Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, I have the pleasure of extending to
you, Sir, my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am deeply
convinced that your wisdom, long experience and
knowledge of. world affairs will lead the Council to
success. I would also like to extend my congratulations to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Kenya,
Ambassador Mahugu, for all his efforts in leading the
Council last month.

I also take pleasure in thanking you for convening
this meeting on an urgent basis, at the request of the Arab
Group, in order to discuss a very important issue. In
acceding so quickly to that request, the Council has
shown that it sees the danger posed by any impasse in the
peace process, while also showing its concern for
shouldering its responsibility with regard to this issue.

The Israeli Government has taken the decision to
create a new settlement in the southern part of East
Jerusalem, in Jabal .Abu Ghneim, on the road to
Bethlehem in Arab tenitory. Israel should have returned
this land to the Arab Palestinian population as part of the
peace process and on the basis of one of the essential
tenets and foundations of the peace process: the exchange
of occupied Arab land for peace.

Jordan has already expressed its firm opposition to

the Israeli decision because it believes that the Arab city
of Jerusalem is territory that has been occupied since
security council 5mm] meeting (Resumption I)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

1967, like the rest of the West Bank. This Israeli decision
poses a great danger and is fraught with consequences. This
step runs counter to all the foundations of the peace
process; to the Madrid principle of land for peace; to
Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which affirms that
the acquisition of territories by force is illegal; to
resolutions 338 (1973) and 242 (1967), which are the
reference points for the peace process; and to international
law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the Hague
Rules of 1907 and their annexes. This decision constitutes
a violation of the right to private property, and an attempt
to expropriate territories and force out the population. It
also goes against all the resolutions adopted by this
Council. Israel has always refused to renounce its
settlement activities.

There have been some positive achievements since the
Madrid Peace Conference. The Arab side has shown that it
can be committed to peace, that it can work seriously and
sincerely for achieving peace. As part of this process,
Jordan, for its part, signed in autumn 1994 a full peace
treaty with Israel. Jordan has complied with all the
modalities and commitments of that treaty. Jordan continues
to comply with all the requirements of the peace process.
The Palestinians and Israelis, for their part, have concluded
the Oslo agreements and other important agreements, each
of which is a step towards the goal of a final agreement
and comprehensive peace for both parties. The latest
agreement is on the partial withdrawal from Al-Khalil.

There can be no doubt that the Palestinian side has
honoured all its agreements, especially with regard to the
suppression of all violent demonstrations and in connection
with serious security assurances in all areas under the
control of the Palestinian National Authority, with strict
respect for the most important Israeli requests. Furthermore,
a number of Arab States from outside the region, stirred by
their desire to support peace and to see it restored in lasting
form, have established relations with Israel and have tried
every possible means of dealing with Israel and cooperating
with it.

We hope that all these achievements will lead to
additional achievements, and will culminate in the
restoration of the comprehensive and lasting peace we all
desire. We hope that this will put the region on the path
towards economic reconstruction and development and
scientific and technological progress, which will make
peace meaningful and help remedy the effects of decades
of conflict and bloodshed in the region.
Unfortunately, this has not been the case. Tensions
have worsened. Today we see that, after thinking that the
peace process would move forward, the fear has now
arisen that the peace process will move backwards. This
is evidenced by the fact that some States have stopped
actions intended to normalize relations with Israel.

We are deeply concerned to see the peace process
take a turn for the worse in the area because of Israel's
non-compliance with the principles of peace. The problem
we are addressing today in the Council is not Israel's first
violation. Israel has persisted in its settlement activities in
occupied Arab territories and has not fulfilled its
commitments. Indeed, the Council was compelled to meet
last September when Israel opened a tunnel beneath a
mosque, prompting an outbreak of violence and violating
the rights of Palestinians and the feelings of the Arab and
Muslim world. We also saw the delays in implementation
of the Al-Khalil protocol, despite the conclusion of this
agreement by the previous Israeli Government.

The continuation of these measures, the ongoing
expulsions and demolition of homes, the issuance of
identity cards to the inhabitants of Al-Quds and their lack
of access to holy sites in the city and the isolation of
territories are all practices that created the atmosphere that
prevailed in the region a few years ago and which we
believed was a thing of the past.

The persistence with which Israel continues to
occupy lands and create settlements clearly demonstrates
that Israel is not committed to shouldering its
responsibilities and complying with its commitment to
return occupied lands to their rightful owners in exchange
for peace. How, then, can we hope that peace might be
achieved? The only way to establish peace is to comply
with all the agreements concluded. We cannot
contemplate peace without a return of land in accordance
with the peace process. It is because we believe in peace
and that peace is a necessity for all peoples and States in
the region - and first and foremost for Israel -- that we
urge this Council to assume its responsibilities and
speedily to adopt a firm resolution that will declare null
and void the steps Israel has taken while demanding that
Israel rescind its decision, cease any settlement activities
and remove any obstacles that might hinder steps towards
peace.

We also call upon the international community, and
those responsible for the peace process in particular, to
oppose these settlement activities by compelling Israel to
rescind its decisions and to pursue the path of peace.
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-second ye'ir 6 March 1997

 

We consider the commitment to peace and to
complying with all of its requirements to be our only
choice. We will never flinch in the face of this commitment
and shall always devote ourselves to this goal. We know
the consequences for the region should peace fail to
materialize, but peace cannot be achieved on a unilateral
basis; it can be consolidated only if all parties to the
process choose peace and if this process is based on justice
and mutual recognition of legitimate rights and
requirements. -

