Mr. Annabi: I will of course convey the good
wishes of the members of the Council to the Secretary-
General as he sets out on his trip to Kinshasa and
Kigali on 1 September. I will also convey your good
wishes to Mr. Ngongi, the incoming Special
Representative. And of course, I will gladly pass on to
Mr. Morjane the words of appreciation expressed here
by Council members and others for the excellent work
done during his tenure.

The first question, I think, was from Ambassador
Ward and related to the participation of Congolese
women in the inter-Congolese dialogue. As Council
members are aware, this is an issue that President
Masire feels very strongly about. I must confess that,
on the basis of the reports we have received from
Gaborone, the participation of women in the Gaborone
meeting was not very good. We hope President
Masire's appeals, and the appeals of this Council, will
be heard and that Congolese women will be more
adequately represented at the meeting in Addis Ababa.
We certainly hope that will be the case.

The next question related to the assistance that
the Secretariat might be able to provide to President
Masire in the organization of the dialogue scheduled
for next month in Addis Ababa. As Council members
are aware, MONUC and the Secretariat are providing
support to President Masire, in terms of both posts and
logistic support. In fact, a good number- if not a
large number- of the participants in the Gaborone
meeting were flown there on MONUC airplanes. We
have scheduled a meeting with President Masire on 5
September to see what more we can do to assist and
support his efforts, of course within the constraints
imposed on us by the United Nations rules and
regulations and MONUC's budget. We will continue,
especially in terms of logistics support, to do what we
can to support his efforts, which are obviously essential
to the settlement of this problem.

There was a question by Ambassador Eldon
regarding the planning for the "three Ds", as he called
them. Indeed, our colleagues in MONUC have
arbitrarily decided to use a different acronym and to
move from "DDRRR" to the three Ds, which stand for
"disarmament, demobilization and durable solutions",
which is perhaps simpler. I want to assure Ambassador
Eldon that, as it is in fact authorized to do under
resolution 1355 (2001), MONUC will take advantage
of opportunities for DDR as they arise. In fact, we are
working on a two-pronged strategy.

First, in the short-term, we are doing what we can
to build capacity to enable MONUC to respond
effectively to requests for early disarmament by groups
that the Government has reportedly already assembled
in two camps in Katanga and Bas-Congo, respectively.
But, so far, MONUC has not had access to those
camps. We are nevertheless prepared to assist in that
regard.

The second aspect of this strategy looks at the
longer term. This strategy will be based on an
increased presence in the east, starting with the Kindu-
Goma-Kalemie triangle and spreading beyond that to
other areas in North and South Kivu. This strategy will
include the implementation of confidence-building
measures, which we feel will be essential before the
gradual implementation of a DDR programme. As we
speak, an integrated planning team has just spent the
last 10 days in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to gather the information we need for further planning.
As the Council knows, that information has so far not
been forthcoming from the parties, despite the
commitments made in that regard. That team has also
been trying to advance the planning process. They will
be returning to New York in the coming days.

I must repeat that, in the final analysis, the armed
groups that need to disarm and demobilize will also
need to know how they will be dealt with and what
opportunities will be offered to them to reintegrate
usefully into civilian life. That is why we need what I

call a political
understanding between the

framework,

or a basic political
leaders concerned, with a

coordination mechanism so that we can elaborate a

programme in which these

that they can participate. There will of course always
be hardcore elements that are more relevant for an
international tribunal than for DDR and that may not
participate. But for the others 1 think we need to define
a programme on the basis of a political framework that
offers genuine opportunities and assurances to those
who will be reintegrated, repatriated or resettled, as the
case may be.

1 think this covers most of the questions that were
raised.

people can feel confident

