Mr. Scheffers (Netherlands): First of all, I thank
Mr. Annabi for his briefing and the Secretary-General
for his very comprehensive report.

I realize that many, if not all, issues related to the
transitional process in East Timor and the United
Nations mission there have already been touched upon.
That is why I would like to highlight three aspects
only: the security situation, the question of the East
Timorese armed forces and the question of
independence.

Before doing so, given the mixed picture
presented this morning of, on the one hand, good news,
and, on the other, frustration and tragedy, my
delegation believes it is useful to stress once more how
much the Netherlands commends the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
for its untiring efforts in preparing East Timor to
become a free, prosperous and independent country.

Unfortunately, the security situation still gives
rise for concern. Indeed, the recent incident that caused
the death of Private Manning and continuing cross-
border attacks demonstrate that it is premature to
contend that a situation of stability has been reached. I
would like to seize this opportunity to join previous
speakers in expressing, on behalf of my Government,
our sympathies and condolences to the Government of
New Zealand and to the loved ones of Private
Manning. We call upon the Indonesian authorities to
renew their efforts in cooperating with UNTAET and to
disarm and disband the militias operating in the border
areas.

Coming back to the security situation in general, I
believe that the Council should consider the question of
troop reductions very carefully, taking into account all
aspects of the situation on the ground. We therefore
feel that decisions on the number of troops deployed
should be taken only on the basis of sound military
advice, preferably by hearing the UNTAET Force
Commander who is in an excellent position to
enlighten us on this subject. In this context, I echo the
wish of, in particular, the representative of Argentina,
for further clarification, hoping that the overall security
situation will not be compromised by the intended
reductions.

Another aspect of the security situation is the
question of the future East Timorese armed forces. As
my delegation has stated before, their establishment
may contribute to strengthening the security in East
Timor and thus provide a horizon to the international
presence there. We therefore very much welcome the
statement made by Mr. Annabi that members of Falintil
will be at the core of the future self-defence forces. We
take due note of his statement that international
assistance is called for. In this respect, my delegation
looks forward to the results of the study being
conducted by King's College, London.

Prospective independence for East Timor is a
matter of great importance. We are all aware of the
problems on the way to independence, especially in
terms of capacity-building and economic
reconstruction. Here the United Nations bears a heavy
and grave responsibility. Much as we would like to see
East Timor's prospective independence realized, and
the current United Nations operation successfully
completed, I reiterate that the United Nations should
make sure that the process of handing over
responsibilities to the East Timorese is carefully
calibrated to correspond to the actual emergence of
local capacity.

We spoke on earlier occasions in terms of
benchmarks, which are referred to, I have noted with
pleasure, in paragraph 68 of the Secretary-General's
report. We also welcome the establishment of an
interim Cabinet and of the newly formed National
Council, steps in the right direction.

On the subject of elections, it would seem logical
that the election schedule for next year will be
elections for a constituent assembly which will debate
and adopt the constitution; therefore, it seems that
independence should not immediately follow the
elections.

In conclusion, on a separate and unrelated issue, I
very much share the concern expressed by the
representative of the United States about the situation
in the Moluccas and the alarming reports, so far not
confirmed. We call upon the Government of Indonesia
to restore law and order and allow humanitarian aid
workers to do their work in a terrible situation in the
Moluccas.

