The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
communique issued by the Government of
Angola on 13 March 2002 (S/2002/270) as a
positive, constructive and forward-looking
approach to ending the conflict and resuming the
process of national reconciliation and calls upon
the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de
Angola (UNITA) to show that it shares a similar
position, with the aim of achieving national
reconciliation including through a general
ceasefire in Angola.

"The Security Council urges UNITA to
recognize the historic nature of this opportunity
to end the conflict with dignity, to give a clear,
positive response to the Government's offer of
peace, to implement fully the Lusaka Protocol
(S/ 1994/ 1441, annex), including by disavowing the
use of arms and demilitarizing completely, and to
re-enter political life to pursue its ideals as an
important contributor to the process of national
reconciliation towards a fully democratic Angola.

"The Security Council recognizes the
positive initiatives of the Government of Angola
in this process. It also recognizes the vital role to
be played by a peaceful UNITA and stresses the
importance of the role of other political parties
and civil society, including the churches, all
supported by the international community.

"The Security Council expects that the
Government of Angola will fulfil its
commitments as rapidly as circumstances permit,
and notes that the response of the international
community, including the provision of assistance,
with the exception of humanitarian assistance,

would be positively encouraged by the
Government's efforts and actions.

"The Security Council calls on the
Government of Angola to ensure further the
transparency and credibility of the peace process,
including by cooperating with the United Nations,
in the first phase and beyond. The Council looks
forward to discussions between the Under-
Secretary-General/Adviser for Special Assignments
in Africa and the Government of Angola to clarify
the role of the United Nations.

"The Security Council stresses the active
role that the United Nations is expected to play in
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, in
close cooperation with the Government of
Angola, and notes the need to renew, and possibly
redefine, the mandate of the United Nations Office
in Angola (UNOA) by 15 April 2002, taking into
account recent developments in Angola, in
consultation with the Government of Angola.

"The Security Council declares its support
for the full implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol and its willingness to work with all
parties in this endeavour, and stresses the
importance of the re-commencement of the Joint
Commission as soon as UNITA is ready to name
its members. It calls upon the Government to
facilitate UNITA retaking its place on the
Commission, while noting that it might be
necessary for the parties to build upon the Lusaka
Protocol, by common agreement, as appropriate
to current circumstances without altering the
fundamental nature and principles of the accord.

"The Security Council stands ready to
consider appropriate and specific exemptions
from and amendments to the measures imposed
by paragraph 4 (a) of its resolution 1127 (1997)
of 28 August 1997 in consultation with the
Government of Angola and with a view to
facilitating the peace negotiations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
statement of the Government of Angola on
facilitation of the political reorganization of
UNITA and the choice of their leadership in
complete freedom, in order to have a legitimate
interlocutor for national reconciliation.

"The Security Council underlines that the
legitimacy of the peace process depends upon a
genuine role for, and full participation of,
political parties and civil society without
interference, as well as flexibility in approaching
questions of national reconciliation.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
that the grave humanitarian situation, especially
for internally displaced persons, continues to
deteriorate, and calls upon the Government of
Angola to accelerate full and immediate access to
all those in need of humanitarian assistance. It
welcomes the decision by the Government of
Angola to include humanitarian assistance in its
plans to extend territorial administration
throughout Angola, and expects the Government
of Angola to cooperate fully, through an agreed
coordinating mechanism, with the international
donors in developing swiftly an appropriate and
effective humanitarian response, including
demining activities.

"The Security Council invites the
Government of Angola to brief the Council at the
earliest opportunity on the peace process in all its
aspects, as well as national reconciliation and the
humanitarian situation."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/7.

The Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.25 61.171.
