Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I applaud
you, Mr. President, for holding this meeting today, and we
are particularly pleased by the presence of the Secretary-
General. The key role of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) is one that is far too often overlooked.
Yet it is an essential element to many post-conflict peace-
building efforts. Today's meeting will help ensure that we
all stay engaged in the effort to build peace - not just stop
war.

Today's meeting builds on our open debate last July
under the presidency of Malaysia. We thank Ambassador
Hasmy and the delegation of Malaysia once again for their
continuing effort to focus the Council's attention on these
issues. Today's meeting will help the Council remain
engaged on this important matter, and I hope that we take
up the Secretary-General's call this morning to address the
issue with renewed determination.

When peace agreements are successfully reached, it is
essential that steps be taken to promote the transition of
war-torn societies from conflict to normalcy. Key to this
transition is the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the ex-combatants into the fabric of civil
society. The Secretary-General's report of ll February
underscores this point.

As the Secretary-General recommends in that report,
the ability of future peacekeeping operations to advance
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration goals can be
enhanced in several ways. These include explicit reference
to DDR programmes in peace agreements; ensuring
adequate technical and financial support for such activities
in all operations; and improving institutional coordination
among the bodies of the international community that
address these needs.

It is essential that the Council underscore the point
that successful DDR activities depend upon the political
will of the parties involved to commit themselves to
peace. The success of such activities requires the
cooperation of entire populations, former combatants and
civilians.

The international community can support this
process, but it cannot provide the will required to bring it
to a successful conclusion. This point is being made very
clearly in Sierra Leone, where the commitment to the
peace agreement of the Revolutionary United Front, and
especially of its leader Foday Sankoh, remains in doubt.
One key indicator of the problem is the low number and
quality of weapons that have been turned in thus far
under the DDR programme currently under way in Sierra
Leone. Moreover, far too few combatants have presented
themselves for disarmament and demobilization.
Similarly, the disturbing outbreak of violence in the
Congo discussed yesterday by this Council gives weight
to the point that the international community cannot fulfil
its obligations if the parties fail to meet their own
commitments.

With regard to disarmament, surplus small arms and
light weapons in post-conflict situations all too often fuel
renewed fighting and banditry. Effective disposal - and
preferably destruction - of small arms, light weapons
and ammunition must be part of any peace process.

In addition, the Council must be prepared to consider
measures to limit the flow of small arms and other
weapons into DDR zones, including sanctions, if
necessary and appropriate. As Ambassador Fowler has so
ably demonstrated, more effective enforcement of existing
sanctions can also play a role, including in the prevention
of new arms flows into a region. The United States looks
forward to participating in next year's United Nations
conference here in New York on illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons.

The goal of demobilization activities is to remove
ex-combatants from military organizations and structures
as quickly as possible - to free these populations to
return to lives as productive citizens and to contribute to
the development of their societies. To advance
demobilization, sufficient resources and political support
must be provided to peacekeeping operations. As the
Secretary-General correctly notes, a mission that has been
perceived as strong from its beginning is far less likely to
be tested than one that is perceived as vulnerable or
ineffective.

 

We see much reintegration work as distinct from
traditional peacekeeping activities of disarmament and
demobilization. Disarmament and demobilization are under
the purview of the Security Council and often part of
peacekeeping operations, although implementation of these
activities has at times been shared by humanitarian
agencies. Reintegration, however, must be viewed as a post-
conflict peace-building or development activity. The
Secretary-General's report notes the complexity of
reintegration activities and the number of organizations and
actors that can contribute to their success. We welcome
improved coordination among implementing agencies -
including World Bank support for reintegration in Sierra
Leone - and note the need for further progress. We also
concur with the Secretary-General that involving
commercial interests in peace efforts can support the
processes and encourage further exploration in this area.

We agree with the Secretary-General that there can be
problems in identifying adequate funding for DDR activities
and, with the implosion of societies that is occurring in
today's conflicts, it is critical that we strike the right
balance between assessed and voluntary contributions to
address these issues.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the special
needs of child soldiers during all phases of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, including the special
needs of girl soldiers due to their roles as fighters,
messengers, spies, labourers and sexual slaves. We applaud
the efforts of the United Nations Children's Fund and
others to meet these critical needs in existing operations and
their plans to do so in future DDR programmes. I am happy
to note also the consensus agreement reached in January on
the addition of an optional protocol on involvement of
children in armed conflict to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. By addressing forced recruitment and the
conduct of armed rebels, this agreement strikes at the heart
of the problem of child soldiers.

In discussing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, we often overlook the special needs of
women ex-combatants. As correctly underlined in the
Secretary-General's report, female ex-combatants and their
children are especially vulnerable in post-conflict situations.
DDR plans should seek to assist women and girls who have
suffered sexual abuse, have been forced to participate in
violence or have had to bear children for their victimizers,
and who may risk rejection by their communities.
Sustainable reintegration of former combatants is a
prerequisite to the prevention of future conflicts, and
women are often excluded from this process. In a broader
context, we rarely consider the powerful role women can
play in reintegration, peace-building and conflict
resolution. Women's involvement as leaders, mediators
and teachers can have a critical impact on the success of
reintegration efforts and their involvement is essential for
maintaining peace and security.

In conclusion, the Council's task of maintaining
international peace and security requires that we pay close
attention to the important issues we discuss here today.
As the United Nations develops methods and means to
address post-conflict peace-building requirements, our
ability to undertake successful and complete DDR
programmes will grow. I commend you, Mr. President,
and our other colleagues who have taken the lead on this
issue. The United States looks forward to working
together to put into practice the ideas and plans we
discuss here today.

