Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Mr.
President, allow me at the outset to express to you our
congratulations on your assumption to the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are
confident that African wisdom will certainly help
crown the deliberations of the Council with success
under your leadership.

We would also like to express our thanks and
gratitude to the friendly State of South Africa for its
initiative on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement on
requesting the convening of this meeting to give a
chance to the Members States of the United Nations to
express their views on this matter, which is not only
about relations between Iraq and the Security Council,
but also about international relations in general. It is
also a matter that relates to the capacity of the
international community to face up to the American
tendency to practice hegemony and aggression, and to
stand steadfastly by the principles of the United
Nations Charter. We hope that the Security Council
will take the views that we will hear today and
tomorrow into account.

The deterioration in international relations has
reached a point where the American Administration
unabashedly declares its plans to invade and occupy
Iraq, using military force and even appointing an
American governor, therein changing the map of the
region by force and putting their hands on the sources
of energy there. The United States also wants the
Security Council to give it a blank cheque to colonize
Iraq, not just Iraq but the entire Arab Mashrq, which it
plans to Violate as part of its plan to subject the entire
world to American hegemony. The United States of
America has taken advantage of illegal means of
pressure and a tremendous propaganda mechanism to
disseminate lies concerning Iraq, one he after the other,
the latest being the pretence that Iraq owns weapons of
mass destruction and the alleged threat of such
weapons to world security.

I believe that everyone knows that there are no
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq and that Iraq implemented many
years ago the disarmament requirements set out in
paragraphs 8 to 13 of resolution 687 (1991). This has
been recognized by the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which has declared that there are no
pending issues concerning disarmament in Iraq. The
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) also
recognized that fact. Ambassador Rolf Ekeus, the
former Executive Chairman of UNSCOM, declared on
13 January 1993 that Iraq had implemented 95 per cent
of its obligations, an assertion that he repeated in an
interview for the Swedish Broadcasting Corporation on
7 September 2002.

I should like to beg the Security Council's
indulgence in describing in depth Iraq's
implementation of resolution 687 (1991) over the past
seven years and seven months. Suffice it to say that
276 inspection teams, made up of a total of 3,845
inspectors, in addition to 80 delegations in the form of
special missions, undertook 3,392 visits to Iraqi sites.
Among these teams were 94 teams specializing in
meetings and interviews, which met for a total of 2,359
hours with 1,378 people connected directly or
indirectly with Iraq's previous programmes. There
were 192 monitoring teams involving 1,332 inspectors
who undertook 10,256 inspection visits to sites subject
to the monitoring system, as well as other sites.
Although 595 sites were subject to monitoring pursuant
to the mechanism for monitoring Iraqi exports and
imports under resolution 1051 (1996), 74 sites were
added, including in border and customs areas,
harbours, hospitals and health centres.

UNSCOM. and IAEA used 140 surveillance
cameras at 29 sites and 30 sensors at 23 sites, as well
as 1,929 labels on 1,832 facilities and pieces of
equipment in monitoring 161 sites. UNSCOM. placed
9,026 labels on 99 types of missile with a range of less
than seven kilometres. UNSCOM. and IAEA also
undertook 2,967 helicopter sorties in their work, for a
total of 4,480 flight hours. The United States undertook
434 U-2 surveillance sorties for a total of 1,800 flight
hours. Iraq submitted 1,744,000 pages of documents to
UNSCOM. and IAEA, along with a number of
videotapes and nine kilometres of microfilm,
containing 600,000 pictures and 50,000 microfilm
slides.

All of this demonstrates to the Security Council
that Iraq has honoured all its requirements, despite the
many harmful and insulting practices of the inspection
units, including the espionage carried out by the
American and British inspectors, in particular, in
implementation of the well-known plots and plans
devised by the United States to maintain the embargo
and to jeopardize Iraqi national security. This was
recognized by many inspectors, UNSCOM. Executive
Chairman Ekeus and the chief United States inspector
Scott Ritter among them.

Iraq has consented to all these sacrifices in the
hope that its cooperation would lead the Security
Council to honour its obligations under resolution 687
(1991). Foremost among those obligations are lifting
the comprehensive embargo imposed on Iraq, ensuring
respect for Iraq's national security, and addressing the
regional security imbalance embodied in Israel's
possession of a vast arsenal of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, long-range missiles and their
delivery systems. However, when the United States
sensed that the pretext of inspections had become an
inadequate excuse for maintaining the comprehensive
embargo and for repeated American and British
aggressions, it asked the inspection team led by Mr.
Butler to leave Iraq on 15 December 1998. In other
words, the inspectors did not leave because Iraq asked
them to, but because Mr. Butler asked them to do so, as
instructed by the United States.

One day after the inspectors left Iraq, there was a
vast military attack against Iraq, which claimed the
lives of hundreds of Iraqi citizens and destroyed
several economic and service institutions, including
sites that had been under the surveillance and
monitoring of UNSCOM. and the IAEA.

Following that, the United States dragged the
Security Council along a very long and complex path
of discussions in order to redraft Council resolutions,
impose new conditions on Iraq and set up new
inspection committees, believing that the continued
absence of inspectors justified continuing the embargo,
which would mean that one day the Iraqi people would
kneel to the will of the United States.

Thus, the inspectors left Iraq and the overall
embargo continued from 6 August 1990, claiming the
lives of Iraqi citizens, so much so that the number of
embargo victims has reached 1,750,000 Iraqi citizens,
as of the end of September of this year.

The embargo continues to represent a moral
problem for the United Nations, as described by the
Secretary-General. It also is a blatant violation of
several provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
such as Article 24, which calls for the Security Council
to work in keeping with the purposes and principles of
the Charter. It is also a violation of Article 1,
paragraph 1, which states that sanctions and other
measures adopted for the maintenance of international
peace and security should be in keeping with the
principles of international law and justice.

The sanctions are a violation of Article 1,
paragraph 2 of the Charter, which deals with respect for
the principle of equality among peoples - their equal
rights and their right to self-determination - since no
sanctions should be imposed that will cause
international disagreements that are incompatible with
the legal rights of the State or that prejudice the
people's right to self-determination.

The sanctions are also a violation of Article 1,
paragraph 3 of the Charter, which concerns the
promotion of and respect for human rights.

The system of sanctions also violates Article 2,
paragraph 7 of the Charter, which does not allow the
United Nations to intervene in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State.

Sanctions also go against Article 55 of the
Charter, which calls upon the United Nations to
guarantee higher standards of living for all people and
to work towards economic and social progress and
development. We do not want to dwell at length on the
fact that they are also a violation of many other
international conventions and instruments on human
rights.

All this has been documented by United Nations
agencies, humanitarian organizations, human rights
organizations and many researchers and writers in this
area. The sanctions imposed on Iraq have caused a
humanitarian catastrophe comparable to the worst
catastrophes that have befallen the world throughout
history. The sanctions have claimed the lives of
thousands of children, women and elderly people. They
constitute genocide by any standard; the number of
victims goes far beyond the victims of the use of
weapons of mass destruction throughout history.

Parallel to the imposition of the comprehensive
embargo, since April of 1991 the United States and
Britain have declared two no-fly zones in the south and
north of Iraq, in blatant violation of the Charter and the
established rules of international law, as well as the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, which
have underlined the importance of respecting Iraq's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence.

By imposing those no-fly zones, the United States
and Britain have carried out military aggression
continuously, killing thousands of Iraqi citizens and
destroying property. Those two States are violating
daily the resolutions of the Security Council and
carrying out continuous aggression against Iraq. The
Council has been unable to put an end to such
aggression or even to condemn it.

In order to end the impasse in the situation with
the Security Council, Iraq took the initiative of opening
a dialogue with the Secretary-General, with the aim of
achieving full implementation of the obligations
contained in resolutions of the Council in a balanced
and equitable manner and in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.

The Iraqi side held four meetings with the
Secretary-General which led to some progress but
which did not achieve their objective. This was due to
pressure by the United States, which prevented the
Council from participating in the efforts to seek a
comprehensive solution that would deal with all
aspects of the relationship between Iraq and the
Council while guaranteeing the implementation of all
the requirements of the Council's resolutions- 1
repeat, guaranteeing the implementation of all
requirements of the Security Council.

This American position actually means that a
comprehensive solution would not serve the aggressive
intentions of the United States against Iraq and the
region as a whole. That is the very reason which has
led the United States to prevent the Security Council
from examining the possibility of implementing
operative paragraph 6 of the Council's resolution
1382 (2001). This paragraph calls on the Security
Council to reach a comprehensive settlement
concerning the relationship between Iraq and the
Council, including clarification concerning the
implementation of resolution 1284 (1999).

In response to the calls and appeals of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States, the Arab States
and many friendly countries, the Iraqi Government on
16 September 2002 agreed, unconditionally, to the
return of United Nations weapons inspectors, in order
to dissipate any doubts concerning Iraq's continued
possession of weapons of mass destruction, and as a
first step towards a solution that would include lifting
the overall embargo imposed on Iraq and implementing
the other provisions of relevant Security Council
resolutions.
In his letter dated 16 September 2002, the
Secretary-General conveyed to the President of the
Security Council Iraq's agreement and mentioned the
following:

"As I had the honour to mention to the General
Assembly a few days ago, this decision by the
Government of the Republic of Iraq is the
indispensable first step towards an assurance that
Iraq no longer possesses weapons of mass
destruction and, equally important, towards a
comprehensive solution that includes the
suspension and eventual ending of the sanctions
that are causing such hardship for the Iraqi people
and the timely implementation of other provisions
of the relevant Security Council resolutions."
(S/2002/IOS4, p. I)
The Iraqi technical delegation held talks in Vienna on
30 September and 1 October 2002 with delegations
from the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) under the
chairmanship of Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, Both delegations agreed on arrangements
for the return of the weapons inspectors and chose 19
October 2002 as the date when the first UNMOVIC
team would reach Baghdad.

The Iraqi delegation, in the course of that meeting
submitted the semi-annual reports concerning the sites
that are subject to monitoring, and that had not been
monitored since the inspectors left Iraq four years ago.
These reports show Iraq fully respects its obligations
pursuant to Security Council resolution 687 (1991),
despite the absence of the monitoring and inspection
teams. Bear in mind that these developments clearly
reflect the wishes of Iraq and the United Nations and
their readiness to begin confidence-building measures
and pave the way for the Security Council to
implement its own obligations.

In spite of these developments the United States
of America has tried to hamper such agreements by
increasing its threats against Iraq, appearing before the
Security Council in order to obtain the blank check
needed to carry out its aggression and by calling for the
imposition of unfair, impossible and arbitrary
conditions on Iraq. These conditions are, at the least,
an insult to the international community, the United
Nations and international law and constitute a return to
the law of the jungle.

The war hysteria that seems to have hit the
current American Government is fed by hatred and by
a desire to settle old accounts and impose its hegemony
on the world politically, militarily, and economically.
The United States is not interested in the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions, for
the United States of America is the main ally of Israel,
which has refused to implement more than twenty-
eight Security Council resolutions and scores of
General Assembly resolutions that have called on Israel
to withdraw from occupied Arab territories and to
allow Palestinian refugees to return to their homes. The
United States of America has been providing Israel
with state-of-the-art weapons to kill the heroic
Palestinian people and destroy their property.

This aggressive American hysteria has nothing to
do with ending the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction in the world, for the United States of
America possesses the largest arsenal of weapons of
mass destruction and has a longer history of using
these weapons against people, starting with Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, then Viet Nam and most recently by
using depleted uranium against Iraq and Yugoslavia.
The United States is the country that revoked the Anti-
ballistic Missile Treaty. It unilaterally hampered the
implementation of paragraph 14 of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991) which calls for making the
Middle East a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction.

Allow me to mention, as an example, a statement
of the former Director-General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Mr. Jose
Bustani, published in Le Monde Diplomatique in July
of this year, where he stated

"From the very beginning we were faced with
difficulty when the Americans refused to allow
the members of the organization to carry out their
inspections. Very often the inspectors could not
enter the laboratories so we remained unable to
ascertain that they were actually producing
chemical material for peaceful purposes only. It
was very difficult for us to examine the samples,
for it was not possible to carry out such an
inspection, except in the American laboratories.
In the final analysis, we had no guarantee as to
the validity of the results. At every inspection
operation the Americans were trying to change
the rules of the game."

We call on the international community loudly to
voice their objections to the aggressive designs of the
United States of America against Iraq, in order to
prevent it from using the Security Council as a tool to
carry out its policy of aggression. Not to speak out in
the face of these attempts would have serious
repercussions on international peace and security, for
this would be the beginning of the end of the collective
security system as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations and of all other instruments, agreements and
conventions governing international relations. The key
principles underpinning all of these include resorting
first to peaceful means in the settlement of conflicts;
refraining from the use of force, or the threat thereof,
and from violating the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State; respecting equal
sovereignty among States Members of the United
Nations; and following a policy of non-intervention in
matters that fall under the jurisdiction of a given State.
This hegemonistic attitude will claim many victims if
we do not bridle it.

Today we must urgently reject Washington's
attempts to hinder the return of the inspectors. It is
doing so even though Iraq has taken all the necessary
practical measures and arrangements and paved the
way for the return of the inspectors and made the
necessary preparations for them to carry out their work
easily.

Iraq has pledged to cooperate with the inspectors
in every possible way so as to facilitate their task of
ascertaining that there are no weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq.

There is therefore absolutely no need for the
adoption a new Security Council resolution. The
attempts being made by the United States of America
to hamper and delay the return of the inspectors and to
make the Security Council adopt a new resolution
laying down conditions that are impossible to respect
are but a pretext for aggression against Iraq. The goal
of that aggression is the colonization of our country
and the imposition of American domination over our
oil, as a first step towards the imposition of American
colonialism in the region as a whole and the control of
its oil and towards allowing Israel to continue its
genocidal war against the Palestinian people and its
aggression against the Arab countries.

The United States of America does not want the
inspectors to return, because if they do there will be
proof that the Americans have consistently lied and
made false allegations. At that point the Security
Council would have to lift the unjust embargo against
Iraq, ensure respect for its national and regional
security concerns, and implement of the other
requirements set out in Council resolutions; and that is
exactly what the United States of America does not
want.
Finally, we are confident that, now that Iraq has
expressed its readiness before the Security Council
unconditionally to receive the inspectors, the States
Members of the United Nations will defend its
decisions, just as all peoples have done in rejecting the
American war of aggression.

