The Secretary-General: I thank the United States
for convening this debate, and Secretary of State John
Kerry for presiding. His presence is testament to the
importance the United States places on this issue.

Allow me also to welcome the appointment of
Senator Russ Feingold as the new United States Special
Representative for the African Great Lakes Region
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish him
success in the critical months ahead and hope that he
will continue to coordinately very closely with my
Special Envoy, Ms. Mary Robinson.

It is now five months since the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region was signed, and four
months since the Security Council adopted resolution
2098 (2013). Hopes were high that we could see an end
to the large-scale cyclical violence that had ravaged
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
over the past two decades, and derailed previous
peace initiatives. Peace would mean a new chance
for development and lasting security for some of the
world's most sorely tested people.

I am therefore deeply concerned about the current
hostilities between the Mouvement du 23 mars and the
Congolese armed forces. All parties need to return as
soon as possible to the Kampala talks. I have called
for maximum restraint, and I urge all Framework
signatories to jointly and individually respect their
commitments.

The lack of mutual trust in the region has thwarted
past attempts to find political solutions to the entrenched
problems that continue to drive the conflict. It is vital
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its eastern neighbours pursue constructive
dialogue.

At the national level, structural reforms within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will help address the
root causes of the violence. The Government has taken
initial steps towards army reform, decentralization
and national dialogue. It is essential to translate those
commitments into tangible results.

At the regional level, leaders must look beyond the
issues that divide them and work together to define a
common agenda for lasting peace and prosperity based
on trade, economic cooperation and mutual respect for
one another's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
provides a clear road map. My Special Envoy for the
Great Lakes region will continue to support the parties
to uphold the commitments that they have adhered to
under the Framework. My Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Mr. Martin Kobler, will support the political process
in the country, including support in implementing its
national commitments.

The prospects for durable peace in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain better
than they have for many years. But spoilers are active,
including armed groups and militias that have shown
little inclination to engage in a genuine peace process.
To address that threat, we are reinforcing MONUSCO.
The Force Intervention Brigade is an important tool,
but it is only one part of a comprehensive approach that
embraces security and development.

However, while the United Nations and the
international community can do much, we depend on
the Framework signatories to provide the essential
foundation.
All parties must avoid renewed hostilities and
achieve progress on the political track. Conflict and
lawlessness in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have crippled development and
entrenched extreme poverty and suffering. There are
appalling levels of brutal sexual violence. The region
needs security. But for there to be lasting peace, we
must also provide opportunity.

The United Nations system is committed to
promoting economic development in Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. Last
May, during my joint visit with World Bank President
Jim Yong Kim, the Bank committed an additional
$1 billion for better health and education services, cross-
border trade and hydroelectricity projects, giving new
impetus to regional economic integration. I thank the
leadership and continuing engagement and commitment
of President Kim. I will work very closely with him
in other areas as well, to set the model of partnership
between the United Nations and the World Bank. That
is central to building the trust and interdependence that
are critical to the success of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.

The current fighting in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo casts a grave
shadow. But we should not allow it to deter us from
our objective. It should make us even more determined
to lift people from the oppression of insecurity, human
rights abuses and poverty. I count on the Framework
signatories to work constructively with each other and
with my Special Envoy to develop benchmarks for their
commitments, which will inform the strategic road map
for implementation to be presented for endorsement on
the margins of the General Assembly general debate in
September. And I call on the international community
to use all the tools at its disposal - from international
criminal prosecution and sanctions regimes to
development assistance.

My Special Envoy, Ms. Robinson, has described
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework as
a framework of hope. I urge all signatories and the
international community to keep the hope alive.

