Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
welcomes the initiative of convening a joint meeting
on the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

In regard to the Committee on Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, we thank
Committee Chair Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
very informative briefing, as well as for the leadership
and dynamic way in which he has led the Committee,
which has contributed to combating the scourge of
terrorism wherever it is found. We commend the work of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
for its assistance to the Committee, which provides us
with a strategic vision of the key trends represented by
Al-Qaida and its extensive network of affiliates.

Equally important is the role of the Office of the
Ombudsperson. We thank Ms. Kimberly Prost for the
independence and professionalism with which she has
been carrying out her work. There is no doubt that
it is thanks to the collective effort that the regime is
becoming increasingly effective and that sanctions are
being implemented in an increasingly more diligent
way.

By the same token, we reaffirm the importance
of the work of the Committee in maintaining and
constantly reviewing the list of sanctions. That work
is extremely important and represents the most rapid
and effective way to implement the sanctions regime,
taking into account the energy and versatility of that
terrorist organization and the ease with which it recruits
and incorporates new members in different parts of the
world.

In that regard, we commend the speed and
effectiveness with which, on 22 May, the terrorist
group Boko Haram was added to the list of individuals
and entities subject to financial sanctions and an arms
embargo. We call on Member States to continue to work
to improve those procedures, which underscore the
authority and legitimacy of the measures imposed by
the Council. In that context, we would like to highlight
the importance of the revision of resolution 2083 (2012)
this year.

My country supports the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee aimed at ensuring the full
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). We congratulate the Ambassador of Lithuania,
Ms. Raimonda Murmokaite, for the way in which she
has conducted the work of the Committee since her
appointment. We also thank Ambassador Mohammed
Loulichki of Morocco for his work as Chair of that
Committee until December 2013.

We also highlight the effective support work to
the Committee carried out by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate under the leadership
of Mr. Jean-Paul LaBorde. We believe that the most
important work of the Committee and its Executive
Directorate is the promotion of the capacity of States to
apply and implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) through effective international cooperation,
technology transfer and the training of civil servants,
inter alia, and through the unequivocal condemnation
of the international community whenever a terrorist act
is committed.

We commend the efforts of the Committee and the
Executive Directorate to create and use new national
and regional assessment tools to identify the gaps ofthe
countries and regions and the best practices that help
to ensure the implementation of the most appropriate
measures in the fight against terrorism. We support
interaction among the Committee, the Executive
Directorate, States and regional and subregional
organizations, which is essential to the successful
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). In that regard, my country is organizing a visit
of the Committee next year. We recognize that the
activities just described, as well as the periodic country
visits made by the Executive Directorate, contribute
to strengthening the capacity of the various national
actors in this area.

Chile has high expectations for the special meeting
mandated by resolution 2133 (2014), to be organized by
the Committee and which will include the participation
of Member States and relevant international and
regional organizations. The meeting will consider
measures to prevent terrorist groups from committing
kidnappings and taking hostages in order to raise funds
or obtain political concessions.

In regard to the work of the 1540 Committee, on
7 May we held an open debate to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
which was a milestone to which Chile contributed
when it held a seat as a non-permanent member of the
Council. We value the resolution, which was the first to
link the threat of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons with non-State actors, thereby
filling a void in the system of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Over those 10 years, the 1540 Committee has
raised the awareness of the international community
by providing assistance, facilitating cooperation and
disseminating good practices. However, much work
remains because today, as in 2004, the threat ofnon- State
actors and terrorist groups persists. We value activities
fostering exchange of information. For example,
the recent visits to the Niger and Bangladesh were
excellent opportunities to promote the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Promoting joint information
presentations is highly relevant, as they will strengthen
awareness-raising among State authorities and civil
society and ensure the training of civil servants and
specialized units through workshops and seminars.

It is our opinion that the Committee's work is
headed in the right direction in taking up challenges
such as the financing of weapons proliferation and
support provided by non-State actors in the form
of associated or dual-use materials. From the start,
my country has endeavoured to ensure the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), a
commitment that is in line with State policy. In that
context, we reiterate our commitment to the aims
and purposes of the resolution and again thank the
Government of the Republic of Korea for its leadership.

