Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting. We also wish to thank
Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx for their in-depth
analysis of the situation regarding the fight against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

Recent reports have focused, quite rightly, on
fundamental changes in the situation in Syria and
the transformation of contemporary international
terrorism against the backdrop of the military defeat
and significant weakening of ISIL positions. A
decisive contribution to the dismantling that terrorist
group was made by the Syrian army and allied forces
operating in Syria on legitimate grounds, including the
Russian Federation.

We share the Secretary-General's concerns about
ISIL's ongoing attempts to establish a firm foothold
in other regions. ISIL clearly intends to shore up its
positions in Afghanistan, to establish a branch in South
Asia and to step up its presence in the Asia-Pacific
region. It is cooperating with Islamists in North and
West Africa, while Europe is being eyed as a stage for
terrorist attacks.

Our common goal is to prevent ISIL from having
even the slightest opportunity to rear its head, gain
strength, regroup and find additional ideological and
human resources in different countries and among
different population groups. In that regard, we must
closely monitor the efforts of certain groups that have
helped spawn the emergence of today's terrorist leaders
to reformat ISIL and create a new, more sophisticated
terrorist organization. We caution against playing into
the hands of terrorists and their accomplices, applying
double standards to them and making distinctions
between bad, not-so-bad and, even, good terrorists.

We should like to share our assessment of the
terrorist threats in key regions. Presently, the total
number of ISIL members and their affiliates in Syria
is about 3,000 people. In addition, there are many
other terrorist groups present, the most combat-ready
of which is still Jabhat Al-Nusra, which is particularly
active within and around Idlib governorate. More than
1,500 militants have returned from combat zones to
their homes or have gone to other residential areas
under the guise of internally displaced persons.

In Iraq, despite the end of the military campaign
against ISIL and the announcement of a drawdown of
the international coalition, the ground remains fertile
for further destabilization. Jihadists have turned to
sabotage and terrorist tactics and are now banking
on fuelling the Sunni-Shia conflict in the country.
Currently, ISIL combat units in Iraq comprise as
many as 2,000 fighters from about 40 States, mainly
from the Middle East, Central and South East Asia,
as well as the Russian Federation and countries from
the Commonwealth of Independent States. The main
hotbeds of ISIL's subversive activity are concentrated
in the Sunni triangle zone, as well as in the governorate
of Diyala and Kirkuk. In addition, south-eastern Iraq,
particularly the Shiite governorates of Babil, Wasit,
Dhi Qar, Maysan and Basra, is also at risk.

In Libya, ISIL is increasing its activity and is
capitalizing on the collapse ofthe State and the effective
fracturing of the country. The group is strengthening its
position near oil ports along the Mediterranean shore to
the east of Sirte, the so-called oil crescent, and in the
cities of Tripoli, Benghazi and Derna. The situation in
the south of the country is further complicated by the
massive infiltration of Chadian Islamists.

In Egypt, there is an active presence of up to
1,500 fighters belonging to Ansar Beit Al-Maqdis.
The terrorists are engaged in hostilities in the north-
east and south of the country and regularly attack
security forces.

ISIL is focusing on the deployment of an extensive
underground terrorist network in the Sahelo-Saharan
zone, the formation of staging grounds and the
mounting of frequent intimidation and sabotage attacks
against national law enforcement agencies, United
Nations peacekeepers and civilians. Militants are also
establishing contacts with local criminal groups that
control arms smuggling, drug trafficking and illegal
migration. That threat is compounded by terrorist
groups that have declared their alliance and cooperation
with ISIL, especially the Islamic State's West Africa
Province and the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara.
In particular, the Islamic State's West Africa Province
is currently engaged in terrorist activities along the
borders of Cameroon, Nigeria, the Niger and Chad. The
group consists of 3,500 people, mostly from the local
population. The Islamic State in the Greater Sahara
has up to 700 members, and another ISIL branch, the
Islamic State in Somalia, has up to 900 members.

Members of ISIL are actively seeking to transform
Afghanistan into a staging ground for infiltrating other
parts of the region. The core of terrorist structures is
approximately 4,000 militants, concentrated largely
in the provinces of Kunar and Nangarhar. In addition,
members of ISIL are active in the northern and eastern

parts of the country. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province has solidified its position in
Afghanistan, with the support of the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan and the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement. Young people and field commanders from
local and regional terrorist groups, including the Taliban
and Hizb ut-Tahrir, are being actively recruited, as are
militants from combat zones in the Middle East. The
most dangerous situation is unfolding in the areas of
Afghanistan that border Tajikistan and Turkmenistan,
with approximately 1,300 ISIL affiliates. At the same
time, ISIL leaders seek to expand their presence in the
north and east of the country by taking control of areas
traditionally controlled by the Taliban.

Unfortunately, ISIL continues to receive funds
from foreign sponsors disguised as charitable
foundations, religious organizations and other
non-governmental organizations.
During the discussion of the seventh (S/2018/770)
and eighth (S/20l9/103) reports ofthe Secretary-General
(see S/PV.8330 and S/PV.8460, respectively), the
Russian delegation drew attention to flagrant violations
of the ISIL arms embargo. That remains relevant and
pressing. The document under discussion today in no
way addresses the issue of the provision of military
goods to terrorist organizations. It is unacceptable to
turn a blind eye to such glaring gaps in the fight against
international terrorism. It is important to publish
information about all funding channels for ISIL and the
efforts undertaken to eradicate them. Possible solutions
to that problem will be discussed in detail at the second
International Conference on Countering Illicit Arms
Trafficking in the Context of Fighting International
Terror, to be held in Moscow on 5 and 6 September.

We speak about this regularly, however, I wish to
emphatically reiterate today that collective action by
the international community is necessary to counter
international terrorism. It is necessary to take advantage
of the conditions emerging after the elimination of
the terrorist staging grounds in the Middle East. It is
necessary to pool efforts in order to suppress the further
spread of the terrorist threat, forestall spiralling tensions
in the region and find political and diplomatic solutions
to all existing issues based on international law and
under the central coordination of the United Nations.

