Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock warned us today
about dire conditions in the besieged community of
eastern Ghouta. He warned us about children on their
deathbeds due to severe, acute malnutrition and about
hundreds of sick people who desperately need to be
evacuated for life-saving treatment.

In fact, he has been giving us those warnings
for months. One Syrian mother in eastern Ghouta is
running out of options. That mother reportedly came
into a clinic recently. She was crying as she brought
in her four malnourished children to be treated. But
what this mother told the clinic's doctor was shocking
to hear, even for a doctor working in the midst of one
ofthe worlds' worst war zones. The mother said that all
she could do was give her four children damp pieces of
newspaper to chew on so they would stop screaming.
That is all she had left - damp pieces of newspaper to
feed her children.

To my colleagues around this table, therefore, I say:
tomorrow morning, when we pick up a newspaper, we
need to think about what this mother is going through
and realize that that is just one family. That is just
one family out of the nearly 400,000 people living
under siege in a region just a short drive away from
Damascus. One can say that it is ironic that eastern
Ghouta is a so-called de-escalation area, but it is no
coincidence that in the past week dozens of civilians
have died from relentless air strikes and shelling there.
It is no coincidence that those air strikes were carried
out by the Al-Assad regime with the support of the
Russian Government.

The Syrian regime is pummelling a population of
starving, desperate people who have been cut off from
food and medicine for months. It is the latest version of
the Al-Assad regime's despicable starve-and-surrender
strategy. The objective is not peace, but domination.
The regime does not even try to hide its strategy.
This month the Al-Assad regime allowed the United
Nations to make only one shipment of aid to a besieged
area. That one delivery helped 21,500 persons, but the
398,000 other Syrians living in eastern Ghouta and
nine other besieged areas got nothing. They received
no food, no medicine, no vaccines. They will spend
another month collecting whatever scraps of food they
can find or, when that fails, chewing on things like
grass or damp newspapers. Moreover, the 2.5 million
civilians living in hard-to-reach areas are also suffering
profoundly and struggling to survive. In October,
thanks to the Al-Assad regime's strategy of denying
aid to its political opponents, the United Nations could
deliver humanitarian assistance to only about 6 per cent
of its population.

But the cruelty does not end there. The Al-Assad
regime and its allies, like Hizbullah, steal pieces of
assistance out of United Nations convoys all the time.
They have taken out more than 630,000 medical items
from United Nations trucks since the beginning of
2017. The regime and its thugs grab surgical gloves,
ultrasound equipment, ventilators and, as we have all
heard, even formula for infants, from United Nations
trucks before they reach the Syrians in need.

Some members of the Council urge us to put more
faith in the Al-Assad regime. They ask us to trust that
the regime will allow for aid deliveries. They act like
the regime makes decisions in the best interests of the
Syrian people. But why would we ever expect a regime
that literally steals medicine from the sick to do the
right thing? Why would we ever expect a regime that
has spent years starving Syria into submission to do the
right thing? Why would we ever expect a regime that
has gassed its own people, fire-bombed its cities and
turned its schools and hospitals into rubble to do the
right thing for its people?

One thing is clear: those countries with influence
over the Al-Assad regime must use their influence. That
is especially true of Russia, which is both a permanent
member of the Security Council and a nation that has
stated its commitment to a Syrian political process.
We must all demand that every besieged area and all
civilians in need receive assistance. We must all demand
that Al-Assad and the militias allied to the regime stop
plundering aid provided by the United Nations. That is
a simple message, but one that the Al-Assad regime has
almost never accepted in the history of this conflict.

As members of the Security Council, we have

another extremely important responsibility coming up.
In December, the Council must renew the authorization
for cross-border deliveries of aid into Syria, originally
granted in resolution 2165 (2014). The consequences
of this mandate are enormous. It is no exaggeration to
say that renewing it is a life-and-death question. Since
2014, the United Nations has conducted more than 663
cross-border convoys, with 16,844 trucks containing
aid passing through border crossings approved by the
Security Council. On average, that assistance reaches
more than 1 million Syrians every month. Again,
1 million people get aid as the result of a mandate from
the Security Council. We can only imagine the number
of lives saved by this one resolution. To give just one
example, in October the World Heath Organization
sent supplies for nine health-care facilities and 80,567
people in two cross-border deliveries. More than
546,600 Syrians benefited from access to clean water
through cross-border shipments in October as well. We
are therefore talking about hundreds of thousands of
Syrians who will not get sick this month because of the
Council's cross-border-assistance mandate.

Nor can we forget that this assistance is also closely
monitored. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic looked at 420 trucks
used in 20 shipments in October. For each truck, the
Monitoring Mechanism confirmed that every delivery
was humanitarian and notified the Syrian authorities
about what was in it and where it went. Despite our
divisions on Syria, the Council's rare moment of unity
on cross-border assistance has had a vital impact. We
managed to set politics aside and come together to
establish this mandate and then renew it for each of
the past two years. We must once again stand with the
Syrian people and renew that authorization. The lives
of far too many Syrian depend upon us living up to our
responsibility to help.

