Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and the Ambassador of Switzerland
for their briefings and, above all, for their work in
support of peace and reconciliation in Burundi.

France would also like to see the rule of law and
human rights respected in Burundi and for the country
to experience development and growth and benefit
from the current momentum in the Great Lakes region.
The 2020 elections will be a crucial moment; only the
organization of free elections will allow Burundi to
find its way back to stability. The electoral deadlines
must be prepared for by consensus, with the trust
of all political actors and the population. President
Nkurunziza's commitment not to stand for re-election

and the ongoing discussions with some political leaders
in exile contribute to reduced tensions, but the violence
against activists, the arbitrary arrest ofjournalists and
members of the opposition and the acts of vandalism
against the opposition party's offices mustbe condemned
and stopped. France urges the Burundian authorities to
prosecute the perpetrators and do everything possible
to ensure that such acts are not repeated.

The guarantee of freedom of expression during
the campaign, the opening of political space and the
security of candidates and supporters of the various
parties would be welcome. Such technical measures as
electoral observation by citizens and transparency in
vote counting could also help to build that trust. Several
partners have indicated their willingness to support
Burundi in preparing the elections if it so wishes.
France strongly encourages the Burundian authorities
to take advantage of this opportunity.

In parallel, France remains concerned about the
persistence of human rights violations in the country
as well as violence, including sexual violence, and the
closure of the Human Rights Office in Burundi. We
encourage the Burundian authorities to fully respect
their international commitments in terms of protecting
human rights. These measures are also necessary for
holding inclusive and peaceful elections. In that regard,
France will continue to monitor the humanitarian
situation with great attention.

Beyond preparing the elections, and in the spirit
of the Arusha Agreement, political dialogue remains
necessary for the situation to be normalized. Such
a dialogue will also help to build confidence in the
electoral process and prevent elections from being held
in an atmosphere of tension.

France encourages the East African Community to
continue its mediation efforts and further calls on the
Burundian authorities to engage in dialogue with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. In the pivotal
period ahead, it is important that the United Nations
remain fully engaged. This heightened focus is justified
both by the pre-electoral monitoring and by the risk that
any deterioration of the situation in Burundi might pose
for the region. That is why the Security Council cannot
ignore the situation in the country.

The commitment of the Secretary-General and his
teams remains more necessary than ever before. We
fully support the recommendations of the Secretary-
General. Accordingly, France urges Burundi to finalize
without delay the agreement on the status of the mission
for the Office of the Special Envoy, as the Secretary-
General has requested.

I would conclude by saying that we regret the
Special Envoy's departure and that we share his opinion
that the United Nations must continue its involvement
in Burundi, and by extending a personal warm thanks
to President Kafando.

