Ms. Del Ponte (spoke in French): I would like to
say a few words regarding the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and then,
as I have had an opportunity to spend nine weeks in
Arusha on three occasions, I will speak to members
about the situation of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

(spoke in English)

I would now like to say a few words regarding
the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Since I
addressed the Council in November 1999, there have
been a number of developments which may be of
interest to Council members.

First, I would like to say something about the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). I know
this is not a matter that concerns the Security Council.
Nevertheless, I am sure that Council members are
aware that in recent months various complaints and a
considerable body of information have been submitted
to my Office concerning allegations that NATO, or
more accurately, NATO personnel and leaders, may
have committed crimes that fall within the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal during the NATO air campaign against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia last year.

Those allegations and supporting material have
been submitted to my office from a number of sources,
including lawyers acting on behalf of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and a Russian parliamentary
commission. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
submitted a substantial amount of material concerning
particular incidents. In addition, a number of reports
and commentaries on the bombing campaign have been
published by human rights organizations and others.

Since the International Tribunal has jurisdiction
over all potential war crimes in the former Yugoslavia,
I considered that it was my obligation and
responsibility as an independent prosecutor to assess
the complaints and allegations. In 1999, my
predecessor, Justice Arbour, established a working
group within her office, comprising military lawyers,
military analysts and other experts, to examine and
assess all complaints and allegations and
accompanying material. In addition, the team has
assessed all new allegations and materials subsequent
to their arrival in my office. Analysis of the material
has, quite properly, taken some time, and has involved
an examination of all facts and a detailed legal analysis
of all aspects involving the Tribunal's jurisdiction.

I am now able to announce my conclusion,
following a full consideration of my team's assessment
of all complaints and allegations, that there is no basis
for opening an investigation into any of those
allegations or into other incidents related to the NATO
bombing. Although some mistakes were made by
NATO, I am very satisfied that there was no deliberate
targeting of civilians or of unlawful military targets by
NATO during the bombing campaign. I intend to
release in the near future the details of my assessment
and of the criteria applied. However, this is not the
forum for going into those details. Nevertheless, I felt
that it was important that I inform the Council of my
conclusions today, since the NATO campaign is an
important issue that has been causing considerable
speculation and comment.

An important consequence of the NATO
campaign should also be mentioned, namely the impact
that it, together with the indictment of President
Milosevic and other high-level Serbian officials, has
had on the willingness of the authorities in Belgrade to
cooperate with the Tribunal. Since these events, there
has been literally no cooperation with my office. This
severely hampers my ability to conclude my
investigations involving Serbian victims, particularly
where such victims are residing in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. My investigators are denied visas to
enter the country to continue with our investigations. I
too have applied for a visa to travel to Belgrade, but
this has also been denied.

When allegations are made against the Tribunal
that it is anti-Serb and that there is an imbalance in the
indictments issued, the fact that I am unable to gain
access to the victims and to the evidence makes such
allegations rather hollow.

Coming now to the issue of cooperation by the
Republic of Croatia with the Tribunal, I am pleased to
say that the new Croatian Government is showing and
demonstrating a willingness to cooperate fully with the
Tribunal. This is certainly very encouraging and is
leading to the point where full cooperation is very
close. For example, over the past several months we
have witnessed the surrender of Mladen Naletilic, also
known as Tuta, to The Hague. Further, the Government
recognizes the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and my right
to investigate incidents which occurred within Croatia,
such as Operation Storm in 1995. Also, the
Government recently allowed a forensic investigation
by my investigators to proceed, and they assisted the
process. Finally, a formal agreement relating to the
status of my office in Zagreb has been finalized.

This leaves one remaining area where the
Republic of Croatia has been less than forthcoming in
recent years in its cooperation with the Tribunal:
namely my access to sensitive witnesses in Croatia, and
access to documents held by, or under the control of,
the Government. In this area, there is still some
important ground to be covered, but I am pleased to
report that progress is being made. I would hope to be
in a position in the near future to report that the
Republic of Croatia is in full compliance with its
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal. But we are
not there yet.

The last matter about Yugoslavia that I would like
to raise concerns an issue which is increasingly
becoming a problem for the Tribunal, namely the
length of our proceedings, both the length of the trials
themselves and the overall period of detention facing
most accused who are taken into the Tribunal's
custody. Our trials are by their nature difficult and
complex undertakings. The crimes are broad and the
rights of the accused to a fair trial are jealously
protected. The need to guarantee fairness often
conflicts with the need to ensure speedy justice. We
now have four cases at the trial stage in The Hague,
and nine waiting to begin. It is true that the prosecution
and the defence become engaged at an early stage in
attempts to focus the areas of dispute between them,
but we must not lose sight of the fact that our statute
guarantees all accused the right to be tried without
undue delay.

It is becoming increasingly clear that the existing
trial chambers are finding it difficult to cope with the
number of trials awaiting determination. Traditionally,
in many national jurisdictions, there are two remedies
which are relied upon to address this kind of situation:
first, the release of accused on bail pending trial; and
secondly, the appointment of more judges to cope with
the judicial workload. In the case of the Tribunal, the
question of releasing accused on bail, or provisional
release as it is termed in the Tribunal, is not an
available option in most instances, particularly in
situations where the accused has been detained and
surrendered by the Stabilization Force (SFOR). In my
assessment, it is not satisfactory to release indicted
accused into a community where there is no ability on
the part of the Tribunal to enforce its own orders
without the cooperation of all States of the former
Yugoslavia. For example, it would be very easy for an
indicted accused in the Republika Srpska to enter
Serbia, where there is currently no reasonable prospect
of his being arrested.

The President of the Tribunal, Judge Claude
Jorda, is acutely aware ofthe situation and has recently
written to the General Assembly and to the Security
Council setting out his vision of the Tribunal's future. I
understand that that document is still being translated
and may not yet have reached members, but in it Mr.
Jorda projects the likely workload of the trial chambers
and gives the best available estimates of how long it
will take the Tribunal to process the cases at our
current level of resources. The results of the President's
analysis give cause for concern, and he proposes a
twofold solution: the creation of a pool of ad litem
judges upon which he could call as needed; and the
delegation of much of the detailed pre-trial work to
jurists acting on behalf of the trial chambers, thus
releasing the judges to concentrate on the proceedings
themselves. Those radical proposals have my support
in principle. We must find a way to have fair trials
within a reasonable time for all accused. This is, of
course, a solution which rests largely in the hands of
the General Assembly, but I felt it necessary to inform
the Council of the problem in the hope that it will
continue to lend its support to the Tribunal as it faces
new challenges.
(spoke in French)

I wish now to speak of the situation relating to
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. I
believe members are aware of the 31 March 2000
decision of the Appeals Chamber in the Barayagwiza
case, which reversed an earlier decision by the same
Chamber. The new decision, by which the accused, Mr.
Barayagwiza, will remain in detention and can be tried
by the Arusha court, has naturally changed our
cooperation relationship with the Government of
Rwanda.

We were there three times, for three-week
periods. We were, of course, working on investigations
and conducting trials, but the visits also provided a
good opportunity to meet with members of the
Government, including President Kagame, the Minister
of Justice, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Prosecutor-General.

I can assure the Council that cooperation with the
Government of Rwanda is now excellent. Might I also
say that the Rwandan Government, as a sign of
friendship, gave me a permanent entry visa to Rwanda
this time. Our Kigali Office has been focused on the
investigations. For the trials that were to begin this
month, we moved the trial teams to Arusha to follow
closely all of the hearings, while restricting the field
investigators to Kigali.

Regarding the work programme of the second
half of this year, we now have 42 detainees in Arusha.
Our programme envisages the arrest of 13 fugitives
still at large. Some are in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It would be a good idea for the United
Nations mission to have a mandate similar to the one
given to the Stabilization Force to help us arrest these
indictees.

Cooperation with African and European States is
excellent. We have a tracking team that is conducting
all the necessary investigations to locate fugitives; this
is naturally being done in cooperation with the judicial
authorities of the various countries. To date eight
indictees have been sentenced. Of these eight, three
pleaded guilty, including George Ruggiu, a Belgian
journalist who was sentenced yesterday to 12 years in
prison. Currently, there is only one trial under way,
against Bagilishema, which means that there are four
trials that have not yet been initiated. The reason why
these trials have not yet been initiated is that the
defence interjected 12 interlocutory appeals against the
joinder of proceedings. I will explain: we asked to try
the indictees in a single trial where they would have to
answer for the same crimes and the same acts. This
means that we will have a trial called the Government
case, with eight former Ministers now detained in
Arusha. There is the trial called the military case,
which involves four high-ranking military officers.
There is the media case, in which three journalists, a
publisher and a radio station owner are involved. Two
trials involve the Butare case, with six indictees, and
the Cyangugu case, with four indictees. This means
that there are 35 detainees waiting to be tried. We
hope - and I am certain - that these trials will start
this year, because the Appeals Chamber will issue its
decisions, and this will make it possible to start the
trials.

One of the problems we discovered during our
recent mission is that in Rwanda there are still many
common graves that have not yet been opened. I
discussed this problem with President Kagame, and we
agreed that, in cooperation with the Rwandan
authorities, we will be opening all of these common
graves, because I believe that to have 30 or 50 bodies,
in latrines, as I found during my last visit, is totally
unacceptable. It is not acceptable either from the point
of View of criminal proceedings - because one must
count those who were murdered - nor, furthermore,
from the point of View - and here President Kagame
agreed with me - of giving the victims the kind of
burial a human being deserves. This means that my
intention now is to use the forensic teams that we now
have in Kosovo to open up these common graves at the
end of October, when it will no longer be possible to
work in Kosovo because of the climatic conditions, and
to send some of the forensic teams to Rwanda to help
remove the bodies from the common graves.
I met with genocide survivor associations, and
with the survivors themselves; naturally, the problem is
still very serious from the point of View of the situation
ofthese survivors. I will give just one example to show
the social element also involved. A 27-year-old woman
was raped five times. Of course, she was injured and
still bears the marks of several wounds; she was saved
because she was underneath the corpses, and the Red
Cross discovered her still alive. She was saved. She
had a child as result of being raped, but naturally she
was rejected by her family, and now she is living alone
in destitute conditions. Such were the meetings we had
with some of the survivors. The situation is very, very
serious in this sense.

The situation is also very serious from the point
of View of the Rwandan detainees. l was able to visit
two prisons with the Justice Minister of Rwanda. These
prisons, with space for 2,000 detainees, are holding
8,000 people. This means that the detainees cannot
even stretch out to sleep. Naturally, the Justice Minister
is very concerned about this problem. They are now
trying to introduce a form of justice called gachacha,
which means sending the prisoners back to their
villages for trial in the ancestral tradition. I think that
this is actually the ideal solution, because it is
objectively impossible to try all the detainees.

Turning now to our future strategy, our Office has
identified 90 suspects who are being investigated, all
responsible for genocide and other Violations of
international humanitarian law. One priority is cases of
rape. What happened in Rwanda is unbelievable. We
think that we can have indictments against those 90
accused people by the end of next year. We have also
conducted financial investigations for Rwanda and for
the former Yugoslavia. We do not have much staff to
carry out these financial investigations. For Rwanda
there are two people and for the former Yugoslavia just
three. I will need bigger teams to do this, and I hope
that in the next budget I will be getting new posts. This
is a very important aspect of our activities. If we cut
off the funding - that is, the bank accounts - of the
indictees, not only will we make their escape more
difficult, but the money, according to the Chamber
judges' decision, will also be used to provide
compensation to the victims.
This is extremely important for Rwanda. It would
be regrettable were we unable to obtain such a decision
from the judges. There is a problem, however. There is
a loophole in our law. Our procedural rules do not
provide access for confiscating sequestered funds. That
is why we would request that a change be made in the
rules.

I will not take up any more of the Council's time.
I am available to answer any questions members may
wish to pose.

