Mr. Morris: I am deeply grateful for this
opportunity to visit with the Council about a range of
humanitarian issues, specifically as they affect peace
and security in Africa.

Yesterday, I listened carefully to the comments
that you, Mr. President, made at luncheon. I thought
that in just a few short sentences you offered
extraordinary insight and guidance with respect to the
humanitarian agenda and the development agenda as
they relate to very tough issues of peace and security
and the extraordinary impact that those issues have on
hundreds of millions of people who are, truly, so
desperately at risk. You said that it was important to
focus on the essential. You said that there was no
possibility of reaching the Millennium Development
Goals without peace. Indeed, I would say that without
peace, there is no chance of reaching the Millennium
Development Goals. You talked about the importance
of accelerating the post-conflict process to address the
Millennium Development Goals. You then said that
prevention is just simply common sense, and that the
best way to make progress in the area of development
is through good governance. I admire a person who can
so say much with such few words. Your comments
were powerful.

A few weeks ago, President Obasanjo of Nigeria
made a trip to Rome to visit with the World Food
Programme Executive Board. He came to talk about
the relationship between food and peace and security.
But he said something that I will never forget: "A
hungry person is an angry person. It is in all of our
interests to take away the cause of their anger".

Recently, I had the privilege of making my fifth
trip through southern Africa as the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy for Humanitarian Needs in Southern
Africa. I was accompanied on the trip by Ann Veneman
of UNICEF and Peter Piot of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).

It is my judgement that the greatest humanitarian
crisis we face today in the world is not in Darfur or
Afghanistan or North Korea, as challenging as those
issues are. It is the gradual disintegration of the social
structures in southern Africa. Hunger is at the very
core of that issue. A lethal mix of AIDS, recurring
drought and failing governance and capacity is eroding
social and political stability.

The facts relating to southern Africa are
extraordinary and overwhelming. Last year 1 million
lives were lost to AIDS. We are now entering the peak
of the pandemic, the years 2005 to 2007. The numbers
will continue to rise. On average, life expectancy in the
region has decreased by 20 years. Think of that. In
North America, Europe and Japan children can expect
to live nearly twice as long as children in Malawi,
Zambia and Zimbabwe. Much of life expectancy in
southern Africa is barely more than it was in Europe
during the Middle Ages. If there is a sadness,
something that is absolutely reprehensible, it is the
impact of all of this on children.

Earlier this year, the World Food Programme
estimated that 3.5 million people would need
emergency food aid in southern Africa. Today our
estimate is that 8.3 million people will need food aid,
in large part as a result the lack of rain in the region in
January, February and much of March. More than
4 million people are at risk in Zimbabwe, 1.6 million in
Malawi, 1.2 million in Zambia and 900,000 in
Mozambique. The case of Zambia is particularly
important when one thinks that in the last two years the
World Food Programme was able to buy 150,000
metric tons of food in Zambia for use elsewhere in the
world.

The prevalence of HIV is taking a huge toll in
terms of lives lost and reduced life expectancy. It is
directly undermining the capacity of communities to
produce enough food. HIV prevalence ranges from a
low of 12 per cent in Mozambique to a high of 42 per
cent of the adult population in Swaziland. Government
ministers talk frequently about losing their closest
colleagues to AIDS, and they worry that their
educational and health systems are collapsing. In 2003
Lesotho lost a third of its health workers and 15 per
cent of its teachers. The Prime Minister of Lesotho said
to me, "Jim, by 2010 half the teachers in our country
will be dead because of AIDS". President Mwanawasa
of Zambia told me that his country was losing teachers
at twice the rate they were able to replace them.

Outside many rural villages land lies fallow, with
no one to till it. A generation has gone missing. There
is no one to teach the next generation to farm. The
fastest growth industry in the region is the business of
producing funerals. AIDS has claimed the lives of
nearly 8 million African farmers, more than the total
number of farmers in North America and the European
Union combined - a staggering fact. Today there are
14 million orphans in sub-Saharan Africa because of
HIV/AIDS, and that number will grow to 20 million
over the next five years. The demographics are
strongly in place, and there is nothing we can do to
turn that number around in the short run.

I wish that I could find a way to stir up adequate
public and media interest in the suffering in southern
Africa. I will never forget a 70-year-old grandmother
in Swaziland. She and her blind 80-year-old husband
were heading a household with a dozen small children.
Some were her grandchildren, others not. In much of
Africa villages act as extended families. It is their form
of social security. In some respects, that system has
been the envy of the world. But that system is now
stretched to the breaking point where AIDS has taken
its greatest toll.

Hunger is a symptom of failure: a failed harvest,
failure to cope with a natural disaster and failure to
overcome social inequities, ethnic strife and racial
hatred. But addressing hunger and malnutrition and
saving the women and children who suffer most require
the cooperation of those in charge in the very areas
where those failures take place. Even with the
cooperation of civil authorities, delivering food and
other humanitarian aid is a dangerous business. The
World Food Programme has lost more staff to death
than any agency in the United Nations, with the
exception of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Assaults on convoys and hostage-taking
are not uncommon. We have lost three staff members
in the last few weeks in Darfur.

The United Nations has a Special Rapporteur on
the Right to Food, Jean Ziegler. In some ways, he and I
could not be more different in our political and
economic outlooks. He is a leading Swiss socialist and
I am a confirmed American capitalist. But he is a good
guy and we have a good friendship. I hope he would
say the same about me. We do not see the world
through the same lens, but on one point we could not
agree more: vulnerable, hungry people, especially
women and children, have a right to food. And we
agree that food should never be a weapon in war or an
instrument of diplomatic coercion. President Reagan
said that eloquently when he approved United States
food aid for Ethiopia in 1985 during the great famine
there, despite his strong antipathy toward the
communist regime in Ethiopia at the time. He said
simply, "A hungry child knows no politics". Whatever
a Government's perceived sins or the level of popular
indignation, we cannot withhold aid as a political tactic
in an emergency.

Over the last decade, we have seen starvation
used as a weapon in war in Darfur, the southern Sudan,
Somalia, Angola, northern Uganda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and West Africa. The tactic is
not unique to Africa; it was employed in Europe in
1992 by the Bosnian Serbs in the siege of Sarajevo.
When hatred strips us of our civility, we are all capable
of incredible brutality. The most egregious example of
the use of food as a weapon today is in Darfur, where
the situation continues to deteriorate. In January, we
estimated that 2.8 million people would need food aid
to avert mass starvation; today, the number is closer to
3.5 million. We are doing pretty well on the food front,
but camp workers live in fear that, as food supplies in
Darfur dwindle, even more people will be drawn into
the camps where the United Nations and non-
governmental organizations are woefully short of being
able to provide water, sanitation and basic health
services.

In much of Africa, the prevalence of hunger is an
accurate barometer for the level of social instability. It
does not matter whether that instability is caused by
civil conflict, drought, AIDS, bad governance or any
combination of those factors - hunger is almost
always within the group. A United Nations review of
half a dozen conflicts in Africa over a 20-year period
showed an absolute correlation between armed conflict
and reduced agricultural production, on average by 20
per cent per year, with a concomitant rise in the
prevalence of hunger.

Conflict clearly can cause hunger, but what about
the reverse? The relationship between hunger and
conflict is similar to the relation between hunger and
poverty. Hunger is both a cause and an effect of
poverty. It is also both a cause and an effect of political
conflict.

One African in three is malnourished and there
has been little sign of change in that over the last 10
years. In Central Africa, where war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has disrupted the region, the
percentage of undernourished people rose from 53 per
cent in 1995 to more than 70 per cent today. In other
areas where conflict has been less of a factor - Ghana,
Nigeria, Malawi and Madagascar - the nutritional
situation of the people has improved. All of us engage
in an exercise called "vulnerability mapping", in which
we use various indicators, such as market prices, rates
of malnutrition and household food consumption
patterns to put together maps showing hunger hot
spots. The correlation between hot spots and political
Violence in such places as Somalia, the Sudan and
northern Uganda is striking.

Chronic hunger in the African countryside is a
destabilizing influence that undermines political
stability and security. It spurs the continuing migration
of rural people into cities, where the existence of at
least some basic social services - including
subsidized or free food - acts as an incentive for
people to come to the urban environment. There is a
chance that as antiretroviral treatment becomes more
widely available - undoubtedly first in urban areas -
that, too, will act as a magnet to enhance, encourage
and increase rural-urban migration. Waves of AIDS
orphans are fleeing the countryside and arrive in cities
without any means of economic support, often
contributing to social disintegration and crime. Hungry
children are far more easily recruited as child soldiers
in such places as northern Uganda. We need a
dedicated effort through school feeding and other
activities to keep those children in rural areas and in
school.

Projections for urban population growth in sub-
Saharan Africa are among the highest in the world,
with cities such as Nairobi, Lagos and Lusaka
experiencing growth rates of over 6 per cent per year.
The impact of rural-urban migration on employment in
Africa has been precisely the opposite of that in
Western Europe and the United States - it has led to
higher rather than lower rates of unemployment and
social instability. At a certain point, the capacities of
municipal Governments are stretched to the limit and
social demands are not met, aggravating internal
political and social tensions among competing ethnic
groups perhaps not accustomed to sharing the same
space.

Competition for limited food resources can ignite
Violence and instability. The fact that African
agriculture is so dependent on rainfall and that there
are comparatively large pastoral populations
contributes to population movements that can incite
conflict. The Violence in Darfur, for example, has
reduced the movements of nomads and led to
overgrazing in areas with insufficient water, and the
result has been drought-like conditions. We have seen
that problem for decades not just in the Sudan, but in
Mauritania, Senegal and other places as well. When
families can neither plant nor market livestock
products, they begin to move. The economy in North
Darfur is now in total shambles. Most markets are
closed, fighting has virtually eliminated cultivation,
and cereal prices have skyrocketed. Insecurity has
pushed people northwards, placing unbearable strains
on scarce supplies of water and wild foods. In March,
an inter-agency mission warned that, without more aid,
there would be further displacement and growing
tensions between the community of internally
displaced persons and the host communities.

Access to food was used as a weapon at the
height of the civil war in the Sudan. The famine in
1988 cost a quarter of a million lives. Now that there is
a peace agreement in much of the Sudan, it is ironic
that support for food aid has dwindled, and that could
well undermine the peace process. It is our estimate
that at least 3.2 million people in the rest of the Sudan,
who are generally affected by the peace process, are
severely at risk of hunger and require food. There are
now more displaced Sudanese fleeing into
neighbouring Kenya and Uganda as refugees than
returning home. That is quite remarkable.

The continuing presence of large numbers of
internally displaced persons and refugees is inherently
a threat to political and economic stability, and the
threat of hunger presents significant complications in
resettling them. It is difficult to persuade a family in
Angola, for example, to return to its home Village if it
does not have sufficient food to tide it over to the next
harvest. WFP invests heavily in repatriation packages
that allow ex-combatants to feed themselves and their
families while they get re-established at home.

Food aid has been a critical component in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
in Africa. In the last five years alone, we have targeted
800,000 combatants in Liberia, Burundi, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone,
Rwanda and Angola. I can never help but mention, as
we look at the ex-combatants on all sides of the
conflict in Liberia, that 70 to 80 per cent of them were
very young children. Just this past week, we approved
a new demobilization aid package for 150,000 former
army and militia combatants in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where pressure to demobilize
and disarm has grown in recent months.

In West Africa, where thousands are still
displaced by over a decade of war, food aid is used to
help restore social and economic stability. One of my
colleagues has reported that today's stability in West
Africa is fragile, and progress is impossible if people
lack basics like food, shelter and the means to keep
their families healthy. Food aid is now a tool to support
education, help rebuild communities and give people
the means to safeguard their own welfare.

A peace deal brokered by South Africa has
encouraged some optimism with regard to cote
d'Ivoire, but the country remains dangerously divided.
Disarmament was due to start this week but will be a
challenge. Our operations target 922,000 people in the
region, including 700,000 in Cote d'Ivoire and the
remainder in neighbouring Burkina Faso, Mali and
Ghana. We provide rations for 26,000 Liberian
refugees and displaced persons within C6te d'Ivoire.
The fighting in Cote d'Ivoire ostensibly began over
political disenfranchisement. Here again, competition
for limited agricultural resources played a role as the
economy sputtered, living standards fell and the
number of internal migrants began to rise.

In our View, there are few phenomena in modern
life as political as humanitarian aid. The world's major
donors all make clearly political choices on which
humanitarian aid projects to fund. Some make those
choices in an effort to have a global scope to their
emergency aid, others concentrate regionally, on
former colonies or where they see the greatest socio-
economic interest at home. Some time ago, we
compared aid channelled through WFP with the
broader patterns of ODA, which includes humanitarian
assistance, and the results were interesting. In 2003, 23
percent of ODA went to least developed countries and
24 percent to Africa. WFP's portfolio is heavily
emergency-oriented and heavily African in focus.
Three quarters of our aid - our work - went to least
developed countries and African countries.

Overall commitments to ODA are climbing, and
recent European initiatives, especially in the Nordic
countries and the European Union, are especially
encouraging. Food aid, which is critically important in
Africa, is in sharp decline. Globally, it dropped by
more than 1.8 million metric tons last year, excluding
Iraq. This is happening despite the fact that the number
of hungry people worldwide actually rose from 790
million in 1990 to 852 million today. Had the Chinese
not had the remarkable success of moving 300 million
people out of conditions of hunger and poverty, by
their own standards, over the last 25 years - truly one
of humankind's great accomplishments - the number
of hungry people in the world would be simply out of
sight.

Occasionally I have thought that the worst place
for a hungry child to live in Africa today would be in a
country at peace with its neighbours and relatively
stable, but just plain poor. Funding levels rise with the
incidence of violence and media interest.

We are encouraged by growing donor attention to
some of the less popular emergencies. President Bush's
recent announcement of 50,000 tons of food aid for
North Korea was particularly welcome, as was an
earlier donation by Germany.

Let me give the Council a very powerful example
that helps to make clear the importance of food aid. In
a comparison between a 7-year-old boy in North Korea
to his 7-year-old counterpart in South Korea, the North
Korean boy would be 8 inches shorter and 20 pounds
lighter.

The Blair Commission has been extraordinary in
focusing public attention on humanitarian and
development needs in Africa. Presidents Lula, Chirac
and Lagos, as well as Prime Minister Zapatero, are
working together to give hunger top priority.

As I close, may I thank the members of the
Council for their support for Africa's hungry and for
the World Food Programme. France has recently
doubled its contribution; Japan, Denmark and the
United Kingdom have been consistently strong
contributors for emergencies; and Russia, China and
India have joined the ranks of our donors. Once again
in 2004, the United States provided more than
$1 billion of support.

There are encouraging signs for Africa. The G-8
debt initiative; renewed popular interest, as seen in the
revival of Live Aid; the Bush-Blair announcement of
$674 million in emergency food aid; the work of the
New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD)
and the African Union; and other home-grown
development initiatives give us cause for optimism.
WFP itself is trying to be more creative in its approach
and is looking at a famine insurance scheme in
Ethiopia, in partnership with the World Bank. Ethiopia
is an unusual place in that it has the highest per-capita
support for emergencies and the lowest for
development work. We are also looking for ways to
maximize the impact of the support you give us. In
some respects, we are taking the perspective of the
insurance industry, where we will actuarially determine
the reliability of the support you provide for us actually
coming to our bank account. Once we determine
actuarially the reliability of what is likely to come, we
can begin to spend that money on the first day, as
opposed to waiting for the cash actually to be
transferred. We know that if we are able to use the
resources we have earlier, we can probably feed 20 per
cent more people with the same amount of money
during the course of a year.

We are proud that globally WFP has phased out
of food aid in 25 countries since the mid-1990s. One
day, we want to phase out of Africa, too.

In 2000 at the Millennium Summit, every nation
here made the pledge to halve hunger and poverty. It is
time we began to show progress and, with that, build
peace and security on a troubled continent. The most
powerful leverage to investment we can all make is to
find a way to feed the 300 million hungry children in
this world. That is doable proposition; it is not an
expensive proposition. The payoff - the change in a
young person's life when he or she is fed early in life
and has a chance to go to school, even for a few
years- everything about that child's life and that
community, and, ultimately, that country, changes for
the better. The cash requirement to do it, in partnership
with the host countries, is not a huge amount of money,
but, in my judgement, it is the most powerful
opportunity we have to meet the Millennium
Development Goals by virtually, over a period of 10
years, eliminating child hunger in the world.

