The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned about
the escalation of violence in Burundi. It condemns the
murders of the Minister of Energy and Mines and of
the former Mayor of Bujumbura by extremists, and
deplores the ensuing ethnic killings of many people
that have caused thousands to flee their homes. It
stresses the futility of resorting to violence and
condemns the activities of the extremist elements who
try to destabilize the country and threaten the whole
region. It encourages all States to take the measures
deemed necessary to prevent them from travelling
abroad and receiving any kind of support. It reaffirms
its determination to support the Convention of
Government of 10 September 1994, the provisions of
which constitute the institutional framework for the
necessary national reconciliation. The Council calls on
all political parties, military forces and all elements of
civil society fully to respect and implement it in a
spirit of dialogue, moderation and compromise.

"The Security Council urges all parties to work
together to further the dialogue. It underlines the
urgency of organizing, in accordance with the
Convention of Government, a national debate with the
participation of all elements of the nation with a view
to consolidating national reconciliation and restoring
democracy. lt invites the Secretary-General to help the
various political parties and elements of civil society
to initiate this comprehensive consultation.

"The Security Council warns that those who
commit crimes against humanity are individually
responsible for their crimes, and will be brought to

 
justice. The Council specifically warns that if acts of
genocide are committed in Burundi, it will consider
taking appropriate measures to bring to justice under
international law any who may have committed such
acts.

"The Security Council reaffirms its view that
the perception of impunity is a fundamental problem
in Burundi, one which seriously endangers security
in the country. The Council expresses once again its
grave concern at reports indicating that systematic,
widespread and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law have been committed in Burundi.

"The Security Council recalls the statement by
the President of the Security Council of 9 March
1995 (S/PRST/l995/10), in which the Security
Council, inter alia, underlined the role that could be
played in Burundi by an international commission of
inquiry into the October 1993 coup attempt and into
the massacres that followed. It requests the
Secretary-General to report to the Council on an
urgent basis on what steps should be taken to
establish such an impartial commission of inquiry.

"The Security Council favours measures to
restore a state of law and improve the functioning of
the judicial system. It also favours the organization
of a round table of donors. It urges States to provide
for these projects financial contributions directly or
through a trust fund to be created for this purpose.

"The Security Council supports the
reinforcement of the action decided by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
welcomes the dispatching of experts.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
actions taken by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). It calls upon the OAU and its members in
the subregion to continue to use their influence to
help stabilize the situation in Burundi. It further calls
upon all States, in particular neighbouring States, to
refrain from supplying or allowing the transit of
arms and to deny sanctuary and any other assistance
to those extremist elements which seek to destabilize
the situation in Burundi.

"Aware of the close interconnection between
various humanitarian and political problems in the
region and of the risk of subsequent destabilization,
the Security Council reaffirms its support for a
 

regional conference on peace. stability and security
and calls upon the countries of the region to convene
such a conference as a matter of urgency.

"The Security Council remains seized of the
matter. The Council will consider taking action as the
situation demands".

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/ 13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.
