Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to join
others in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November and to express our gratitude to Ambassador
Oshima of Japan for the able manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council during the month of
October.

It is with sadness and frustration that we are once
again gathered here in response to another attack on
innocent civilians. At the outset I would like to
reiterate my Government's condolences to President
Abbas and the Palestinian people for the loss of life
suffered.

My delegation would also like to associate itself
with the statement delivered earlier today by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The South African Government has expressed
deep concern at the escalation of the conflict in the
Middle East. The recent attacks in Gaza are raising
tensions in the region to new dangerous heights, at a
time when we would have hoped that all sides in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict would be looking at ways to
end the negotiation deadlock and move the peace
process forward.

The increase in violence is threatening regional
and international peace and security and we urge the
Security Council, in line with its Charter obligations,
to act decisively and to take urgent action to resolve
the conflict. My delegation reiterates the position that
no party should take unilateral action that seeks to
predetermine issues that can only be resolved through
negotiation.

We call on the Israeli Government to refrain from
that type of action and, as a major military Power in
the region, to act with restraint so as to avoid further
civilian casualties and the destruction of vital
infrastructure. Equally, we call on the Palestinians to
stop firing rockets into Israel. From our experience, the
only lesson that we have been able to learn from such
retaliatory actions over the past decades is that they
merely give rise to more violence.

The draft resolution presented by Qatar deserves
serious consideration by the Council. The Security
Council should call for an immediate ceasefire and call
for the establishment of a United Nations observer
force to supervise the ceasefire. The Security Council
has been seized with this matter for more than 40
years. Its failure to find a lasting solution to the crisis
has denied hope to the people of Palestine. Without
hope, the people in the region will believe that they
have no other recourse but to engage in more violence
and counter-violence.

It is of concern that every time there is progress,
those that do not want change use the opportunity to
make the situation worse. In that regard, the
international community must accept its responsibility
and relaunch the peace process.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our
unwavering support to the Palestinian people in their
struggle for the establishment of an independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel, with both States enjoying
secure and internationally recognized borders. The
vision of a two State solution, as enshrined in Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002), and the principle of
land for peace must, therefore, underpin any permanent
settlement of the Middle East conflict.

