Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. My delegation
hopes that your term will be a successful one.

(spoke in French)
During the month of September, Ambassador

Alfredo Lopes Cabral presided over the Security Council
and with outstanding brio. My delegation wishes to

 

congratulate him for the manner in which he carried out his
tasks.

Despite the grave crisis my country has been
experiencing for almost three years, the Republic of
Burundi, which my delegation has the privilege of
representing here, has carefully followed developments in
the political situation in the fraternal and friendly country
of Angola. My delegation takes this opportunity to
commend the remarkable efforts made by the international
community to assist the Angolan people in putting an end
to the fratricidal warfare that has divided and devastated it
for over 20 years.

In this regard, the main players - the States members
of the Organization of African Unity, its Organ on Politics,
Defence and Security, and the United Nations, with the
firm support of its many agencies, non-governmental
organizations and the various donors - deserve special
tribute for their tireless efforts.

Burundi wishes to underscore the special importance
of the Lusaka Protocol of 20 November 1994, the result of
the very productive mediation of the United Nations in
close cooperation with the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the Angolan political leaders
primarily involved.

On behalf of my Government, the delegation of
Burundi pays a solemn tribute to all the Heads of State of
the region who have come together to tackle the colossal
task of restoring peace and security in Angola. For his lofty
mission to mediate the successful reconciliation of the
Angolan brothers, in his capacity as Special Representative
of Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye deserves an especially enthusiastic tribute, in
particular, from Africa and from the United Nations in
general.

The constant political will, commitment and
magnanimity of President dos Santos deserves the
appreciation of the entire international community. All his
efforts and sacrifices have been aimed at bringing the peace
process to a successful conclusion, thereby alleviating the
untold suffering of the Angolan people and offering new
hope to the sons and daughters of his country.

But Burundi, which itself faces armed rebellion from
within and beyond its borders, is disturbed over the stalling,
ambiguities and delays of UNITA, which is a party to the
Lusaka Protocol. These delays could jeopardize and
seriously threaten any chances for peace. My Government

 

therefore associates itself with the international
community and particularly with the Security Council and
the mediation mission, and strongly urges UNITA to
proceed without delay to the quartering of all its troops in
the areas under United Nations supervision, to hand over
all weapons and military equipment still under its control
and to proceed with the effective dismantling of all
command posts for incorporation into the Angolan Armed
Forces command.

My delegation has good reason to disapprove of
UNITA's turnabout. By declining the offer of one of the
highest State political posts, that of Vice-President of the
Republic, an offer intended to reinforce the spirit of
national reconciliation, UNITA is thwarting the
anticipated successful outcome. We must therefore
demand that the UNITA leaders speedily change their
course and scrupulously apply the Lusaka peace Protocol,
and that they do their utmost to safeguard the process of
national reconciliation.

Full compliance with the Lusaka Protocol includes
the rapid settlement of the question of a special status for
the President of UNITA, full respect for the free
circulation of persons and goods throughout the country,
the integration of UNITA members into provincial and
local administrations throughout the countries, the
immediate return of UNITA deputies to the National
Assembly and, above all, the formation of a Government
of National Unity and Reconciliation.

The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibilities and make all the signatories of the Lusaka
Protocol to abide faithfully by their commitments, entered
into before the world and the Angolan nation. The
Security Council must be more vigilant in turning things
around, putting the peace process back on track and
suppressing any manoeuvres indicating a dangerous
reversal of the significant progress already achieved on
the path to final normalization.

Burundi too draws inspiration from the painful
experience of our friends and brothers, the people of
Angola, whom we long supported in their legitimate
struggle for national liberation. Indeed, the people of
Burundi has been confronted with a civil war imposed
upon it by armed groups and militias since the outbreak
of our national tragedy in October 1993. With a view to
restoring complete peace and security, the Government of
Burundi has resolutely committed itself to negotiations
with all groups, including armed factions. One month has
already elapsed since the reestablishment of our National

 

Assembly, the restoration of the rights and functions of
political parties and the public commitment of the
Government to engage in talks with the rebels guilty of
large-scale massacres of an innocent people; all this is in
line with our policy of national reconciliation and
democratization.

On 24 September, I informed the President of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General of my
Government's complete implementation of the conditions
used by the countries of our region as a pretext to impose
immoral, illegal sanctions, in flagrant violation of the
Charters of the United Nations and of the Organization of
African Unity. This total economic blockade is ravaging the
population, in particular the most vulnerable categories:
women, children, the old and the sick. Burundi has fulfilled
all the conditions set by the architects of the embargo and
those outlined in Security Council resolution 1072 (1996)
of 30 August; therefore, any further pretext for maintaining
these measures can only be dictated by other motives, by a
hidden agenda on the part of those who favour the status
quo. Here the destinies of the Governments of Angola and
of Burundi coincide. Both are victims of their complete
compliance with the appeals of the international community
and with Security Council resolutions, since they are being
penalized because of the obstructions of rebels who violate
with impunity their commitments, which remain dead
letters. The Security Council must remedy this state of
affairs by obliging the recalcitrant parties to abide by
Security Council resolutions.

