Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to start
by thanking Ambassador Oh Joon of the Republic of
Korea, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), for his presentation of the
progress report on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Rwanda commends the Committee
and its Group of Experts for their continued efforts
in ensuring that non-State actors do not develop,
acquire, manufacture or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons. We appreciate the efforts made
by the Committee, particularly in improving outreach
programmes and its own visibility.

Recalling the Committee's objective of achieving
universal reporting, and as underscored by the
presidential statement of 7 May 2014 (S/PRST/2014/7),
we note with satisfaction the priority given by the
Committee to encouraging States that have not yet
submitted their first reports to do so. In that regard,
we welcome the holding of the three special meetings
in Pretoria, Libreville and Lome, as well as the visits
to Member States by their invitation, and we hope that
the remaining 20 non-reporting States will soon submit
their national implementation reports.

Rwanda is among the Member States that have
fulfilled their reporting obligations, and we did so
in 2011 thanks to the outreach of the Committee and
the Group of Experts at that time. We will continue
to ensure the implementation of the report within
our borders and in our region, and we encourage all
Member States to cooperate in identifying effective
practices, experiences and lessons learned that would
contribute to the development of a long-term vision and
strategy for the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

We are concerned about capacity gaps in the
technical, financial and legal frameworks within our
States in dealing with issues related to the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Rwanda therefore
welcomes the commitment of the 1540 Committee to
ensuring the effectiveness of the matchmaking role
between assistance requests and offers. We also support
the Committee's commitment to increasing the number
of focal points of contact between Member States and
international organizations, which currently stands
at 79. We are of the view that both the matchmaking
between assistance requests and the increase of points
of contact will greatly contribute to the universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

In that regard, I welcome the organization by the
African Union Commission, in collaboration with
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
of a training workshop for national points of contact,
held last week on 18 and 19 November in Addis
Ababa. The objective of the training workshop was
to impart practical information, skills and guidance
on the obligations of Member States under resolution
1540 (2004), as well as the role and responsibilities
of national points of contact. During the workshop,
Member States also shared best practices on how to
draft voluntary national action plans, develop and
implement legislative and other control measures, and
prepare national reports on implementation.

Before I conclude, I would recall the strong link
that exists between terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. We therefore stress
the need for continued cooperation between the 1540
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, as well as the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in order to
put in place an integrated and comprehensive strategy
against those two scourges that constitute the most
dangerous threat to international peace and security. In
that regard, we reiterate our call to all Member States
for universal denuclearization.

Finally, since this is probably the last briefing
by Ambassador Oh Joon in his capacity as Chair
of the 1540 Committee, Rwanda commends his
strong leadership, as well as that of his predecessor,
Ambassador Kim Sook, over the past two years on
the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. That was demonstrated by the Committee's
extensive outreach activities under the chairmanship of
the Republic of Korea, as well as the successful high-
level open debate held in May this year (see S/PV.7169)
and presided over by Minister for Foreign Affairs Yun
Byung-se, to mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) and give new impetus to its
implementation. 1 am convinced that with the legacy
of the Republic of Korea, including the presidential
statement of 7 May (S/PRST/2014/7), the Committee is
in a better position to conduct a well-informed strategy
aimed at achieving full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), which will be incorporated into the
Committee's comprehensive review, to be submitted to
the Security Council before December 2016.

