Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): My delegation, at the
outset, would like to register its sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his informative and useful report
contained in document S/l995/473 of 10 June 1995, the
eleventh in the series of progress reports on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).
We would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr.
Anthony Nyakyi, as well as to the leaders of the member
States of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for their untiring efforts to bring about peace
in Liberia. In this context, we commend the convening of
the Third Meeting of Heads of State and Government of the
ECOWAS Committee of Nine on Liberia held in Abuja last
month, which was aimed at coordinating and harmonizing
their policies on Liberia. We share the view that the
harmonization of ECOWAS policies on Liberia will greatly
foster their combined efforts to bring the crisis, which has
gone on for far too long, to an end. We note further that
without such harmonization, the lack of which has become
one of the significant obstacles to the peace process, the
cooperation of the faction leaders in the peace process will
be difficult to secure.

Some developments have occurred in Liberia over the
past few months, but unfortunately they still do not create
a climate conducive to the attainment of peace, stability and
national reconciliation. The factions and political leaders,
regrettably, are still unable to break the deadlock in
reaching a final agreement towards the installation of the
Council of State which, we believe, would contribute
greatly to the search for peace and reconciliation in Liberia.
It is my delegation's fervent hope that the follow-up
consultations on this matter will result in a final agreement
on the installation of the Council of State.

We share the assessment of the Secretary-General that
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
will not be able to carry out its mandate successfully
without the cooperation and support of the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), as well as that of the
warring factions. In this regard, we welcome the intention
of the Secretary-General to consult ECOWAS with a View
to enhancing cooperation between UN OMIL and ECOMOG
and defining a joint concept of operations. In the same
vein, we urge the Liberian parties to overcome their deep
mistrust of one another and their unwillingness to share
power in governing the country, which have kept them
from extending the necessary cooperation.

We would also like to express our deep concern over
the continued flow of arms into Liberia, in violation of
the arms embargo, across the borders and from sources
within Liberia. In this regard, we support the request of
the ECOWAS leaders to ECOMOG and UNOMIL to
improve the existing monitoring mechanism in order to
stem the flow of arms into the country.

Another issue of concern to the Indonesian
delegation is the continued blocking by the contending
factions of access routes for the delivery of relief
supplies. We therefore call on all Liberian parties to
provide guarantees for the safety of humanitarian
assistance delivery throughout the country in order to
alleviate the unnecessary suffering of the civilian
population.

My delegation also regrets that the Liberian leaders
have still not laid down their arms for the greater good of
their country, in spite of the many opportunities that have
been provided by the international community to
implement the various agreements they themselves have
signed. Since the political future of Liberia depends on
the Liberians themselves, they must therefore strive to
demonstrate further their political will and sustained
commitment to peace and stability in their country.

The draft resolution on Liberia before us today,
inter alia, extends the mandate of UNOMIL to 15
September 1995 and declares the Council's readiness to
consider restoring UNOMIL to its full strength if
significant progress in the peace process in Liberia is
achieved during the next extension of the mandate.

In View of the considerations that I have just
mentioned, Indonesia will vote in favour of the draft
resolution. This position is also based on our hope that
during the next extension of the mandate the Liberian
parties will avail themselves of this new opportunity to
demonstrate, through concrete steps, their political will to
resolve their own problems and to respect the role of
international, regional and subregional organizations.

In this context, we urge the Liberian parties to see
this extension as an opportunity to strive for substantial
progress on all outstanding issues that remain unresolved,
particularly the installation of the Council of State, the re-
establishment of a comprehensive and effective cease-fire,
the disengagement of all forces and the creation of an

 

agreed timetable and schedule for the implementation of all
other aspects of the Akosombo and Accra agreements. The
extension, we believe, could also contribute to the efforts of
the ECOWAS Ministers of the Committee of Nine to
reconvene a meeting of the Liberian parties in order to
assist them in resolving those outstanding issues.

