Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I am glad to be taking part
in one of those occasions in which the errors of the
past, carried out in the name of bare political
expediency, can begin to be set aright through a series
of acts characterized by strategic foresight, vision and
prudence. We have the chance to engage in a common
effort to attenuate the effects of a serious challenge to
the foundations of the international system that took
place on 17 February 2008. On that day, the ethnic
Albanian authorities of Serbia's southern province of
Kosovo and Metohija unilaterally declared
independence from a State Member of the United
Nations in direct violation of its democratic
Constitution and against the will of the Security
Council.

In all the meetings of the Security Council
devoted to our southern province, Serbia has insisted
upon the full respect of the binding obligations of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as this Council's
resolution 1244 (1999), which guarantees the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country. I
make no apology for this. I celebrate the fact that
Serbia is unwavering in its determination to defend its
principled position on Kosovo peacefully, using all
political, diplomatic and legal means at our disposal.
We will continue to do so in the future.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
the States Members of the United Nations that support
08-6204]
Serbia's position on Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independent, the first among these valiant equals being
the Russian Federation. Our nations stand together,
dedicated to safeguarding the principles set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations.

Serbia's insistence on resolving Kosovo's future
status in accordance with international law has not only
been invoked for reasons of vital national interest and
constitutional necessity, nor merely out of genuine care
for regional peace and stability. We have also done so
out of a fundamental concern about the dangerous
consequences the Kosovo precedent could have for the
survival of the United Nations system as we know it.

We hold that the argument that Kosovo is sui
generis - in other words, a unique case - is
untenable. The sui generis contention comes down to
saying that Kosovo should be treated as exempt from
international law and that Kosovo should stand beyond
the rules that govern the behaviour of the international
community. The Republic of Serbia strongly rejects
this claim, believing that no one can claim the right to
proclaim such exceptions, especially in defiance of the
Security Council.

Serbia's position has remained consistent. The
only way to avoid challenging the territorial integrity
of any United Nations Member State is for the world
community to work constructively together to solve
this issue through international institutions of
indisputable and universal legitimacy. On 8 October,
the General Assembly supported Serbia's position by
an overwhelming majority. It adopted a resolution to
refer the question of status to the International Court of
Justice. Thanks to this support, an issue of such
fundamental importance and complexity, which
passionately involves all at once identity, boundaries,
communal rights and opposing historical narratives,
has been steered clear of resort to the force of arms for
the first time in the history of our region.

Referring this matter to the judicial arena was a
reaffirmation by the world community of Serbia's
strategic choice to respond to the universal declaration
of independence peacefully and with maximal restraint.
It is the first in a series of steps designed to create an
environment in which lasting stability can be secured,
law strengthened and the sovereign equality of nations
reinforced.

The second involves restoring legitimacy to
international action in our southern province. On

12 June, the Secretary-General issued a report in which
he informed the Security Council of his intention to
begin reconfiguring the international civilian presence
in Kosovo. This was done without the approval of the
Republic of Serbia, the host country of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo. And it was done without
the endorsement of the Security Council, the only
institution endowed with the power to legitimate
changes in the composition of the international
presence in Kosovo, as paragraphs 5 and 19 of
resolution 1244 (1999) make abundantly clear.

Ignoring the will of Serbia and infringing on the
statutory prerogatives of the Security Council sets the
stage for a crisis of legitimacy. Just as with the
universal declaration of independence, the Republic of
Serbia responded in a non-confrontational manner. On
25 July, we addressed the Council to repeat our
position that it is of "crucial importance [for
reconfiguration to proceed] with the full engagement
of Serbia. It must be completed with our acceptance
and explicitly approved by the Security Council. That
is the only way", we concluded, "to deliver legitimacy
and ensure sustainability of our work" (S/PV5944, p. 6). Our point was clear: the voice of Serbia must be
respected.

On that basis, an understanding with the
Secretary-General was reached in which a dialogue
between Serbia and the United Nations would intensify
on six topics of mutual concern: police, judiciary,
customs, transportation and infrastructure,
administrative boundaries and Serbian patrimony. After
months of difficult negotiations, I am pleased to say
that an agreement has been reached. Its provisions are
detailed in the report we have before us.

That dialogue will continue. Serbia will remain
constructive in the ongoing dialogue with the United
Nations, while holding to its principled position on
Kosovo, rooted in our country's Constitution and in
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

Our present achievement is of great significance.
It creates the conditions to protect the well-being of
Serbs and other gravely endangered communities in
Kosovo, and it cements the fact that the Republic of
Serbia remains indispensable to the self-governance of
our southern province.

Serbia's long-standing position of support for the
deepening of the European Union's engagement in any
part of Serbia, including Kosovo, has never been at
issue. The European Union can and should help to
build the much-needed institutional and societal fabric
of our southern province. That has been impossible
until now because of the way reconfiguration began.
What has always been a crucial condition for our
acceptance of reconfiguration is the clear and binding
commitment of the European Union, confirmed by the
Security Council, to being fully status-neutral and to
anchoring completely its presence in Kosovo under the
authority of the United Nations, in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999).

I am pleased that those reasonable conditions
have been met. The explicit language of the report
confirms the status neutrality of the engagement of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), which is a guarantee that no part of its
mandate can be devoted to the implementation of the
Ahtisaari plan for Kosovo's independence, which was
rejected by the Republic of Serbia and "not endorsed
by the Security Council" (S/2008/692, para. 5), in the
words of the report that is before us today. The
Republic of Serbia gives its full consent to the six-
point agreement and the conditions laid out for the
deployment of EULEX. We welcome the Secretary-
General's report and invite the Security Council to
endorse it.

I must confess my disappointment at the position
that the authorities in Pristina have taken on the
Secretary-General's report. What is of great
significance, however, is that the implementation of the
six points, as well as the deployment of EULEX -
which, to quote the report, "will fully respect Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and operate under the
overall authority and within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations" (ibid, para. 50) -
shall nonetheless be put into operation; and that it shall
be done in consultation with relevant stakeholders,
such as the Republic of Serbia. I call on the authorities
in Pristina neither to obstruct the will of the
international community nor to oppose the binding
resolve of the Security Council.

I take this opportunity to draw the Council's
attention to the difficult environment in which the most
endangered community in Europe continues to live.
For many Serbs in Kosovo, their fate continues to
depend on how they feel they can survive despite the
enormous hostility of their immediate surroundings.
The representative of the Kosovo Albanians is present
today in his personal capacity. In his previous remarks

to the Council, he claimed that Kosovo is an idyllic
multi-ethnic place where democratic perfection is just
around the corner. I therefore invite the Council to
consider the following.

What of the abominable act of cultural cleansing
that is the paving over of the ruins of the recently
destroyed Serbian church in the centre of Djakovica,
thus compounding physical destruction with the
attempt to erase every trace of its very existence?

What of the defiance of the municipal authorities
in Decani to restore the cadastral record of land
belonging to the monastery of Visoki Decani,
designated by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site and
placed on its list of endangered places, notwithstanding
two executive decisions by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General ordering them to do so?

What of the return of illegally seized private
property? More than 30,000 such cases are
outstanding. Those affected - Kosovo Serbs in
particular - barely manage in makeshift dwellings or
camps for internally displaced persons, while Kosovo
Albanians continue to live in their homes and make use
of their agricultural fields without any fear of
prosecution.

What of the fact that, according to United Nations
figures, only 107 displaced Kosovo Serbs returned to
their homes in the first nine months of this year?

What of the break-in at the Kosovo Trust Agency
compound by officials of the parallel institution known
as the privatization agency of Kosovo, done in the
presence of local police?

What of the seizure of massive quantities of
medicine and medical equipment destined for North
Kosovo or the enclaves?

What of the most recent stoning of Serbs in
Kosovska Mitrovica and the use of automatic weapons
by ethnic Albanians against unarmed Serbian civilians
and international police?

Finally, what of the repeated assaults on
international civilian officials in Kosovo?

Those and many other similar questions are
disturbing indeed. As Member States of the United
Nations, I believe it is our solemn duty to seek the
answers to them.
08-6204]
In conclusion, I would like to say that quickly
achieving full membership in the European Union will
continue to be the central strategic priority of the
Republic of Serbia. That should also remain the
priority of all other United Nations Member States in
the Western Balkans. The caravan of history that began
its journey with the Treaty of Rome will not stop. We

must make sure that no one is left behind as it goes by.

We have been very clear as to who we are and
what we want. Serbia continues to believe in the shared
destiny of all European nations. We remain dedicated
to embrace Robert Schumann's dream of an organized
and living Europe that is indispensable to the
maintenance of peaceful relations among States. That
is at the foundation of our democracy, our efforts at
reconciliation and our belief in what we can
accomplish together. They remind us of the importance
of cooperation, compromise and consensus-building,
while prompting us to remain true to the moral
compass the values themselves provide for all who
have the prescience to see beyond the first obstacle on
the way.

Serbia - a whole Serbia, including its sovereign
province of Kosovo - now a member of the United
Nations, will join the European Union in the next few
years. We will join the European Union with our heads
held high, with our territorial integrity intact and with
our sovereignty preserved.

Like most other nations, mine has travelled
through periods of tragedy and periods of glory.
Sometimes it is tragedy that produces the opportunity
to achieve new heights; but those heights are not
reached by simply inventing new history. That is why
Serbia will never, ever, accept the independence of
Kosovo, come what may. New heights are achieved by
honouring all that constitute one's national identity, not
by denying it. New heights are achieved by nurturing
heritage, not by suffocating it. Achieving new heights
is about a nation being proud of its past while reaching
beyond its present.

Martin Luther King said that the arc of the moral
universe is long, but it bends towards justice. It comes
to all in the end. So it has always been, so it is and so it
will be. And so will be Kosovo: part of Serbia forever.

Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council at a time of
great consequence for us all.
