Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, first of all, allow me to
congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of
the Security Council and express the expectation that the
Security Council will work successfully under your
leadership. The delegation of the Russian Federation will
be prepared to offer you every possible support in this
connection.

I would also like to express our profound thanks to
the Ambassador of China, Mr. Li Zhaoxing, for the very
skilful, precise and effective way in which he organized
the work of the Security Council in March.
Today, for the first time since 1968, the Security
Council is considering the question of security assurances
for non-nuclear-weapon States. During the almost 30
intervening years, considerable progress has been
achieved in the field of disarmament. There has been a
sea change in the international situation. The threat of
nuclear warfare has been averted, and tangible results
have been achieved in the field of nuclear disarmament.
The START I Treaty has been signed and entered into
force and the way has been opened for Russia and the
United States to ratify START 11. Specific steps in this
field are also being taken by the other nuclear Powers,
and talks on a comprehensive test-ban treaty have started
in the Conference on Disarmament.

The question of security assurances for non-nuclear-
weapon States is most certainly a key element in the
international security system. When he spoke at the forty-
ninth session of the General Assembly, the President of
the Russian Federation, Mr. Boris Nikolaevich Yeltsin,
proposed that work be done to reach agreement on a
renewed Security Council resolution on security
assurances for non-nuclear-weapon States, and this is the
very goal that the resolution we have adopted reflects.
The draft of the resolution that was put before the
Council was prepared with the assistance of a wide range
of States and, for the first time, all five nuclear-weapon
States joined in sponsoring a draft resolution, in Council,
on security assurances.

The resolution is an important step in response to the
legitimate interest of the non-nuclear-weapon States,
which have been trying to obtain agreed and binding
security assurances in light of the fact that they
themselves have renounced nuclear weapons under the

 

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
In our view, the resolution provides a global, collective and
specific response to that interest. The adoption of the
resolution is important for strengthening the NPT itself,
whose purpose is to avert the threat of nuclear war and the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and to promote
international cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear
energy.

I should like to emphasize that, for the first time, all
five nuclear-weapon States have provided both positive and
negative security assurances. In View of the legitimate
aspirations of the non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty to obtain assurances that nuclear
weapons will not be used against them, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation made the
following declaration on 5 April this year:
"The Russian Federation will not use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, except in the case of an invasion or any
other attack on the Russian Federation, its territory, its
armed forces or other troops, its allies or on a State
towards which it has a security commitment, carried
out or sustained by such a non-nuclear-weapon State
in association or alliance with a nuclear-weapon
State." (S/1995/261, p. 3)

Today's unanimous resolution goes significantly
further than resolution 255 (1968) and spells out the actions
and forms of assistance that will be undertaken by the
Security Council and nuclear-weapon States in the event
that an aggression using nuclear weapons, or the threat of
such aggression, should occur. It is significant that, in the
event of an aggression with nuclear weapons or the threat
of such aggression against a non-nuclear-weapon State
party to the NPT, the nuclear-weapon-States - permanent
members of the Security Council - will immediately bring
the matter to the attention of the Security Council and will
seek to ensure that the Security Council, in accordance with
the Charter, takes steps to provide the necessary assistance
to States victims of an act of aggression or subject to the
threat of such aggression.

The resolution also makes provision for appropriate
steps to be taken in response to a request from a victim of
aggression for technical, medical, scientific or humanitarian
assistance, and also for compensation by the aggressor for
the losses, damage or injuries sustained by the State victim.

I am very pleased to note the constructive and
responsible approach of all members of the Security
Council during the discussion of the draft resolution. As
far as possible, the sponsors tried to take into account all
the proposals made by the non-nuclear-weapon States,
particularly the non-aligned countries, during work on the
draft resolution.

The adoption of today's resolution on security
assurances for non-nuclear-weapon States does not mean
that this question has been played out. We intend for
work along these lines to continue. I should also like to
emphasize that the adoption of the resolution supplements
the commitments already made by the Russian Federation
concerning the signing of the relevant clarifications to the
Protocols to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean - the
Treaty of Tlatelolco - and the South Pacific Nuclear
Free Zone Treaty - the Treaty of Rarotonga. The
Russian Federation supports proposals for similar zones
in Africa, the Middle East, South-East Asia and the
Korean peninsula. We believe that the Security Council's
adoption of today's resolution will help strengthen the
nuclear non-proliferation regime, international security
and world stability.

