Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer; the Executive Director
of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake; and the President of the
Central African Republic, Faustin Archange Touadera,
for their briefings.

(spoke in English)

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
remains an acute and urgent concern for the EU and
its member States. We concur with the Secretary-
General, as expressed in his report of June 2015 (see S/2015/453), that prevailing disrespect for international
humanitarian law by some States and non-State
armed groups and pervasive impunity for violations
have become one of the most critical challenges for
the protection of civilians. Upholding the norms that
safeguard humankind was at the heart of the recent
World Humanitarian Summit and we must take forward
the commitments that were made there to enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The specific protection needs of women and
children require special attention. Similar attention
should also be paid to the phenomenon of sexual
violence and the use of rape as tactics of warfare,
affecting women, children, but also men. Children
are disproportionately affected by armed conflict, and
grave violations against children continue to increase.
The situation of children in many places, such as Syria,
the Central African Republic and Mali, among others,
is of most urgent concern.

National authorities have the primary responsibility
to provide protection for their citizens. However,
the protection of civilians is also a main task of
peacekeeping and is often decisive for the success and
legitimacy of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Today, 10 out of 16 peacekeeping missions have
mandates encompassing the protection of civilians.

However, many challenges remain in terms of the
effective implementation of protection mandates, and
we need to continue to address them. For example,
effective implementation requires better planning
support to missions, capturing lessons learned
effectively and improving the understanding of how
to support host States in protecting civilians. Missions
need to be equipped with the tools to address both the
root causes ofcrises and their most Visible consequences.
Peacekeepers must protect civilians under threat of
physical violence consistent with the requirements of
their mandates. Different levels of threat must be met
with the appropriate and commensurate use of force,
as necessary.

Clearly, local actors and non-governmental
organizations, as well as regional and international
organizations, have a key role to play in supporting
national authorities in their protection-of-civilians
responsibilities. Key areas to advance in the protection
of civilians, such as a political process, conflict
prevention, early warning and partnerships, which were
all emphasized in the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the Secretary-
General's reports, would require the active involvement
of all those actors. The EU and its members States are
providing support and capacity-building to partners
in all those areas. Local ownership is an important
factor in protecting civilians. Regional and subregional
organizations play an increasingly important role in
international peace and security. Better coordination
of efforts between the United Nations and such
organizations should be pursued to ensure that the
distribution ofobjectives and tasks among organizations
maximizes the impact on the ground.

Peacekeeping operations need to be equipped
with clear, coherent, concise and achievable mandates
that include a strong human rights component when
relevant, and protection mandates must be translated
into solid concepts of operations and operational
guidelines. We call on all peacekeeping operations
with a protection-of-civilians mandate to put in place
protection-of-civilians strategies by the end of this
year. Transition arrangements between different
operations or distinct organizations and exit strategies
should be explored early on. From an early stage
onwards, transition arrangements should take into
account elements that will contribute to the assessment
of the overall efficiency of the missions once they
are terminated.

We agree that, in many ways, training is the
cornerstone of improving the carrying out the protection
ofcivilians by missions. We need to improve cooperation
in the area of training in order to better implement
relevant United Nations standards, ideally by offering
United Nations-certified training on the protection of
civilians, as some EU member States have been doing.
Such training should also include predeployment and
in-mission training on child protection, as well as issues
on sexual exploitation and abuse. The EU supports the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy in that regard.
There is nothing more damning for the legitimacy of
international peacekeeping and for efforts to regain the
trust of local populations than peacekeepers abusing
those they are mandated to protect. The EU has, for its
part, provided training on the protection of civilians,
atrocity prevention, gender, child protection, human
rights law and international humanitarian law as an
integral part of the training curricula to its missions in
Somalia, Mali and the Niger.

United Nations peace operations should also
play a critical role in assisting the host States in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect, as they
are often in the front line when a State is unable or
unwilling to protect civilians from the risk of atrocity
crimes. In that context, United Nations peace operations
need to be staffed and equipped in a way that allows
United Nations personnel to better interact with the local
population and civil society organizations, including
women's rights-based groups, with the overarching aim
of responding to warning signals and reducing the risk
of atrocity crimes. The implementation of the Human
Rights Up Front Initiative should make a positive
contribution in that regard.

In cases where international efforts fail and atrocity
crimes are committed, accountability is crucial. Where
mandated or when the host State has consented thereto,
United Nations peace operations should be equipped
and staffed with the capability and expertise to assist
in transparent investigations and support the collection
of evidence in a professional manner. The EU is
committed to assisting States in strengthening their
national judicial and correctional systems in order to
enable them to investigate and prosecute perpetrators
of atrocity crimes. Furthermore, closer cooperation
between the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
missions in the field is of vital importance. When a
peace operation is to be deployed in an ICC-situation
country, its mandate should authorize it to facilitate or
assist the ICC, including by assisting authorities in the
protection of witnesses and the arrest and surrender
of individuals subject to arrest warrants issued by
the Court.

The EU finds it deeply disturbing that civilians
continue to account for the vast majority of casualties
in today's armed conflicts. The Council can count
on our support for reinforcing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, including through support
to United Nations peace operations and through
our own missions. We will continue our support
for the promotion of compliance with international
humanitarian law and strengthened accountability for
serious violations thereof.

