Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation associates
itself fully with the complimentary remarks addressed to
you, Mr. President, and to your predecessor, Ambassador
Holbrooke. My delegation is also pleased to see
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello here again to address the
Council in this discussion of the issue of East Timor, and
we thank him for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation since he took up his position there.

My delegation is gratified that the security situation
in East Timor has greatly improved, despite some
remaining problems, which, in our view, augurs well for
the early and smooth transition of the Territory to
independence in the not-too-distant future. We welcome
the phasing in of United Nations peacekeeping forces,
which we hope will be completed as scheduled.

My delegation notes with concern reports of
increased crime, which is attributed to rampant
unemployment, poverty and the settling of past feuds. The
situation must be addressed urgently and prevented from
spreading, so that the culture of peace and rule of law
will be in place, instead of one of Violence and
lawlessness.

 
Indeed, it would appear that the situation would
require more police personnel than peacekeeping troops. At
the same time, the socio-economic problems that
contributed to the increase in acts of criminality should be
addressed through development and reconstruction
programmes, which must be undertaken urgently to cater to
a population that has been, for the most part, uprooted and
displaced during the conflict and must now be assisted to
settle upon their return to their homes and villages.

In this regard, we were gratified by the overwhelming
positive response during the donor meeting in Tokyo last
December. These funds must be mobilized quickly and
effectively for purposes of the reconstruction efforts. We
therefore welcome the Quick Impact Projects of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and the road rehabilitation projects of the
United Nations Development Programme, which have
provided employment for local people.

As regards the settling of old scores or vendettas
between the opposing groups, serious efforts must be made
to foster national reconciliation among the East Timorese,
along with effective efforts in disarming former combatants
of both sides. We would appreciate it if Mr. Vieira de
Mello could say something about the issue of disarming the
ex-combatants, if he has the time to do so. In this regard,
my delegation calls on all parties concerned to step up their
reconciliation efforts and to utilize the National
Consultative Council for this purpose. We believe that
traditional and local institutions, such as the Church and
Village elders, could and should also play a facilitative role.

Malaysia is pleased to note the improved relations
between East Timor and Indonesia. We hope that the
planned visit of President Wahid to East Timor later this
month will further improve these relations. As we have
stated so often in the past, it is important for East Timor to
undertake reconciliation, not only among its own people,
but also with its immediate neighbour, Indonesia. We
warmly welcome these positive trends. On its part,
Malaysia looks forward to the upcoming visit of
Mr. Xanana Gusmao and Mr. Ramos-Horta to Kuala
Lumpur some time this month. We welcome any move by
East Timor to integrate itself into the region. I am confident
that the regional States will respond appropriately.

Clearly, according to the briefing given by Mr. Vieira
de Mello, a lot of work remains to be done to rehabilitate
East Timor, which must be undertaken urgently in the face
of rising expectations on the part of the East Timorese
people. The international community must continue to
give its strong support to UNTAET.
On the issue of human rights and their violation, we,
too, believe that there should be a full accounting of what
happened, so that justice can be done and those
responsible brought to book. We also note, however, that
Indonesia has taken concrete positive steps in addressing
this issue. These are taken with seriousness and without
fear or favour. I think this aspect should also be
considered or factored in by the Council as it considers
the report.

In conclusion, we wish to commend the Special
Representative and Transitional Administrator for East
Timor and the entire staff of UNTAET for their
outstanding work in very difficult circumstances.

