Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you wholeheartedly,
Sir, on the very professional and effective manner in which
you are presiding over the work of the Security Council in
this extremely busy month of January. I should also like to
extend these sentiments to Ambassador Jassim Buallay of
Bahrain on his brilliant work in December.

I also believe that it is only fair to highlight your
efforts, Sir, to convene this public meeting and to ensure a
thorough consideration of the importance of humanitarian
activities relevant to the Security Council. The dramatic
contribution just made by Under-Secretary-General Vieira
de Mello is extremely important because it stresses these
serious problems precisely and forcefully. I also believe that
the contributions made by China and the United States are
very useful and timely.

In our view, it is relevant for a number of reasons that
this Council actively address these issues.

First, the concept of peace and security, as laid down
in the Charter, is based today on broader and more
qualitative issues than it was in 1945. Today, it is
recognized that, in order to prevent local conflicts from
spreading and acquiring international dimensions, it is
necessary to take effective measures, keeping in mind the
close interrelationship between justice, social well-being
and peace.

Secondly, a good number of the items on the agenda
are related to intra-State conflicts, which on the one hand
unleash uncontrollable flows of refugees, and on the other
lead to gross Violations of the laws governing armed
conflicts, and all of this has a great impact on the civilian
population. Such crises develop quickly, when United
Nations bodies with political responsibilities do not, or
cannot, adopt the necessary measures to prevent them or
control them.

Thirdly, it is not possible seriously to negotiate a
political architecture that will put an end to conflicts
without previously resolving or marshalling humanitarian
problems. Therefore, attention to the humanitarian
problem is essential, not just ancillary, in order to achieve
a solution. Hence, the idea of including humanitarian
units in peacekeeping operations is of great interest and
must have broad-based support.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General, in the report he
submitted last year on the work of the Organization,
pointed out that the Security Council should take up those
economic and social factors that have an impact on peace
and security with the same energy and seriousness with
which it deals with political issues, if it truly aspires to
ensure that prevention of conflicts is the rule rather than
the exception.

In the last few days, the Council has considered
several items in its regular agenda where all these
elements appear quite clearly. Also, a few days ago, we
saw two aircraft chartered by the United Nations shot
down, with a most regrettable loss of the lives of staff
serving the United Nations.

When tragedy of this kind strikes, the lack of an
appropriate response, paralysis or powerlessness not only
mean a deplorable lack of consideration towards the
victims and their families but also encourage the
continuation of such criminal acts under our very eyes.

The individuals who are trying to implement the
mandates of this Council in the most dangerous places
must know that impunity will not be accepted, and that
the required investigations and taking of responsibility
will be encouraged with all necessary pressure, without,
however, undermining the principle of non-intervention.

To think about strengthening the presence of United
Nations personnel in places of conflict without at the
same time providing them the utmost guarantees of
security and protection is simply inconceivable.

We welcome the fact that the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel came
into force two days ago. We congratulate New Zealand
for having made it possible for this most important event
to take place. But the entry into force of the Convention
does not relieve us of our responsibilities.

 

The trend to pursue policies of disengagement, to look
upon humanitarian tragedies that stem from armed conflicts
without trying to assume our responsibilities under the
Charter in any Visible way, adversely affects mainly those
countries that are Members of the United Nations.

In such issues, we must practise a zero-tolerance
policy. Hence, it is regrettable to note that in recent months
we have seen renewed erosion of respect for humanitarian
principles.

International humanitarian law enshrines the norm that
needy civilians, and in particular women and children, have
the right to receive humanitarian assistance. Yet
humanitarian organizations are denied the possibility to
deliver assistance to those who need it, and, as Mr. Vieira
de Mello stated, deliberate attacks are launched against
civilian populations. Acts of violence have been committed
against people working for humanitarian assistance
organizations whenever armed groups wrongly believe that
such assistance is a threat to their political objectives. As
also stressed by Mr. Vieira de Mello, statistics show that
more civilian staff have lost their lives than United Nations
military staff.

Let us also bear in mind that most of the conflicts
considered by the Council occur in a context of poverty,
backwardness and hopelessness. Therefore, it will be very
difficult to resolve them without a global approach and
without the kind of resources that very few countries of the
world have available to them today. As stated by the
Secretary-General, "a bridge must be constructed between,
in effect, the Dow Jones index and the human development
index". (A/53/I, para. 15)

Finally, nothing could be more relevant than the words
of the Secretary-General contained in an article that
appeared on page A19 of The New York Times on 19
January 1999:

"the peace we seek is one that reflects the lessons
of our terrible century: that peace is not true or lasting
if bought at any cost without democracy, tolerance
and human rights for all, no peace is truly safe."

