Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Natural resources are a rich endowment from Mother
Nature and have played a critical role in the
perpetuation, development and prosperity of human
civilization.

However, the exploitation of natural resources is
a double-edged sword. The improper use of resources
can trigger a series of problems in the economic,
social, environmental and governance areas. Under
specific circumstances, the irrational exploitation, use
and distribution of natural resources can cause a
gradual increase in social conflicts, which can
culminate in internal strife or even in regional disputes.

Of course, the causes of armed conflicts are
complex and deep-rooted and involve many
interrelated factors. The connection between natural
resources and armed conflicts is not a simple causal
one, nor does possession of the former necessarily lead
directly to the latter. In our view, to properly address
the link between natural resources and conflict, the
following principles should be taken into account.
First, it is necessary truly to respect the full and
permanent sovereignty of countries over their natural
resources. Since the 19605, the General Assembly has
adopted a series of resolutions and documents
recognizing that a country enjoys full and permanent
sovereignty over its own natural resources and is
entitled to exercise that right freely. Those resolutions
and documents have played an important role in
encouraging countries to develop their economies
through their own efforts, promoting effective
international cooperation and maintaining world peace
and stability. They should continue to be effectively
implemented.

Secondly, it is necessary to continue to strengthen
coordination among the various United Nations
agencies. Many development agencies, including the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the World Food
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations have done a great deal of work in
assisting countries to realize the rational exploitation
and sustainable use of their natural resources. The
Peacebuilding Commission has also offered guidance
to post-conflict countries concerning the effective use
of natural resources in the reconstruction process.
Various agencies within the United Nations system
should further strengthen coordination and
cooperation, consolidate current resources and further
enhance efficiency.

Thirdly, the Security Council should continue to
play a constructive role. Embargoes on natural
resources produced in conflict areas are an important
tool at the disposal of the Security Council to prevent,
intervene in and put an end to conflicts. All countries
must therefore strictly implement the existing sanctions
imposed by the Council.

At the same time, the Security Council should
also give more consideration to the possible
humanitarian impacts of sanctions and take
corresponding remedial measures to avoid focusing on
one aspect of the question while neglecting others.
Since the purpose of sanctions is not to punish, we
must attach importance to and improve the mechanism
for lifting sanctions. When the time is right, the
Security Council should lift sanctions immediately so
as to give full play to the policy-guiding role of
sanctions and put natural resources into service for the
peaceful reconstruction of the country concerned and
the welfare of the local people as soon as possible.
Fourthly, it is necessary to let regional
organizations and other relevant mechanisms and
initiatives play their full role. In recent years, regional
organizations, including the African Union and the
European Union, have played an important role in
encouraging countries to strengthen the management,
protection and rational use of natural resources. The
adoption of the Security, Stability and Development
Pact for the Great Lakes region has demonstrated the
determination of countries in Central Africa to
strengthen unity, join hands in development and engage
in cooperation. In addition, intergovernmental
mechanisms and arrangements such as the Kimberley
Process have been a strong force in curbing illicit
transactions in natural resources and maintaining the
stability of natural resource-producing countries,
especially in Africa. The efforts of the aforementioned
mechanisms and individual countries complement
those of the United Nations and should continue to be
encouraged.

Natural resources are a critical material basis for
the survival and development of human society. It is
the shared responsibility of all countries to make wise
use of natural resources and to strive for sustainable
development to the benefit of all mankind. As an
important arena for advocating international
cooperation and maintaining world peace, the United
Nations undoubtedly has a tremendous role to play in
that area. We support the continued discussion of this
issue in the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council.

