Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): This
year, we commemorate the twelfth anniversary
of the international community's commitment to
Afghanistan. I believe that this is an excellent moment
to thank the Secretary-General for introducing his
report (8/2013/133) to the Council today, and to say that
I greatly value the contribution made to this debate by
Ambassador Tanin.

Spain, which has been part of this process from
the beginning, has been making a military and civilian
contribution to the stabilization and reconstruction of
the country. The human toll of Spain's military effort
in Afghanistan has been high; 100 Spaniards have died
since the arrival of our troops. Spain is currently the
eighth largest contributor to the NATO International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan,
under the Security Council's mandate. We are now
engaged in the withdrawal ofthe 1,300 Spanish soldiers
who are still in Afghanistan, distributed throughout
the provinces of Herat, whose airport is managed by
Spain; Badghis, which is one of the most inaccessible
and disadvantaged provinces of the country and where
the Spanish provincial reconstruction team is located
in Qala-i-Naw; and Kabul. Spain has supported in the
past and continues today to strongly support the efforts
of the Afghan Government in the complex transition
process, both in their security and civilian aspects. We
are currently entering a difficult stage in the process.
We are in the final stretch, as we all know. We all
have to do our utmost to ensure that the transition is
irreversible and sustainable. We must therefore redouble
our efforts in the coming months, particularly in the
areas of governance, institution-building and economic
development.

The transfer ofresponsibilities in the security sector
to Afghan authorities has already been completed in
the six districts of Badghis province. We are satisfied
with the way in which the transition is progressing.
Spain will continue cooperating and will remain firmly
committed to the activities of consulting, training
and supporting the Afghan security forces during the
completion of the transition process.

With regard to the civil aspects of the transition,
we are now in a position to complete the transfer of
the cooperation projects that we have developed in our
area of responsibility. We are considering doing that
in parallel with the transfer of responsibility in the
crucial area of security. Currently, most of the projects
are already being managed by Afghan personnel. The
transfer will be formalized with the signing of the
appropriate agreements with the representatives of the
Afghan ministries that will take over those projects.

In 2013, Cooperacion Espafiola en Afganistan will
conclude after seven years of positive collaboration.
It should be emphasized, however, that Cooperacion
Espafiola will continue to participate in multilateral
projects through its contributions to international
organizations.

Despite the difficulties inherent in the complex
peace process, recent progress permits us to hope for
a possible relaunch of dialogue towards sustainable
and inclusive reconciliation. For that to be successful,
it should involve the armed groups and all sectors of
Afghan society in a context of respect for the Afghan
Constitution, especially when it comes to human rights,
in particular those of women and girls.

The year 2012 was a year of major international
events related to Afghanistan. Now it is time to note the
year's many achievements.

Afghanistan will continue to need international
assistance after 2014. That is why the bases for the new
allied mission for the post-2014 period are being outlined,
focusing exclusively on educational and training tasks.
In that way it will seek to assist the Afghan National
Security Forces in the best possible way so that they
can successfully deal with the important work that they
have to do and that is expected of them.

On the regional level, we welcome the fact that the
Istanbul Process, whose principal goal is to promote
regional cooperation and security in order to achieve
peace and stability in Afghanistan, is decisively moving
forward. Spain is currently examining its contributions
to the confidence-building measures that are associated
with the Process.

In addition to everything I have just set out, we
are also working to secure the political and financial
sustainability essential for the consolidation of the
Afghan political system. We trust that the Government
of Afghanistan will continue to fulfil its basic
commitments in the fields of governance, development,
the rule of law, human rights and the fight against
corruption.

In that context, the presidential elections announced
for 5 April 2014 will be a significant challenge from
a logistical perspective. The international community
will continue to support Afghanistan, which in turn will
have to ensure an inclusive, transparent and democratic
election, with results that the Afghan people can fully
identify with.

The work and the support of the United Nations will
be of great importance in those elections. That is why
Spain supports the decision to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
by one year, and greatly appreciates the central and
impartial role that the United Nations is playing in
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Finally, allow me also to emphasize the enormous
importance that Spain attaches to the role that the
European Union can play in assisting the Afghan
authorities on issues related to capacity-building,
including governance, transparency and the rule of
law, as well as in the training of civil servants and
members of the police and judicial sectors, and in the
socioeconomic development of the country in general.

In the light of what I have said here, Spain firmly
supports the ongoing negotiations for an ambitious
cooperation agreement for partnership and development
between the European Union and Afghanistan, which
will certainly set the tone for and guide the relations
between both partners in the coming years. The coming
months will be decisive for the consolidation of the
international community's legacy in Afghanistan. It
is essential that the progress and successes of the past
decade not be reversed.

The Special Representative of the European Union
for Afghanistan has already made a statement, which
we of course share. Nevertheless, I am also grateful,
Mr. President, for the fact that you have given me the
opportunity to make an additional set of comments in
my national capacity.

