Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh gives
warm greetings to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. We are
confident that under your leadership and the United
States leadership, we will have an effective presidency.

We meet here against the backdrop of the
horrendous murder in Bunia of six humanitarian
personnel of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. There can be no excuse for such heinous acts.
My delegation conveys our sincere condolences to the
bereaved families. We demand a prompt inquiry into
the incident so that those responsible are brought to
justice without delay.

We have great pleasure in welcoming the
Ministers of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda and Burundi, and the Special Envoy of
Rwanda, who are with us today to discuss an issue of
serious significance for peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Ms. Safiatou Ba-N'Daw, Chairperson of the Panel
of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and her colleagues
on the Panel - Mr. Francois Ekoko, Mr. Mel Holt, Mr.
Henri Maire and Mr. Moustapha Tall - deserve our
appreciation for their courage and commitment in
pursuing the mandate given to them by the Council.
Their comprehensive report and their findings and
recommendations assume critical importance,
particularly in view of the current forward movement
in the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We shall limit our observations to five issues. The
first is the findings and conclusions of the Panel. The
Panel has concluded that the plundering of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues and that there is a clear linkage between
illegal exploitation and the continuation of the war. If
the conclusion is established beyond doubt, all
concerned will have to assume due responsibility and
take measures to break the nexus between the illegal
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation of the war.

The findings of the Panel in its present report
should be examined, taking the views of concerned
countries and other relevant parties fully into account.
There are questions about the methodology used, about
the quality of evidence and about the nature of the
conclusions. In fact, the main purpose of today's
meeting is to hear the various views. The Panel will do
well if it can substantiate its conclusions against
disclaimers offered.

The findings and conclusions of such expert
panels have serious implications for the objectives
pursued by the Security Council. We stress that reports
of panels of experts issued in the name of the United
Nations should meet evidentiary standards and other
relevant norms. A panel should, at the same time, be
able to investigate and to submit its findings with
absolute independence and objectivity.

The second issue is the definition of illegality. We
have noted the Panel's definition of illegal exploitation.
It has been stated that the definition does not seem to
conform to the provisions of the Lusaka Agreement.
There are questions on the legality or illegality of
exploitation of resources in areas under rebel control.
The question is relevant, as some of the rebel
movements are signatories of the Lusaka Agreement.

The third issue relates to an immediate response
by the Council, concerned parties and Member States
to the findings and recommendations. As an interim
response, the Council should call for immediate
cessation of the illegal exploitation of the mineral and
other resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Panel recommends a number of steps that,
we believe, Member States can take unilaterally at this
stage. They include steps with regard to the import,
export and transportation of certain minerals and
financial transactions that have been put into question.
Countries involved may also consider declaring an
immediate moratorium on the supply of weapons and
all military mate'riel to rebel groups operating in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

A unique area of concern is conflict timber. The
world is aware of conflict diamonds and other high
value commodities. It is a revelation to us that
plundering extends to such mass-volume products as
timber and non-timber forest products. We support the
Panel's recommendation that concerned countries
should, as per international practice, declare to the
United Nations Forum on Forests the origins of the
timber that is being shipped from their seaports, as well
as the certification documents of such timber. Timber
and non-timber forest products coming from warring
areas should be declared as "conflict timber and non-
timber forest products". Similar positive steps may also
be considered by the countries on the demand side.

The Council's demand for such interim measures
should extend to all actors involved in illegal activities:
Governments, armed forces, individuals and public or
private enterprises engaged directly or indirectly in the
extraction, transport, import and export of resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The fourth issue relates to further action by the
Council. Any specific measures by the Council should
follow consideration of the addendum to the report that
the Panel will be requested to submit before the expiry
of its extended mandate. The Panel will be expected to
respond to the comments of those cited in the report,
update its data and complete unfinished tasks in the
remaining areas of investigation. Council action in
terms of appropriate measures can follow only after
conclusive evidence is available and after parties
responsible for the illegal activities fail to take
corrective measures or to comply with the Council's
demands.

Finally, we would like to underline that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should have full
sovereignty over its national resources; exploitation,
illegal or otherwise, by outside actors should not
contribute to sustaining the war.

The Council's purpose in pursuing the matter is to
facilitate the peace process; it should take all
appropriate measures to that end.

