Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Leila Zerrougui and Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi,
Permanent Representative of Kuwait and Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for their briefings.

At present, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is stable overall. National and
provisional legislative and executive institutions have
generally been established and the country's economy
has enjoyed steady development. President Tshisekedi
has paid visits to countries of the region to improve the
security situation in the east by strengthening regional
cooperation. Those positive developments demonstrate
that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has the ability and the will to keep the
country stable and that the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) is effective.

Meanwhile, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues to face challenges and the security situation
in the eastern part of the country remains grim. The
Ebola outbreak has deteriorated and has been declared
a public health emergency of international concern,
with a greater risk of spillover. China calls on the
international community to increase its input to help
the Democratic Republic of the Congo overcome its
challenges in the security, humanitarian, development
and other spheres.

First, it is necessary to assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with its security capacity-
building. Peace and stability are the necessary
foundations to guarantee that the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo can advance its political process and realize
economic and social development. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo bears the
primary responsibility for safeguarding its national
security and stability. The international community
should respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, fully respect the leadership of the Government
in handling its own affairs and, on that basis, help the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to strengthen its
security capacity-building. All international partners
should help to push the armed groups in the country to
give up the military option and find solutions through
dialogue and consultation.

Secondly, regional and subregional
organizations - such as the African Union, the
Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region - should continue to play their roles as the main
channels of mediation to facilitate greater interaction,
dialogue and consultation between the parties and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The United Nations should play a coordinating
role to form synergies at the international level so
as to effectively implement the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.

Thirdly, there is a need to help the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo bring the Ebola
outbreaks under control as soon as possible. The World
Health Organization (WHO) has declared the Ebola
outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo a
public health emergency of international concern.
The top priority is to step up assistance according to
the needs of the Government and, at the same time,
lend strong support to the work of the WHO and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies. United Nations agencies should improve
coordination among themselves and work in synergy.

Fourthly, economic support should continue to be
provided to the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. International partners should focus
on increasing investment in education, health care,
infrastructure and other sectors to help the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to increase employment
opportunities, improve people's livelihoods, restore
socioeconomic development and tackle the root causes
of the conflict. It is hoped that the United Nations
Development Programme and other agencies, as well
as the Peacebuilding Commission, will play a more
visible role.

China welcomes Ambassador Alotaibi's recent
visit to the countries of the region. We believe that this
will help to better inform members of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
about the situation on the ground and to strengthen
the Committee's cooperation with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries of the region.
Sanctions are not an end but a means to an end. We hope
that the Panel of Experts will continue to work strictly
within the parameters of its mandate, supporting the
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in strengthening weapons management
and eliminating the threat of armed groups.

Since last year, China has been providing
emergency humanitarian assistance for the prevention
and control of Ebola in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through bilateral and multilateral channels
and has sent groups of experts to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda to support their
anti-epidemic efforts. China will continue to maintain
close communication with the WHO, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other African countries.
We will continue to provide all necessary assistance to
the best of our ability for the prevention and control of
Ebola, in accordance with the dynamics of the disease
on the ground and the needs of African countries.

MONUSCO has played a vital role in maintaining
peace, security and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and responding to Ebola outbreaks.
China hopes that MONUSCO will continue to increase
coordination and communication with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and actively
fulfil its mandated functions. The international
community must continue to lend active support to the
work of the Mission. China firmly supports the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
actively participates in the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in the country. We have contributed military
officers, military experts, engineering units and
medical units to MONUSCO.

China stands ready to join the rest of the
international community to continue contributing to
the early realization of peace, stability and development
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

