Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his informative
briefing, and Ambassador Skoog for his presentation on

the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali.

(spoke in French)

I also wish to welcome Mr. Tieman Hubert
Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.

(spoke in English)

Let me express my strongest condemnation of the
recent attacks against MINUSMA in Aguelhok and
Gao, which caused the deaths of one Nigerian and two
Chadian peacekeepers, and injured 10 others. I would
like to express my deepest condolences and sympathy
to the families of the victims and to the Governments of
Chad and the Niger, as well as to wish a quick and full
recovery to those who were injured.

I would like to focus my intervention on three issues,
that is, the political process, the security situation and
the capacities of the MINUSMA.

On the political process, the implementation
of the arduously achieved Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remains slow in the face of
the current challenges and needs. Tangible progress
in priority areas, including decentralization, security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, is crucial to advance the peace process.
Holding the presidential elections on time will be vital
for Mali to avoid serious political tension. However,
organizing the elections in a situation where the State
remains absent in a large part of the country may
even deepen the crisis. In that context, restoring State
authority over the entire territory should be of the utmost
urgency. Poland supports all the necessary measures
taken by the Security Council against individuals and
entities engaged in actions or policies that threaten the
implementation of the peace process or the security and
stability of Mali.

On the security situation, the situation in northern
and central Mali continues to be critical and remains a
serious threat to regional stability in the Sahel. Terrorist
groups continue to carry out attacks against innocent
civilians as well as MINUSMA and French and Malian
forces. At the same time, counter-terrorism operations
continue to raise grave human rights concerns. We
believe that the fragile security situation in the region
requires a multidimensional approach focused not
only on military operations against terrorist networks
and organized criminals, but also on creating job
opportunities for youth and ensuring accountability for
serious crimes that destabilize the peace process.

My third point concerns MINUSMA capacity gaps,
which continue to affect the Mission's operations as well
as the safety and security of its personnel. MINUSMA
peacekeepers continue to be targeted by attacks that
are increasingly complex and lethal. Poland welcomes
the technical agreement among the United Nations, the
European Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel,
signed at the Brussels conference in February, with
a view to providing the Joint Force with operational
and logistical support through MINUSMA. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's upcoming update of
United Nations support to Joint Force.

In conclusion, Poland commends the tireless efforts
of the men and women of MINUSMA in extremely
difficult circumstances and fully supports the Special
Representative Annadif. We also look forward to the
outcome of the ongoing strategic review of the Mission,
led by Ms. Ellen Margrethe Loj, which will provide
guidelines for the future direction of MINUSMA.

