Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Mr. Hoyer, Minister of State of Germany,
who is presiding over today's meeting, and I thank
Mr. Serry for his briefing. I also listened carefully to
the statements made by the representatives of Palestine
and of Israel.

The protracted and unresolved Middle East issue
is the main obstacle blocking progress on peace and
development in the Middle East, which thus affects
global peace and stability. The Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks have again reached a stalemate with a lack of
substantial progress over the past few months. The
Middle East is now at a crucial crossroads. China is
deeply concerned by the current status of peace talks
between Israel and Palestine.

China supports a solution to the Israel-Palestine
dispute through political and diplomatic channels
based on relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map for peace in the Middle East, with
the aim of establishing a fully independent, sovereign
State of Palestine with the two countries, Palestine and
Israel, living peacefully side by side.

Israeli settlement activities have directly caused
the stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks and
also constitute the major obstacle to the resumption of
those talks. China is against Israel's construction of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and
appeals to Israel to immediately cease its settlement
activities and to promote conditions conducive to
mutual trust between the two parties in order to break
the stalemate in the peace talks.

China welcomes the internal reconciliation
agreement among the Palestinian parties and hopes that
they will use it to strengthen internal unity and
cooperation and play an active role in moving the
Middle East peace process forward.

The solution to the Middle East issue is
inseparable from vigorous support and assistance on
the part of the international community. China attaches
great importance to the important role of the Quartet
and hopes that it will soon propose specific
programmes conducive to the resumption of peace
talks between the two parties. China hopes that the
international community will display the necessary
political wisdom and courage and strengthen its efforts
to promote peace negotiations and that it will continue
its tireless efforts to facilitate the resumption of the
peace talks. China has noted the recent proposals and
initiatives put forward by the relevant parties and is
open to any diplomatic efforts and initiatives
conducive to breaking the current stalemate.

The Middle East question has long been on the
Council's agenda. China favours the Council's more
active and practical involvement in this issue, as well
as a greater role for the Council in revitalizing the
Middle East peace process.

In order to achieve a comprehensive, lasting and
just peace in the Middle East, the peace talks between
Lebanon and Israel and between Syria and Israel, as
part of the Middle East process, should be conducted in
parallel. All relevant parties should create conditions
conducive to dialogue and negotiation in order to put
an end to the prolonged confrontation and resulting
tensions in the Middle East.

China has resolutely supported the just cause of
the Palestinian people to restore their legitimate
sovereign rights and supports the establishment of a
fully sovereign and independent State of Palestine.
China congratulates Palestine for subscribing to the
choice of peace, and China will continue to support the
just cause of the Palestinian people. We sincerely hope
that the goal of establishing an independent state of
Palestine will be achieved at an early date.

