Mr. Rock (Canada): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak before the Council on the
role of civil society in conflict prevention and the
pacific settlement of disputes. This discussion comes at
a critical time, as we collectively begin to chart the
course ahead on implementation of the outcome of last
week's summit, and we are particularly indebted to the
Philippine presidency for drawing attention to this
issue.

It has been 15 years since the Secretary-General
issued his initial report on the prevention of armed
conflict. Our experience has shown that conflict
prevention is something that Governments cannot
undertake effectively in isolation. Across a spectrum of
conflict prevention roles, civil society organizations
provide crucial assistance. The unique attributes of
civil society - including its independent nature, its
global reach and its high level of community
integration - make civil society an invaluable partner
for the Council and our national Governments.

Canada welcomes the recent adoption of Security
Council resolution 1625 (2005) and its declaration on
strengthening the effectiveness of the Security
Council's role in the prevention of armed conflict.
Resolution 1625 (2005) identifies clearly the
importance of civil society contributions and the need
to work to strengthen the capacity of civil society.

We all know the important role of civil society
organizations, both indigenous and international, in
crisis detection and early warning. But civil society
organizations fulfil widely varying functions across the
conflict cycle - everything from advocacy to
accompanying vulnerable populations as they move to
long-term monitoring and reporting. They can also play
an instrumental role across thematic lines, for example,
in ensuring the inclusion of a gender perspective and a
role for women in the prevention and the resolution of
conflicts, as called for in the World Summit
declaration.

In Canada's experience, civil society partners are
also valuable in efforts to mobilize political will on a
global scale, as evidenced by the key role played by
civil society coalitions in the campaign to ban
landmines and in efforts to establish the International
Criminal Court.

In June of this year, more than 500 civil society
organizations from across 15 regions gathered here in
New York and produced the Global Action Agenda of
the Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed
Conflict. The Action Agenda charts the range of
functions that civil society can perform and provides
important recommendations for national Governments
and the United Nations system. We support and
encourage its implementation.

The Action Agenda stresses the need for the
international community to shift its focus from reaction
to prevention. Better prevention requires better and
more timely information, as well as a rapid response.

(spoke in French)

Today, I would like to focus on three of the more
concrete ways in which we can collectively move
ahead in the coming months to better incorporate civil
society organizations and maximize our effectiveness
in that regard.

First, the Council has already begun to avail itself
more frequently of civil society expertise and
information through the Arria - formula mechanism.
We welcome that but would strongly urge the Council
to deepen that trend. For example, it could consider a
more proactive use of informal meetings and broad
consultations with civil society groups, not only to
gather information on situations already of interest but
also to allow groups to sound the alarm on newly
emerging conflicts and issues of concern. That
approach could lead to the Council's timely
consideration of those issues and a more rapid and
effective Council response.

Secondly, monitoring and reporting mechanisms
that are in place for specific situations should clearly
identify the mechanisms through which civil society
groups can channel information to the Security Council
for consideration or intervention. An excellent example
of that is the recent adoption of Council resolution
1612 (2005), which establishes a monitoring and
reporting mechanism for children in armed conflict and
expressly includes the participation of the relevant civil
society organizations. The Council should consider
applying that model in other areas of its activity.

Finally, as we move to implement the outcome of
last week's summit through the establishment of both
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council, we need to ensure that their structures and
mandates permit them access to the most relevant and
timely information and expertise available on country
situations, including that provided by civil society
organizations in the field. By involving civil society
from the start we can be sure that our efforts will be
based on valid information and be mutually supportive.

In conclusion, Canada strongly believes that civil
society organizations are not only the eyes and ears of
the international community on the ground but also our
collective conscience. We therefore strongly encourage
more open cooperation with civil society and look
forward to working in coming months for the more
extensive participation of civil society in United
Nations conflict prevention efforts.

