Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me begin by once
again thanking Cote d'Ivoire for having organized
this important open debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace
and security. We are glad to see you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over this important debate. We thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and also thank
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States, Mr. Kassi Brou, for their briefings on
the theme of our debate. We take this opportunity to
express our profound appreciation to both of them for
their leadership and their commitment to elevating the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union to new heights.

The timing of this debate could not be more
opportune, as discussions are ongoing on a draft
resolution proposed by the African members of the
Council on the financing of an African Union (AU)
peace-support operation, which has been an important
issue in the United Nations-African Union partnership.
We hope our debate today will build the necessary
momentum for the adoption of the proposed draft
resolution, which is vital in helping the partnership
move from commitments to concrete action. The need to
ensure the predictability, flexibility and sustainability
of financing for AU peace support operations has long
been recognized, and we believe that it is the perfect
time for the Council to take decisive step forward.

The AU has demonstrated real commitment to
sharing the burden by mobilizing resources from
within the continent. With the revitalization of the AU
Peace Fund, the AU has been able to mobilize around
$80 million, as stated earlier by the Chairperson of the
AU, with the objective of endowing the Peace Fund
with $400 million by the year 2021. That is remarkable
progress that needs to be acknowledged and supported
by the Council. Yesterday we were very pleased to
have an opportunity to informally interact with the AU
High Representative for the Peace Fund, Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, who clarified some of the issues with regard
to how the Peace Fund works.

We also understand that there are questions with
regard to the AU's ability and commitment when it
comes to meeting United Nations standards in terms
of accountability and compliance issues. AU peace
support operations are fledgling, and they cannot be
expected to be perfect in a short span of time. United
Nations peacekeeping has 70 years of experience and
we are still discussing reforms to make it fit for purpose.
Nevertheless, the AU has shown clear determination
to fulfil the conditions set out by the Council in the
relevant resolutions, including through the adoption of
the landmark policy documents on the prevention and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse and conduct
and discipline for AU peace support operations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
in those areas is incredibly important, and we hope the
joint declaration to be signed by the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson today will help facilitate that
continuous cooperation.

The financing issue is but one aspect of the United
Nations-AU strategic partnership. The fact that we
have not been able to make progress in discussions
on that issue means that we could not explore the
full range of possibilities for cooperation between
the two organizations on possible responses to the
conflict cycle - from prevention and mediation and to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding - in line with their
Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security. Therefore, with the possible adoption of
the proposed draft resolution on the financing issue, we
hope we will be able to move forward.

There is a need to continue enhancing strategic
dialogue, partnerships, a more regular exchange of
views, analyses and information at the working level
to build capacities in relation to preventive diplomacy
tools. There is also a need to invigorate and engage
potential and existing capacities and capabilities,
particularly through United Nations regional political
offices. Furthermore, more needs to be done to ensure
the coherence and integration of their early-warning,
conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy efforts,
inter alia through mediation and the Secretary-
General's good offices as appropriate.

In that context, we are encouraged by the progress
made in terms of closer collaboration, joint field
visits by senior officials, more regular exchanges
of information, deeper consultations, increasingly
coordinated action and greater collaboration between
the Secretariat and the Commission. We appreciate
the joint briefings of the Special Representatives and
Envoys of the two organizations to the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council. It
is vital that the two Councils also take concrete steps
in line with the understanding reached at their twelfth
annual consultation to consider joint visits to conflict
situations in Africa. A discussion on the modalities
should be initiated without delay to facilitate its
implementation.
Finally, during the past two years ofour membership
of the Council, we have exerted every possible effort to
promote enhanced cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and the AU in general, as well as
between the United Nations Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council in particular, including
in our capacity as Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. As
we hand over the baton to South Africa next month,
we have every confidence that they will do everything
possible - together with Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial
Guinea and all other members of the Council - to
continue advocating for enhanced partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, which is
essential for the promotion and maintenance of peace
and security in Africa.

