Mr. Rivas (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to welcome the report submitted to us
by the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well
as the introduction provided to us by his Special
Representative, Mr. Steiner, who, since assuming his
duties on 14 February, has worked intensively to
promote the Mission's priorities in economic
development, eradicating crime and violence and
establishing a just and safe society for all the
communities of Kosovo. We welcome Mr. Steiner on
his first briefing before the Council.

I also wish once again to welcome to the Council
the Deputy Prime Minister of the Yugoslav constituent
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Covic', and to thank him for his
essential contribution to the process and for the
information he has provided us.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
efforts and resources that the international community
has invested in creating an effective political system, a
viable economy and a multi-ethnic, peaceful and law-
abiding society in Kosovo. Some substantial progress
has been made in establishing provisional institutions
of self-government, such as the coalition Government
and the Assembly. Many difficulties have been
encountered in the efforts to build a multi-ethnic Civil
Service, to improve the security situation and to create
the conditions necessary for the Kosovar Serbs to
remain and for refugees and displaced persons to
return. The establishment of bases for economic
progress is moving ahead with the introduction of the
euro, the campaign against economic crime and the
strengthening of the banking system and tax collection.

Advances have also been made in regional
cooperation, such as in the transfer of prisoners
between Serbia and Kosovo, the adoption of three
protocols related to the issue of missing persons,
assistance to families and the coordination of border
security between Serbia and Macedonia. All such
regional cooperation and coordination is essential to
the success of the Mission and must be pursued on the
basis of the recognition of UNMIK's authority by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

This complex process should lead to the
definitive consolidation of the provisional institutions
of self-government and to the conclusion of the
Mission. To that end, political, technical and financial
support is more necessary than ever for the Mission,
which is entering a potentially more dangerous phase,
as the Secretary-General indicates in his report. This
phase in the implementation of anti-crime initiatives
may provoke retaliation against UNMIK and KFOR.
The attacks of 8 April against UNMIK police in
Mitrovica, which deserve our sternest condemnation,
are merely one manifestation of the potential
difficulties of this new phase. Colombia appeals to all
the communities of Kosovo and to the provisional
institutions of self-government to work together to
ensure respect for the authority of UNMIK and KFOR
and to eradicate organized crime, terrorism and
violence.

I wish to conclude by supporting the Secretary-
General's initiative to request his Special
Representative, Mr. Steiner, to establish a system of
mediation or benchmarks allowing progress to be
measured in such critical areas as the rule of law,
democratic institutions, the economy, freedom of
movement, the return of refugees and displaced persons
and contributions to regional stability.

