Mr. Sumah (Sierra Leone): I heartily congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January 2017.
Let me use this momentous occasion to wish you, Sir,
a very happy new year. My delegation is thankful to
you for convening this open debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing.

Let me express the heartfelt apologies ofthe Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Republic of Sierra Leone, who, owing to unavoidable
circumstances, could not be with us here today.

My delegation subscribes to the View stated in
the concept note (S/2017/6, annex) that the Secretary-
General is taking office at a time when our Organization
faces myriad complicated challenges to peace and
security, which makes it critical to deliver on the
commitment of the Charter of the United Nations to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. In that
regard, the United Nations should pool its strength so as
to strengthen the analysis brought to the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Adequate and predictable
financing is also a prerequisite for good governance,
mediation, country teams and the Peacebuilding Fund.
As the former Secretary-General of the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, aptly stated,

"[t]he human costs of our failures can be seen
in all too many places we have the tools with
which to do better. Let us use them." (S/2015/ PV.7561, p. 3-4)

To that end, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Sierra Leone, let me express our profound
appreciation for the continued support and interest of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the wider membership
of the United Nations and our international partners
in strengthening peace and security in Sierra Leone.
Today we have initiated a profound move in the United
Nations core mandate from peacebuilding to peace
consolidation and development. That manifests the
Organization's strong commitment to our political and
economic ambitions. On that note, I would like to use
this opportunity to extend our gratitude to the members
of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission through the Chair, Ambassador Marc-
Andre' Blanchard of Canada, for the tireless commitment
and profound support that the configuration continues
to display for our efforts to sustain peace, security
and stability.

In our commitment to conflict-prevention and
sustaining peace, we have made progress in addressing
key priority areas that could trigger conflict,
particularly in the areas of youth unemployment and
empowerment, improving the justice system and the
security sector, and the effective management of our
natural resources. Mechanisms have been put in place
for strong private-sector-led growth, which could
translate into more concrete peace dividends. Sierra
Leone has over the years been commended for its
work towards the consolidation of peace and security.
The holding of three successive violence-free, fair,
transparent and credible elections signals our readiness
to evolve towards a more developed phase of conflict
prevention and peace consolidation. There is no
gainsaying that our democratic process is progressively
taking strong root.

Sierra Leone, a country that once received
peacekeepers, now contributes peacekeepers to other
countries. Our country, which was once a byword for
humanitarian crisis, was one of the fastest economies
before the outbreak of the Ebola epidemic. A country
that was rocked by armed and civil divisions has healed
itself. We are grateful to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission of Sierra Leone and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, and we very much appreciate the
commitment of our international friends. I am pleased
to inform the Council that remarkable progress is being
made in setting up the required structures to address the
risk areas of youth unemployment and empowerment,
good governance, the rule of law, drug trafficking and
organized crime. However, sustained international
support is still crucial if we are to fully address the
challenges that we continue to face at both the national
and the regional levels. The progress that we have
collectively made in improving peace, security and
stability provides us with a platform for rolling out the
agenda for prosperity, which is our national development
programme. It aims to build a sustainable future for all
Sierra Leoneans and primarily focuses on moving the
country beyond the phase of peace consolidation to one
in which it is a more secure, peaceful and responsible
member of the community of nations.

The Government of Sierra Leone is committed to
promoting national reconciliation, political dialogue
and an inclusive governance system, as well as gender
equality. The constitutional review process is in its
final stages and addresses major political and social
issues. We have taken a collective decision to move
towards becoming a middle-income nation by 2030.
Almost 15 years ago, the conflict in Sierra Leone was
officially declared over. Since the end of the war, with
the support of the United Nations, the country has made
tremendous progress in charting the path for conflict
prevention and the sustainability of peace. We have
considerably improved our national risk profile as a
post-conflict country and enjoy increased confidence
as a destination for quality investment. In March 2014,
we witnessed a significant transition in our actions
towards a democratic, peaceful, stable, developed and
prosperous country. With the closure of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone, Sierra Leone has left fragility behind.

In preventing conflict and sustaining peace, it is
important to underscore the critical need for the existence
of impartial and transparent institutions, which must
be consolidated and strengthened with strong national
ownership and inclusiveness. That will prevent relapse
into conflict and further ensure peace consolidation.
As rightly stated in the report (see S/2015/490) of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, coordination between the
Security Council and peacebuilding agencies such as
the Peacebuilding Commission is vital. There is a need
for a mutual working relationship with a much more
focused approach that seeks to utilize comparative
strengths. Equally significant is building partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations to address
transnational crime.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm Sierra Leone's
commitment to promoting durable peace and security
within its borders, as well as addressing subregional
peace and security issues. We will continue to build
on the remarkable progress achieved in terms of the
political stability that is critical to our development.

