Mr. Jurica (Croatia): As members are aware,
Croatia has aligned itself with the European Union
statement on this topic. Nevertheless, we would like to
make some additional remarks.

We welcome the successful conclusion of the
democratic presidential and parliamentary elections in
2007 and reaffirm our support for the new
Government. However, we are deeply concerned about
the ongoing fragile situation, especially in the light of
last week's events. We strongly condemn the recent
assassination attempt on Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta,
President of Timor-Leste, and the attack on the convoy
of Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao.

In that regard, we also have unique insight into
this matter through our engagement in the United
Nations police in East Timor. We stress that it is
important that all parties fully cooperate in the
investigations so that those responsible for this attack
can be brought immediately to justice.

This only demonstrates the importance of
continued coordination efforts among the Timorese
leadership, the political parties and civil society to
bridge existing gaps. Such efforts are crucial to
maintain stability and to strengthen democratic
governance and respect for the rule of law. We
recognize the value of coordinated work to review the
future role of the security sector, given its importance
for long-term stability.

We would also like to emphasize the significance
of establishing accountability for crimes committed
during the 1999 and 2006 crises. We welcome the
important progress in the promotion and protection of
human rights that has been achieved in a number of
areas. However, we are concerned about still-
inadequate standards in combating domestic and
gender-based violence and the peaceful return of
internally displaced persons. In that regard, we
encourage the international community to assist the
Government of Timor-Leste in strengthening the
promotion and protection of human rights in the
country.

In that connection, we would also like to express
support for the Secretary-General's initiative to send an
expert mission to the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which will provide
an assessment regarding possible adjustments to
UNMIT's police component. We support the efforts of
Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and the
continuation of the Integrated Mission to build on the
progress achieved thus far. The mission's presence is
crucial in order to encourage the East Timorese
Government to address existing challenges.

Therefore, we firmly and strongly support an
extension of UNMIT's mandate for the next 12 months.

