Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the French initiative to hold today's open
debate. I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui and Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their briefings.
China has also listened attentively to the statements
made by representatives of the non-governmental
organizations.

Children represent the future of humankind. They
are the hope of human progress and development. In
recent years, the international community has made
positive headway in protecting children in armed
conflict, but, at the same time, horrendously evil acts of
killing, abducting and using children as human bombs
by terrorist and extremist forces still occur from time
to time in certain conflict areas, which has inflicted
physical and psychological harm on a large number of
innocent children. We are highly concerned about this
situation.

China supports the international community in
increasing its attention to the issue of the protection
of children in armed conflict and in taking further
specific measures in response. I would like to stress the
following four points.

First, the protection of children in armed conflict
starts with halting and easing armed conflicts. Only
by preventing the worsening of security situations
can we fundamentally attack the causes of children
being harmed in armed conflict. China supports the
Council in its efforts to assume, in accordance with the
responsibilities endowed upon it by the Charter of the
United Nations, a greater role in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding,
among others, and in providing a firm guarantee
for the protection of children in armed conflict. The
Council should, in that connection make greater use
of the means of negotiation and mediation provided
under Chapter VI of the Charter in an effort to defuse
disputes peacefully and prevent the further escalation
of conflicts so as to create favourable conditions for the
protection of children in armed conflict.

Secondly, the Government of the country in
conflict bears the primary responsibility for the
further protection of children in armed conflict.
The sovereignty of the country in conflict should
be respected. In executing Council resolutions and
effectively implementing the various programmes,
plans and initiatives for the protection of children, the
role of the Government in question is irreplaceable.
The international community should make full use of
the leading role of the particular Government, attend
to and support that Government's efforts, and mobilize
the international community to assist the Government
in overcoming financial and other difficulties and in
strengthening its capacity-building.

Thirdly, the international community should
urge any party to conflict to observe the relevant
international law and obligations and stop acts of
violence against children. The Council should not
condone acts by terrorists and extremists forces and
other armed groups, including the killing of children,
the use of children as human bombs and the compulsion
of children to kill hostages. We should adopt a zero-
tolerance policy and measures that form a deterrence
against the armed groups in question in order to create
a peaceful and safe environment for the protection of
children.

Fourthly, all United Nations bodies should leverage
their respective strengths and advantages and act
in synergy to protect children in armed conflict.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should
comprehensively fulfil their mandates and strengthen
their protection of children. Related agencies and
institutions, such as UNICEF, UNESCO and the World
Bank, should engage in close cooperation, join forces
to support the countries in conflict to launch their
peacebuilding efforts, promote the socioeconomic
development of the countries, safeguard children's
physical and psychological health and ensure their
rights and opportunities for equal access to education.
The international community should also aid children
in returning to their homes, societies and schools as a
priority incorporated into post-conflict peacebuilding
strategies in order to help children in armed conflict to
resume normal lives.

The protection of vulnerable groups, such as
children, from being harmed by armed conflict is the
shared responsibility of the international community.
The key lies in resolving conflicts and achieving
development. The international community should
provide countries affected by conflicts with financial
and technical assistance, and aid them in economic
development and in improving their people's livelihoods,
thereby lifting them out of poverty as soon as possible
and removing the root causes of conflict. China is ready
tojoin the parties concerned in a concerted effort to step
up cooperation and effectively improve the situation of
children and other vulnerable groups in armed conflict
so that they can stay safely away from the scourge of
war and the problems resulting from displacement and
homelessness and soon lead peaceful, stable and happy
lives.

