Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): At the outset, Nigeria aligns
itself with the statements delivered by the representative
of the State of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

We wish to thank the Permanent Representative
of Namibia for delivering a statement on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People. We also wish to thank the
delegation of China for convening today's debate, which
provides an opportunity for reflection on the seemingly
intractable situation in the Middle East. Furthermore,
we thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing and commend him for the moral voice that he
has lent to the search for peace in the Middle East. We
welcome his recent visit to the region, during which he
met with high-level officials in furtherance ofhis good-
offices efforts.

The surge in the violence and senseless killings
in the occupied Palestinian territory, perpetrated by
extremists and so well described by previous speakers,
is deeply worrying. Fears have been expressed that,
if the situation is not contained, there is a possibility
of further escalation, with its attendant predictable
consequences. The international community must
therefore work in a concerted manner to avert another
catastrophe in the region.

We condemn the indiscriminate killings in the
strongest possible terms. They are unjustifiable. We
must avert a scenario where extremists dictate the
political agenda, as that could provide fuel to the
conflict and complicate the difficult search for peace
even further. Provocations and hostile rhetoric must
be avoided. The status of all the holy sites must be
respected and protected against hostile actions.

Nigeria takes note of the latest report issued by the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process. We share the concern of
the Special Coordinator that the viability ofa two-State
solution is in danger owing to the negative trends on
the ground, including the recent escalation in violence,
ongoing settlement activities, demolitions, incitement
and the absence of Palestinian unity.

It is evident that a departure from the current crisis
and a revival of the peace process are hardly achievable
without ending the policy of settlement expansion in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We believe that there
are a number of specific actions that are necessary in
order to foster mutual respect and compromise, build

confidence and pave the way for the realization of the
two-State solution. The international community, in
particular the Security Council, has the responsibility
to constructively address that issue before it is too late.

In that regard, we urge Israel to take concrete
steps to freeze all its settlement-related activities in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. The current stalemate
in the Middle East peace process is neither ideal nor
sustainable. Both sides must take concrete steps to
return to negotiations on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road map, the
Madrid terms ofreference, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the relevant agreements between the parties. Nigeria
supports the efforts of the international community
aimed at establishing an environment conducive to
a return to meaningful negotiations on ending the
occupation and resolving the long-running conflict.

The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) serves
to underscore that no one should be left behind in the
legitimate expectation of the enjoyment of the right to
development for all people. However, it is clear that the
Palestinian people will not benefit from that set of goals
without a viable land to call their home and country
and without a lasting peace to enjoy the fruits of their
labour and industry. The Security Council must, as a
matter of duty and necessity, ensure that the Palestinian
people are not left behind and alienated from the stream
of global peace, prosperity and the full enjoyment of
liberty, freedom and human rights.

