Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, my country is deeply attached to
brotherly relations with Kuwait. Each time that I have
spoken about the presence of Kuwaiti terrorists in
Syria, I have very clearly stated that I was not targeting
the Government of Kuwait. However, we must draw
the Kuwaiti Government's attention to the existence
of these terrorists and those who sponsor terrorism.
They are Kuwaiti citizens responsible for promoting
terrorism and raising funds to be sent to terrorists in
Syria. In other words, there are Kuwaiti citizens who
kill Syrians on Syrian territory. I do not understand
why my colleague the representative of Kuwait is so
sensitive when we talk about Kuwaiti terrorists in
Syria. There are Belgian terrorists, French terrorists,
British terrorists, Australian terrorists and so on.
There are terrorists from 100 different Members of this
international Organization in Syria, who are fighting
and killing Syrians.

Not one of those nationalities represented here has
been particularly moved. This information was included
in a formal report issued by a subsidiary committee of
the Security Council involved in counter-terrorism.
Why is there such excessive sensitivity when we say that
there are Kuwaiti terrorists fighting in Syria and killing
Syrians who belong to a Salafist movement? How can
we reject such remarks when the Carnegie Institute
has published two studies on the Salafist movement in
Kuwait? What I am holding up are not press cuttings but
posters that were distributed in Kuwait by a number of
individuals, some of whom are members of the Kuwaiti
Parliament. Those individuals have raised hundreds
of millions of dollars to send to Syria and support
terrorism. Many articles have been published by several
newspapers, including the New York Times. We have lot
of proofs and evidence that we have submitted to the
Security Council and to subsidiary bodies responsible
for the fight against terrorism.

We pair words with deeds. We have sent hundreds of
pieces of evidence to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
about the presence of foreign terrorist fighters in Syria.
They include Kuwaiti nationals. There are Syrian
terrorists fighting the Syrian Government. Should I
be sensitive if someone told me that there are Syrian
terrorists fighting against the Syrian Government
in Syria? No, because it is a fact. There are Syrian
terrorists and foreign terrorist fighters who are fighting
the Syrian Government on behalf of their outside
users. We are very transparent. We are not fabricating
stories. Everybody in the Council knows what we are
talking about. Reports have been published by the
Council on the issue of foreign terrorist fighters in
Syria. Four or five years ago, the Council denied that
there were foreign terrorist fighters in Syria. Today,
the Council has moved from total rejection to complete
acknowledgement of the fact that there are foreign
terrorists in Syria.

Many members are simply competing with us
and with our allies in the fight against this foreign
terrorism. They are liars and hypocrites. We should not
be sensitive when we speak about our pain. Hundreds
of thousands of Syrians have been killed by terrorists.
Terrorists have destroyed our country's infrastructure
as a result of foreign interference. I do not want a
draft resolution. We have 22 resolutions that must be
implemented. Do we really need any more resolutions?
We have 12 resolutions aimed at addressing terrorism.
Let us implement them. Let us implement those 12
Security Council anti-terrorism resolutions. That will
end the problem. But if we say something and then
behave in an entirely contradictory manner, that is the
height of hypocrisy.

