I would like to thank all the briefers for their overviews. As all will recall, two years ago we unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018), which acknowledged the link between armed conflict, food insecurity and famine. Most of the food-insecure people in the world live in countries affected by armed conflict, which has devastating consequences for their civilians and often severely hampers humanitarian relief operations. Those conflicts are the reason why people must survive on what they receive from emergency assistance. At the same time, they make the job of aid workers extremely difficult. The importance of safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian aid to civilians in armed conflicts cannot be overstated. Estonia highly values the work of all front-line humanitarian and health workers, who continue to carry out their tasks in already dire circumstances, now further aggravated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Today four of the worst food crises are in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen, north-east Nigeria and South Sudan, with Afghanistan, Somalia and Burkina Faso not far behind. The common denominator is armed conflict. In addition, this year a new enemy has been ravaging those countries - COVID-19. The pandemic, in conjunction with natural disasters such as desert locusts and flooding, have exacerbated the situation in those vulnerable settings to such a degree that all four countries are potentially facing famine. Over the years, Estonia has supported the World Food Programme, the International Committee of the Red Cross and UNICEF in providing urgent assistance to all four countries. We will continue to do our part. However, a holistic response is needed to address the root causes of conflict-induced famine and widespread food insecurity and offer people a real possibility of putting their dreadful situation behind them. We, the international community, must keep advancing the dialogue to find political solutions, mitigate economic crises and address deprivation in order to help put an end to conflicts and violence. Otherwise, we keep treating the symptoms without paying attention to the disease. In that regard, I take this opportunity to reiterate Estonia's full support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and to call on all parties to armed conflict to comply with international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
