Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation thanks your country for
having organized this public debate, which allows us to
reflect further on conflict prevention, following the
adoption of resolution 1625 (2005) on this question at
the Security Council summit held on 14 September
2005. We listened with genuine interest to the
contributions of the representatives of civil society on
its role, and we express our deepest appreciation to
them.

The emergence of civil society at the both the
national and the international levels as an autonomous
actor and as a force of change results from a
remarkable awakening of the governed, and from
progress in communications technology. This
phenomenon is one of the essential characteristics of
globalization. Organized society is hardly a recent
phenomenon. As long ago as the nineteenth century,
Tocqueville hailed the movement of associations in
American society as reflecting citizen participation
which could generate social progress. But never before
in human history has civil society asserted itself so
ambitiously to participate in decision-making in the
public sphere, in local communities, in national life
and in international life.

While public power as represented by the State
embodies the exercise of State authority, and leads to a
given reality, civil society, for its part, is the seat of the
moral conscience and the place where the aspirations
and expectations of the governed are voiced. Civil
society is a driving force for public protest and even an
additional actor, although its purpose is in no way to
supplant the State's governing function. It aims to
contribute to the monitoring of the Government sphere
and give legitimacy to its actions. When these
functions are well understood on all sides, there can be
at least a relationship of tolerance, but also one of
mutual benefit and even of partnership, which makes it
possible to develop a synergy that benefits society as a
whole.

Civil society has real potential in shaping the
public sphere and in acting as a social intermediary,
and thus in the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
prevention of violent conflicts. The complexity of
problems and challenges related to preserving State
stability and to the promotion of worldwide sustainable
development requires a participatory national and
international mobilization. The role of civil society is
considerable in this. An effective conflict prevention
strategy requires the active involvement of civil society
in order to make best use of the comparative
advantages of civil society. The Constitive Act of the
African Union rightly emphasizes the need to establish
a partnership between Governments and all segments
of civil society.

Thanks to its involvement in society and its
retention of an identity distinct from that of the State
apparatus, civil society can contribute to early warning
mechanisms. This function has become particularly
well developed in recent years, where civil society has
shown its capacity to organize the collection, analysis
and assessment of first-hand information on underlying
trends of national communities, which allows for the
identification of sources of potential tension and latent
conflicts that could escalate. The West African
Network for Peacebuilding has been outstanding in this
field, working to strengthen regional conflict
prevention capacities, in close cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

Civil society can encourage well-targeted locally-
based action to reduce tension in crises and crucial
phases of processes which could escalate out of
control. By way of example, let us recall the calming
and moderating role played by non-governmental
organizations in the holding of elections, through,
among other methods, civic education, education for
tolerance and election monitoring in order to
strengthen the candidates' confidence in the legality of
the balloting, and so forth. Civil society thereby
contributes to the promotion of a culture of peace in
the countries concerned.

Civil society can contribute to mobilizing
national and international solidarity to support self-
help efforts of disadvantaged communities and people
who are victims of social exclusion, above all when a
scarcity of income causes increased rivalry for access
to power in order to gain control of resources
mobilized by the State.

Civil society can mediate between conflicting
groups competing for power by promoting the
consolidation of democratic institutions and the
peaceful transfer of power and through its ability to
lend legitimacy to those who govern. This role was
clear in the central and recognized position of certain
moral or religious authorities in the national
conferences held in Africa in the 19903, which served
as forum for dialogue and arbitration of national
conflict. The great majority of such forums, brought
about peaceful regime change. This was the case in my
own country.

Civil society can also help focus popular
movements seeking peaceful regime change in a crisis
of legitimacy or a breach of the national consensus,
and can provide new, visionary, honest leadership to
get a country which is in difficulty back on track.

Nonetheless, the structures of civil society can be
operated effectively only when their level of
organization and their influence on the society
concerned so allow. It is in the interest of Government
leaders throughout the world to be aware of the
advantages of promoting the emergence of a
responsible civil society at both the national and
international levels. Such awareness can help civil
society organizations acquire the means of best
fulfilling their social role and can promote their
mobilization at the international level, as well as their
access to intergovernmental decision-making centres
where disputes are settled and where development and
cooperation policies are defined at different levels.
Here they can provide their local know-how in the field
and can better determine the details of decisions made
in order to contribute to their implementation or to
provide oversight for them.

The Security Council is in the forefront of this
new awareness. This has led, over the past several
years, to the regular holding of Arria formula meetings
with civil society organizations, which now go beyond
international non-governmental organizations to
encompass local non-governmental organizations, both
in New York and, during Security Council missions, in
the field. We reiterate here our support for the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General's
Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-Civil
Society Relations, especially as regards the relations
between the Security Council and civil society.

We also encourage the United Nations to study
carefully the contribution of international NGOs and
civil society to our reflection on the ways and means of
ensuring better prevention and the pacific settlement of
disputes, as summarized in the final document of the
Forum held by the Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conflict at United Nations
Headquarters from 19 to 21 July 2005. It contains very
relevant recommendations for the coordination of
consistent strategies for the promotion of conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

