Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are following the security situation in
Afghanistan very closely. We are concerned about
its sudden and growing deterioration, especially in
the north of the country, in which the Taliban has
recently become increasingly active. The elimination
of the Taliban leader, Mullah Mansoor, has led to a
strengthening of the influence of the irreconcilable
radicals, which only exacerbates the current situation in
the country. The recent attacks by militants against the
United States military base at Bagram and the German
Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif are stark cases in point.

We support the policy of the Government of
Afghanistan aimed at achieving national reconciliation.
We stand ready to provide assistance towards making
progress in the negotiation process, including through
a flexible approach to the possible easing of the
sanctions regime of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), if
that does not run contrary to the national interests of
Afghanistan. We took note that a peace agreement
was signed by the Government of Afghanistan and
the Hekmatyar party. Much will depend uon how it is
implemented in practice. The main goal of the national
reconciliation process is to get the Taliban involved in
the process. Thus far, that goal has not been achieved.
The Quadrilateral Coordination Group format has not
arrived at breakthrough.

Unfortunately, the basic problems that have been
facing the international military contingents in the
country for the past 15 years remain unresolved. That
applies to the previous NATO International Security
Assistance Force, which left the country, and the
current Resolute Support Mission. We underscore in
particular that only the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces can provide for the stabilization of the
military and political situation in the country. For that
reason, we are providing them with multidimensional
support. The Ministry of Internal Affairs ofthe Russian
Federation has provided 10,000 automatic rifles and
2.1 million cartridges to them at no charge. Russia has
agreed to re-export four Mi-25 helicopter gunships to
Afghanistan from India. The Russian Federation will
continue to provide assistance in forming a capable
Afghan army and police force and continue to train
their personnel through Russian line agencies.

Large-scale drug production in Afghanistan poses a
serious threat to the very stability of Afghanistan itself,
the region and the world in general. Moreover, besides
being nefarious in and of itself, narcotics production
provides substantial financial support for terrorism. In
that regard, we believe that it is necessary to step up the
efforts of the international community in combating the
Afghan drug trade. We are concerned about the sharp
increase in drug crops, including in the north of the
country, and a significant increase in this year's opium
poppy crop. The fear is that the growth in drug revenue
will lead to an even greater surge in terrorist activity.

We do not wholly understand the attempts to
diminish the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. That is at variance
with various assessments, including that of NATO.
Some time ago, the commander of the United States
and NATO Forces in Afghanistan, General Nicholson,
stated that the terrorist group ISIL had intended to
create a caliphate in Afghanistan and that the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan had joined that cause to form
what is known as the Wilayat Khorasan. We expect that
that information will be duly reflected and evaluated in
the relevant United Nations documentation, including
in the quarterly reports to the Secretary-General.
According to what we were told by the representatives
ofthe Afghan leadership, the number ofISIL fighters in
their country has reached several thousand. There are
also confirmed reports of links to the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan, the Taliban movement, especially in the
north, and the Lashkar-e-Taiba movement. There have
also been reports ofthe presence ofISIL training camps
and safe havens in Afghanistan, in which people from
the Central Asian States and the Mountainous Republic
of the Northern Caucasus are being trained, and 700
terrorist families from Syria have already arrived. The
intensity of the fighting in Syria and Iraq is leading
insurgents to increasingly turn their attention towards
Afghanistan as a country in which they can find refuge
and establish a new base for expanding their influence
in neighbouring countries.

We are rather perplexed by the recent statement by
General Nicholson with regard to the support that Russia
is allegedly providing the Taliban, thereby undermining
Washington, NATO and Kabul's efforts to combat
terrorism. That kind of statement reflects an attempt to
shift the blame, as we say in my country. We recall the
facts indicating that some of our partners are not averse
to cooperating with the extremist and terrorist groups in
Afghanistan. We are aware of numerous cases in which
ISIL fighters were redeployed to the northern provinces
of Afghanistan by unmarked helicopters. We must
ascertain who is doing that and why. Many questions
also remain concerning a massive attack by the Taliban
against the administrative centres in the provinces
of Badakhshan, Helmand and Farah. Once again,
we reiterate that Russia is not conducting any secret
negotiations that could undermine the national security
of Afghanistan. Our contacts with the representatives
of the Taliban are limited to the task of providing for
the security of Russian nationals in Afghanistan and
are aimed at moving the Taliban towards joining with
the process of national reconciliation, while making
sure that officials in Kabul maintain a leading role.

We look positively on the fact that the international
community reaffirmed its commitment to support
Afghanistan at the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
in October. We hope that the new financial package will
play a positive role. At the same time, we note that the
Government of Afghanistan has been presented with a
number of conditions. If those conditions are not met,
then the volume of the assistance could be reduced.
We also note that countries have arrived a better
understanding of the regional context of a settlement
of the Afghan conflict, and there is an increase in the
number of regional forums that are focused on that
issue. At the same time, we think that it is important
to make sure that regional actors should assume the
leading role in the work of those forums.

We are convinced that assistance to Afghanistan
should be carried out through proven existing structures,
primarily the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO). As is known, Afghanistan received observer
status in the SCO in 2012. In 2015, at the SCO Summit
in Ufa, Afghanistan officially applied to become a
full-fledged member. At this stage, in order to make
that process more dynamic, we think that it would
be advisable to restore the SCO-Afghanistan contact
group. We also see good prospects for strengthening
cooperation between the counter-terrorism and
anti-narcotics operations of Afghanistan and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.

