Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Some 19 months
ago democratic elections were held in Sierra Leone and
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah was elected President. Eight months
later the Government of Sierra Leone under President
Kabbah signed the Abidjan peace accord with the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) of Sierra Leone in
Abidjan. The signing of this peace agreement signalled the
end of five years of civil war and a chance for the people
of Sierra Leone to look forward to a period of peace and
stability in which much needed development could take
root.
The United Nations, as a moral guarantor of the
Abidjan accord, was actively engaged in the peace process.
The Security Council was involved in exploring ways in
which it could help assist the implementation of the accord.
Tragically for the people of Sierra Leone, the peace process
suffered a grave setback when the RUF refused to
cooperate with United Nations proposals for a military
observer force. In May 1997, a military coup was launched
against President Kabbah's Government.

The United Kingdom, which had helped with the
organization of the elections in March 1996, was appalled
by this turn of events. We have joined the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the rest of the
international community in condemning unequivocally the
seizure of power by Major Koroma and his associates. The
international community cannot afford to acquiesce in the
arbitrary and unconstitutional overthrow of a democratic
Government. And the people of Sierra Leone have the right
to expect their Constitution, the rule of law and the results
of free and fair elections to be respected.

The United Kingdom pays tribute to the dedicated
efforts of the countries of ECOWAS, and in particular of
the Committee of Five Foreign Ministers, to achieve a
peaceful solution to this crisis. Unfortunately, their efforts
to negotiate with the military junta to bring about a
voluntary surrender of power have been thwarted by the
junta's intransigence and lack of good faith.

Only two weeks ago, in this Chamber, many
members of the Council, as well as the Chairman and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
drew particular attention to the importance of regional
initiatives in dealing with the threats to peace and security
in the region. The draft resolution before the Council
today provides practical backing for ECOWAS.

By establishing an international arms and oil
embargo, and visa restrictions on members of the junta,
the Security Council will be making clear to the illegal
regime in Freetown that the entire international
community is committed to reversing the military coup
and restoring the democratically elected Government. The
draft resolution has our full support.

