Mr. Rock (Canada): To begin with,
Mr. President, Canada wishes to add its voice to those
of the many colleagues who have expressed sincere
sympathy, particularly to the families and friends of
those who perished in the tragedy that befell Russia
and its people yesterday.

(spoke in French)

Canada is grateful for the opportunity to address
the Council on this important issue. We would like to
thank Mr. Arnault for providing us with such a candid
snapshot of the situation on the ground. The United
Nations presence in Kabul provides an invaluable
coordinating mechanism and a meaningful contribution
to Afghanistan's rehabilitation, including through
institution-building.

We agree with the conclusion of the report of the
Secretary General on the situation in Afghanistan: in
order for the "peace process to move forward,
extremism, factionalism and the illicit drug trade must
be addressed resolutely" (S/2004/634, summary). The
report highlights the fact that we are at a crucial stage
in the pursuit of the goals agreed to in Bonn: national
reconciliation, lasting peace, stability and respect for
human rights.

(spoke in English)

For our part, Canada's commitment remains
steadfast. We have been with Afghanistan since the
beginning on the path to security and prosperity. In
fact, for the past six months, the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) has been under the capable
command of Canadian General Hillier, which was so
generously acknowledged by my colleague from
Afghanistan. We have maintained 2,000 troops in
Afghanistan until recently with the transfer of the ISAF
command. Following the drawdown of our current
troop contribution, Canada will sustain the presence of
approximately 700 troops in ISAF. But of course, our
engagement goes beyond military deployments and
involves complementary commitments in the areas of
diplomacy and development.

We know that, in order to bring about sustainable
change, more must be done. For that reason, Canada
has committed an additional $250 million in
development assistance to Afghanistan for the period
through 2009, bringing our total commitment to more
than $600 million since 2001.

Indeed, Afghanistan, with the help of the
international community, has made giant strides: a new
constitution, strengthening institutions, massive voter
registration, continuing verification of political rights
and steady progress in disarmament and heavy
weapons cantonment.

However, the gains that have been made are not
yet irreversible. Without security and credible,
accountable governance institutions in Afghanistan -
without a growing private sector and national
income - the goal of becoming a democratic and self-
sustaining State will remain elusive.

Our efforts are being threatened by the mutually
reinforcing threats posed by warlords, resurgent
Taliban and their supporters, and narcotics. That is a
volatile mix. Both supported and insulated by lucrative
customs revenues and the profits from the narcotics
trade, many warlords are capable of autonomous action
and are often impervious to standard incentives in the
context of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). It is clear that these
circumstances represent the single greatest obstacle to
stability and progress in Afghanistan and that, if
allowed to continue, they threaten to undo the progress
made over nearly three years. That has happened
before and it can happen again.

The Afghan authorities and the international
community must make it clear that this behaviour is
unacceptable. We must deny support and legitimacy to
those who choose to pursue their own parochial
interests ahead of the interests of Afghanistan. We must
also be prepared to support sanctions against those who
remain non-compliant with national priority reforms,
such as DDR and heavy-weapons cantonment. That, of
course, will require resolute action to renew the
authority of Government institutions in the eyes of the
populace, as well as to disarm and decommission those
militias that have been pursuing political ends by
shows of force. The international community must now
consider how best to continue to support Afghanistan
in this effort in the coming months.

In the immediate term, our paramount goal is to
ensure that the presidential and subsequent
parliamentary elections go smoothly: as freely and as
fairly as possible. The upcoming elections mark a
milestone on the road to establishing a broad-based,
gender-sensitive, multi-ethnic and fully representative
Government. As the report of the Secretary-General
confirms, while voter registration figures are positive,
additional attention must be devoted to under-
represented regions, including certain areas to the
south, as well as to out-of-country voters.

We strongly support the verification of political
rights now under way by the joint effort of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission. We - neighbours and partners of
Afghanistan alike - must also all rededicate ourselves
to prevent any and all acts of violence aimed at
disrupting the electoral process in Afghanistan: all such
acts run dramatically contrary to the aspirations of the
Afghan people themselves, which have now been
clearly expressed.

Elections are the final phase contemplated by the
Bonn Agreement. After the elections it will be
incumbent on the Government of Afghanistan and on
the international community to develop a forward-
looking plan that extends the vision of Bonn: setting
new benchmarks, key to democratic development. But
without security, particularly outside Kabul, the
prospects for successful elections and overall
stabilization remain seriously endangered.

It is time to intensify our focus on key areas of
concern to ensure that they do not put our overall
engagement in jeopardy. Those key areas include
warlords, militias, narcotics and insurgents. With
continuing support from the international community,
Afghanistan's new Government, army, police and
security institutions are showing that they are equal to
these tasks. But there is still a long way to go. The
international community can reinforce their
effectiveness by ensuring that the development agenda
and the security sector reform agenda in Afghanistan
move forward hand in hand. Enduring success will
require a professional and reformist Government
backed by sustained commitments to shared
development objectives. Canada will continue, working
in cooperation with Afghan and international partners,
particularly the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to develop creative and credible
solutions.

We are particularly grateful to be able to
participate today in this helpful discussion on the way
forward.

