Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Each new settlement that is built in the
occupied territories is a new obstacle in the road to
peace. In that regard, the decision of Council members
to meet this morning underscores the need to put an
end to the ongoing expansion of illegal settlements. We
cannot ignore - and Israel should not ignore - the
broad consensus within the international community on
the need to reverse the growth of the illegal
settlements, which contradict the agreed commitments.

However, we must not lose sight of the many
other obstacles that also block the road to peace. We
cannot ignore how the conduct of each party affects the
conduct of the other party, even if it is unjustified. The
settlements are not the only cause for concern; we are
also concerned about extremism, terrorism, intolerance
and violence. My Government certainly does not
ignore the mutual commitments that must be made
with regard to the core elements of a final agreement.
Each of those obstacles and elements deserves our full
attention, but above all the attention of the parties most
immediately involved - Israel and Palestine.

Costa Rica supported General Assembly
resolution 181 (II) of 1947. We were among the 33
countries that recognized early on that, for all its faults,
the idea of two States coexisting had to be accepted as
being the least bad of all those available. Such a
partition would result in the establishment of two
independent States and as all know well, in 1948 the
State of Israel was established; however, the
establishment of the State of Palestine never came
about, and here we must recognize the shared
responsibility of many.

Since then, we have witnessed one tragedy after
another including wars and intifadas, murders
andattacks, which have seriously impeded the right of
both peoples to live free from fear. At the same time,
and without a time frame, we have seen promises and
hopes flourish generated by various peace processes,
without, however, any peace dividends yet being
reaped. Instead, the situation has proved to be a
breeding ground for double standards, foreign
interference and for the sad repetition of events that
have delayed fulfilment of the mandate agreed upon in
1947.

Now we are meeting after more than 60 years of
procrastination in regard to the establishment of a
Palestinian State in accordance with the stipulations of
the General Assembly in 1947. At the same time, it has
now been 10 years since the expiration of the deadline
established in the declaration of principles of the Oslo
Agreements and, once again, we have exceeded the
deadline established in the Quartet's Road Map: delay
after delay after delay.

The core aspects of the conflict - Jerusalem,
refugees, borders and settlements, which is the issue
that we are addressing here today have always been
relegated to a second or third phase which has never
truly begun, since, important or difficult as they may
be, subsidiary or preparatory issues tend to be
addressed first. That realization is not new and has
been mentioned by many others before. Given that
there are multiple actors in the immediate surroundings
and also in the region who are interested in impeding
the peace process, we listened with profound
indignation to the words of the Head of State of Iran,
expressly calling for the destruction of the State of
Israel. Final negotiations are always premised on
resolving difficult issues that are not vital; issues that
impact the process but at the same time do not help
resolve the situation. Instead, all too many
opportunities have been given to those who thrive on
intolerance and violence, allowing them to sabotage
peace.

 

In the meantime, with each delay a Palestinian
State has been taking shape. Since the universal
unilateral declaration of 1988 granting Palestine
observer status at the United Nations, followed by the
establishment of the Palestinian National Authority that
entity has gradually taken on some if not all of the
basic features of a State. The decision of the
Government of Costa Rica to recognize the State of
Palestine on 5 February 2008 was based not only on
resolution 181 (II) and on the fact that the current
Palestinian State unites many of the basic
characteristics of a state, but also on a well-founded
understanding of the reasons for the various
interruptions in the peace process and the complicated
manoeuvres of the political forces in the region.

In the Middle East there are shared but
differentiated responsibilities. None of the parties has
done all that is necessary to create an environment
conducive to a definitive solution to the conflict. It has
been an asymmetrical conflict, with asymmetrical
concessions and consequences. There is not absolute
parity between the parties, even if reciprocity must
prevail.

It is time for both parties to accept that peace
comes at a price and requires painful and
uncomfortable concessions, but the price will always
be far less than the cost of war. Otherwise, intolerance,
violence and mistrust will continue and in that
environment, unfortunately, we will have to once again
face more extremism and terrorism.

The ongoing negotiations between Israel and
Palestine appear to be leading towards agreement on
key aspects. The presence in this Chamber of
representatives of Arab countries that are concerned
about the events in the region and that have sometimes,
played an active role in their development, offers a
timely opportunity to call on those countries to play a
constructive role that will further develop the factors
conducive to mutual respect and understanding
between the parties.

We want peace and we support peace for the
simple reason that both peoples more than deserve
peace. In that regard, we urge the parties to meet their
commitments to establish verifiable and sustainable
progress on the ground through the establishment of
new agreements that will lead towards the peace that
both peoples so deserve.

