Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative
to convene today's meeting on Somalia. I also thank
Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, whose
excellent briefings have provided greater clarity in
our work.

Today's briefings revealed that Somalia is at a
crossroads and that additional national, regional and
international efforts are required to meet the formidable
challenges the country faces, such as terrorism,
insurrection, violent extremism, natural disasters,
drought and a humanitarian crisis. In addition,
piracy continues to plague Somalia's coast, as the
representative of the Russian Federation just recalled.

There is no need for us to reiterate the details.
We would simply like to underscore that, despite
the challenges, there is still hope, if we look at how
far the country has come over the past few decades,
even in difficult times. Hope was sparked with the
recent election of both Houses of Parliament, and in
particular of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo, who, with courage, clarity and willingness,
is patiently guiding his country towards reconstruction
and national unity by building security and stability
in the country. Some of his achievements include his
efforts in finalizing the agreement on a new national
security architecture at the federal and regional levels
in order to develop well-trained defence and security
forces who are accepted by the Somali people and
accountable to them. That is why we believe that a
political agreement of similar scope could be brokered
in order to assist in establishing a functional Federal
State, with a Government at the helm that paves the
way for crucial one person, one vote general elections
in 2020, with a high level of female representation in
the various institutions, as well as the participation of
the private sector and of the dynamic Somali diaspora.

There is also hope if we consider the excellent
outcome of the London Conference. Our colleague
Mr. Rycroft just provided an update on the Conference
and we congratulate his country on a successful
meeting. The London Conference stands out because
the international community once again pledged its
commitment to continue to support the country. To
translate that hope into specific steps on the ground,
in particular to achieve sustainable development in
the country, which must be anchored in reconciliation,
security and lasting stability, the international
community as a whole, and the Security Council in
particular, must remain engaged by coordinating
efforts and strengthening multi-faceted humanitarian,
technical or other assistance to Somalia in all areas.

We welcome the fact that this process is being
conducted with the participation of the Somali
people - for, as Mr. Madeira mentioned, it is important
that attention be paid to what the Somalis want, and not
what we would like them to want. To that end, the joint
African Union-United Nations review on the future of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the United Nations presence in the country is crucial.
The Mission's exit strategy must go hand in hand with
the subsequent capacity-building of the Somali security
forces to prevent a vacuum from being created, as the
threat remains potent.

We pay tribute to AMISOM. and to the Somali
defence and security forces for the outstanding work
they continue to undertake with United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia teams in a difficult
and often dangerous environment to assist and support
their country in building the rule of law. However,
despite the progress that has been made in countering
terrorism, security and humanitarian challenges remain
of concern because of Al-Shabaab's residual capacity
and the gradual rise in influence of the Islamic State in
the region.

Regrettably, in addition to the surge in
violence against civilians that has been attributed
to Al-Shabaab, children are used in the fighting,
humanitarian workers are attacked and aid is diverted
and its delivery hampered. Such practices must be
condemned and, above all, eliminated. My delegation
therefore welcomes the decision taken by the new
Federal Government of Somalia to make security sector
reform a national priority. That led to an agreement on
a federal approach to security, which is the first step
in rebuilding the country's security sector. In the same
vein, a security pact that aims to lay the foundation for
a peaceful and prosperous country was concluded at the
London Conference on Somalia, held on 11 May. The
Senegalese delegation welcomes that as a major step
forward for the Somali national army, which would
shoulder greater responsibility following the future
withdrawal of the Mission.

The humanitarian situation continues to worsen
at an alarming rate, with the risk of famine and
malnutrition. We therefore welcome the steps taken by
the international community, which have allowed for a
swift response to the situation and better access to food
for thousands of people. However, much remains to be
done. We encourage international and regional actors
to continue to lend coordinated and coherent support
to Somalia in order to build on the gains already made.

The fight against corruption, which is cracking
down on many sectors of activity, and the improvement
of the human rights situation in Somalia, in particular
the protection of women and children, must remain
a priority for the Somali authorities. In this regard,
Senegal supports the zero-tolerance policy initiated
by the Somali authorities with regard to the diversion
of humanitarian assistance, which is committed to act
resolutely against anyone who engages in such acts
and practices.

After the success of the legislative and presidential
elections, we can say that Somalia is on the right track.
Nevertheless, many challenges remain, including
addressing the drought, insecurity, the management
of public finances, combatting corruption, the need to
increase revenue and the need for institutional reforms.
My country therefore encourages the international
community to continue to support the Somali
Federal Government in its efforts aimed advancing
these reforms.

