Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation supports the
adoption of the draft resolution before the Council this
morning, as we believe that the establishment and
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) is overdue given the fact that the
Lome Peace Agreement was signed more than three
months ago. We have commended the courageous step
taken by the Government and the people of Sierra Leone
to end the conflict that had afflicted the country and to
begin the long process towards lasting peace. We believe
that the presence of UNAMSIL will help create a climate
of confidence necessary for the consolidation of peace
and reconciliation. However, the successful
implementation of the Lome Peace Agreement cannot be
placed solely on the shoulders of UNAMSIL; it is also
the responsibility of the people, and particularly the
leaders, of Sierra Leone themselves. They must make it
work, with the help of the international community.

Malaysia strongly supports the deployment of a
strong United Nations force in Sierra Leone. We believe
that given the still fragile, even volatile, political and
security situation in that country, only a peacekeeping
force of credible strength, well equipped and well
mandated, will be able successfully to carry out the tasks
assigned to it. It is for this reason that my delegation has
underlined the need for the establishment of UNAMSIL
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
consistent with the "robust rules of engagement" that the
Secretary-General proposed for UNAMSIL in paragraph
43 of his report of 23 September 1999 (S/1999/1003).
The hostage-taking incident involving personnel of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) in August

 

1999 only serves to highlight this concern. Following
intensive discussions on the matter, my delegation can now
support the language in the draft resolution with respect to
Chapter VII. The success of UNAMSIL may well have a
bearing on future peacekeeping missions that the United
Nations is planning in respect of other conflict areas in
Africa. For this reason it is important for UNAMSIL to be
given the tools to ensure that it has a fair chance of
carrying out its mission successfully.

It is in this regard that my delegation particularly
welcomes the continued presence of ECOMOG in Sierra
Leone to continue to provide security for the areas where
its forces are located and to carry out other tasks in
accordance with its mandate to ensure the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. Once again, we would like to
thank the countries contributing troops to ECOMOG,
particularly Nigeria, which bears the main burden of
ECOMOG's presence in Sierra Leone. We would urge the
international community to continue to assist ECOMOG in
carrying out its responsibilities. My delegation cannot stress
too strongly the need for close cooperation and coordination
between ECOMOG and UNAMSIL for the success of their
missions.

Malaysia welcomes the return of peace to Sierra
Leone after almost a decade of one of the most brutal
conflicts in Africa. The war in Sierra Leone has left the
population deeply scarred and traumatized - particularly
the children, many of whom had been brutalized and
dehumanized and had become the very instruments of the
war. Their desperate plight has been vividly highlighted by
the Under Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, following his recent visit to the region.
The cynical and cruel use and manipulation of children for
purposes of war, as evidenced in some of its worst
manifestations in the conflict in Sierra Leone, must be
condemned in the strongest terms and must never be
allowed to be repeated anywhere in the world.

We welcome the agenda for action in respect of
children in situations of armed conflict, as proposed by
Mr. Otunnu. We commend him for his outstanding
contribution to addressing this extremely serious problem
and will continue to give him strong support in his efforts.

With the ending of the conflict, the rebels must
quickly begin to implement their undertakings as agreed to
in the Peace Agreement. For a start, the rebel leaders must
put words into deeds. They must rein in their supporters
and ensure that they disarm and disband fully and without
delay. We call on all the parties to fulfil commitments
they had solemnly entered into, and to continue to
implement in earnest all provisions of the Lome
Agreement.

Sierra Leone has the daunting tasks of cementing the
peace and embarking on the political, social and economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the war-ravaged
country. The process must begin immediately with the
urgent implementation of its disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme. The smooth implementation
of that programme would consolidate the peace and
contribute to alleviating the pressing humanitarian
situation throughout the country. We therefore welcome
the launching of the programme by the Government of
Sierra Leone. In all these efforts, the special needs of the
traumatized children of Sierra Leone should be addressed
promptly and adequately.

Sierra Leone has been given a unique opportunity to
make peace work. The road it has to traverse will not be
smooth. Nevertheless, the Lome Agreement has provided
a viable framework for peace, which must be seized. For
its part, the international community must ensure that the
momentum of the peace process is not lost at this very
critical juncture in Sierra Leone's history.

