Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor on behalf of the group of friends on the
protection of civilians, which comprises Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay and Switzerland. The group of friends sees
open debates as welcome opportunities to discuss key
issues, while encouraging the Council to strengthen its
action. Among the five pillars identified by the
Secretary-General in his last two reports on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (see S/2009/277; S/2010/579), accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, whether committed by individual perpetrators or
by the parties to a conflict, deserves particular attention
and would benefit from the Council's sustained focus.
The group stands ready to assist in contributing to the
formulation of recommendations in that regard.
The group of friends underlines that the Security
Council has an important role to play in ensuring
compliance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law. In that regard, the Security Council
has set important precedents in terms of ensuring
individual criminal accountability for violations by
requesting the establishment of fact-finding
mechanisms to inquire into alleged violations, by
supporting and encouraging States to prosecute
individuals alleged to have committed serious
international crimes and by referring situations to the
International Criminal Court.

We encourage the Council to continue on that
course, while making use of lessons learned both from
its own experiences and from those of other bodies of
the United Nations system, from civil society and from
national, international and hybrid accountability
mechanisms, such as mixed courts. Improved
interactions can contribute to strengthening capacities
at the national level, which is where the primary
responsibility for ensuring accountability lies.

Appropriate follow-up by the Council on the
results of fact-finding mechanisms is important for
ensuring that expectations among affected populations
and victims are met. The Council should lead by
example so as to ensure a coherent approach in
ascertaining facts and take the action necessary on the
basis of greater standardized criteria. We welcome the
intention of the Secretary-General to undertake a
review of existing in-house processes and experiences
in launching and supporting inquiries, which would be
a welcome step in helping the Council to ensure such
coherence.

A related key element of accountability lies in the
reliability of data collected on violations, which could
provide a further opportunity for greater coherence, not
only to help strengthen accountability, but also to
respond to specific challenges relating to the effective
protection of civilians.

In tackling the complexities posed by
accountability mechanisms, one should not forget the
important question of reparations for violations. There
is a wealth of national and international practice in that
field, on which we can build in order to ensure the full
protection of civilians.

Reparations are not limited to financial
compensation but include measures such as
rehabilitation for victims, including medical and
psycho-social support, as well as public apologies,
commemorations and tributes. Reparations to the
victims of violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law should be made by those
responsible. For instance, in 2005, the General
Assembly adopted a set of Basic Principles and
Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation
for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human
Rights Law and Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law (General Assembly resolution 60/147).

To conclude, I would like to reaffirm, on behalf
of the group, that accountability is an essential building
block for sustainable peace, the rule of law and for the
effective protection of civilians. It is our firm belief
that the Council has a duty to uphold and promote the
wealth of practices and policies developed. Our Group
will continue to do its utmost to ensure that the
protection agenda is backed by concrete action.

(spoke in French)

I now take the floor in my national capacity. A
more detailed version of my statement can be found in
the distributed written version. In the course of the
present year, the Security Council has shown that it can
take decisive action to protect civilians. However, to
ensure the political viability of its actions in the long
term, the Council must ensure the coherence and
non-selectivity of its efforts to protect civilians.

Switzerland is extremely concerned by the threats
to civilians in Syria and strongly condemns the human
rights violations taking place there. We are concerned
in particular about the brutal behaviour of security
forces towards non-violent demonstrators and civilians
who have not participated in demonstrations. The
situation of civilians in Yemen is another continuing
source of concern. We would like to underline the fact
that ensuring that those guilty of human rights
violations are held to account remains the
responsibility of the Security Council.

The report of the Secretary-General's Panel of
Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka brought to light
a number of problem areas for which a suitable follow-
up is indispensable. Such situations raise questions of
crucial importance for the international community:
what can we do to ensure that serious human rights
violations meet with a suitable response? How should
the international community react if no appropriate
response is forthcoming? The credibility of our efforts
will be measured by our ability to protect civilians in
the most adverse conditions.

I would also like to recall the importance of
addressing the question of the accountability of the
parties to a conflict. Accountability is one of the key
aspects of the protection of civilians, and transitional
justice is of crucial importance for lasting peace. In
that context, we would like to thank Portugal for
organizing a workshop on that key question.

The Security Council can and must play a leading
role in efforts to combat impunity with the help of a
suitable combination of mechanisms for fact-finding,
justice, reparation and reforms aimed at preventing any
recurrence of such violations. The recent creation by
the Human Rights Council of a mandate for a Special
Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence is tangible
proof of the international community's support for such
an approach.

To remain effective, fact-finding mechanisms
must be used consistently and frequently. Existing
mechanisms, such as the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission and the experts deployed by
Justice Rapid Response, can also be brought into play.

In a case where a State is either unable or
unwilling to act and where the Council has made use of
its ability to refer situations to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Switzerland wishes to
stress the fact that in such cases it is the responsibility
of the Security Council to ensure that the States
concerned meet their obligations, particularly with
regard to existing arrest warrants. It is indispensable
for fact-finding mechanisms and efforts to establish
individual criminal accountability to be accompanied
by reparation and appropriate reforms of national
institutions, if they are to achieve their objectives.

This is indeed absolutely necessary if we wish to
ensure that a culture of combating impunity and the
rule of law can take hold at the national, regional and
international levels. It is in that spirit that we call upon
the Council to systematically include in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations the tasks of strengthening
the rule of law and monitoring respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights norms.

