Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
would like to associate itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti. We also welcome the
President's decision to hold this open debate on the
situation in Haiti, as this issue will soon be the focus of
attention when a discussion is held on the desirability
of renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I should
also like to welcome Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-
Louis, Prime Minister of Haiti, and to thank her for her
briefing on the situation in her country. I welcome the
positive briefing of President William Clinton, Special
Envoy for Haiti. I would also like to thank Mr. Hedi
Annabi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his detailed briefing on the progress made
in Haiti.

Also under your presidency, Madam, there was an
opportunity, last Friday, 4 September, for an exchange
of views with police- and troop-contributing countries
on the item before the Council today. What is clear is
that, although the situation in Haiti has obviously
improved, its stability and level of security is still
weak. That is why, as recommended by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2009/439), it is essential that
the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) be renewed. Peru is
firmly committed to making its contribution to this
goal.

The representative of Uruguay has already
detailed the plans and proposals that we wish to
contribute to this matter. I would like, however, to
stress two points that are of crucial importance to
making a decisive contribution to the consolidation of
stability and development in Haiti. First, in order to
deal with the grave social and economic situation, as
discussed in the Secretary-General's report, we must
see greater interaction between the public and private
sectors in Haiti. This would strengthen the
implementation of the necessary reforms in the various
institutional areas and would also reinforce the plan for
peacebuilding that has been established. All of this
requires a strategic alliance between both sectors,
which will help strengthen the capacity of the Haitian
State, a fundamental goal that will eventually bring
stability and security to this beloved Caribbean nation.

Secondly, I would like to reiterate, because it is
so relevant, the need for us to bear in mind the
recommendation made by the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
for Haiti of the Economic and Social Council, just
referred to by the distinguished Ambassador of Canada,
namely, that we should look into how we can make
better use of the engineers of MINUSTAH in order to
create greater synergy between the mandate of the
Mission and the development needs of Haiti.

We are convinced that with the very important
contribution of the Special Envoy for Haiti, President
William Clinton, and with the active and sustained
participation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, and the
contribution of MINUSTAH and in particular the
countries of the region, we can continue the work that
has been done to date. This will help the people and
Government of Haiti face with decisiveness, energy
and a healthy optimism the challenges they must deal
with in achieving sustainable development in their
country. Here I would like to reiterate the unwavering
commitment of Peru to contributing towards the
stabilization and development of Haiti.

