The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.

China thanks Angola and Senegal for joining us
in the organization of this open debate. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his briefing.

As an important international shipping route and
energy base, the Gulf of Guinea is a lifeline for the
coastal States of the region. Recent years have seen
frequent pirate attacks and armed robbery throughout
the territorial waters of the Gulf of Guinea. These
attacks are characterized by their brutality and links
to terrorism organizations, illegal armed groups
and criminal gangs. Such activities undermine the
environment for the economic and social development
of the African countries concerned, in addition
to posing a grave threat to maritime passage for
international trade, as well as for regional peace and
security. Safeguarding safety and security in the Gulf
of Guinea is an essential part of the efforts to improve
the safety and security of global connectivity. That
constitutes an important guarantee for the development
and prosperity of coastal and regional countries; it is
a common responsibility that must be shared by the
entire international community.

Standing at the forefront of the fight against piracy,
the coastal countries of the Gulf of Guinea have made
tremendous efforts to combat piracy and armed robbery
at sea. China expresses its great appreciation in that
regard. China supports the African countries concerned
in their efforts to enhance coordination, formulate a
common strategy for maritime security, create a regional
counter-piracy mechanism and conduct joint patrols at
sea. We call upon the international community to pay
attention to the difficulties faced by Gulf of Guinea
coastal States, including a lack of financial resources,
infrastructure and equipment, and to implement the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and assist
the countries of the region to build up their capacity
to fight piracy. Efforts should be focused on the four
following aspects.

First, on the basis of respect for the leadership of
the Gulf of Guinea coastal countries, assistance should
be provided to the countries concerned to enhance
their capacity-building on counter-piracy efforts. Other
countries should take an active part in the construction,
operation and maintenance of their ports, among other
infrastructure, in order that they can provide better
service to ships in the areas of docking, supplies and
maintenance, as well as improve logistical support. It is
also necessary to help them to strengthen training for
their maritime security forces and to provide them with
the necessary equipment, such as vessels and radar
systems, so as to improve their operational capacity in
joint law enforcement and monitoring.

Secondly, regional and subregional organizations
should have a greater role, and a long-term mechanism
should be put in place at the regional level. The
international community should support regional and
subregional organizations - such as the African Union
(AU), the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission 4 in their
efforts to comprehensively implement the integrated
strategy to counter piracy and armed robbery at sea by
increasing financial and technical inputs, enhancing
institution-building in the fight against piracy and
ensuring the full, effective and sustainable operation
of the relevant mechanisms. China looks forward to a
positive outcome to the next AU Summit of Heads of
State and Government on Maritime Safety and Security
in the Gulf of Guinea, which will be held in October
and will further advance the regional and subregional
endeavour on counter-piracy.

Thirdly, resources should be mobilized to
strengthen international cooperation on counter-piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. International organizations,
including the United Nations and the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), should provide more
support to coastal countries. The United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa should accord greater
importance to the needs of the countries concerned and
provide regular briefings to the Security Council on the
latest developments. We call upon countries to continue
their contributions to the IMO West and Central Africa
Maritime Security Trust Fund, while drawing on the
success achieved. On the basis of full consultation with
the coastal States, the international community could
explore the possibility of joint law enforcement as a
new way to intensify counter-piracy efforts.

Fourthly, development assistance to coastal States
should be scaled up. The international community
should increase assistance to the coastal States in the
light of their economic and social development plans,
help them to eradicate poverty, speed up economic and
social development and improve the situation of youth
employment. Cooperation on counter-terrorism should
be strengthened. Transnational organized crime should
be combated effectively. The links that connect pirates
with terrorist organizations and illegal armed groups
should be severed, and channels for drug trafficking
and financing should be blocked. Greater efforts
should be made to ensure legal accountability.

Thanks to the joint efforts of the members
of the Security Council, presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/4, on the fight against piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, was adopted earlier during this meeting. That
is a positive response to the request of the coastal and
regional States for enhanced international cooperation
in the fight against piracy. It crystallizes international
consensus on the fight against piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea and proposes new ideas on joint responses to
tackle the problem. That will strongly enhance and
deepen international cooperation against piracy.
China and Africa make up a community of common
destiny and interests, sharing will and woe and seeking
a win-win outcome. Guided by the principle of sincerity,
political results, affinity and good faith and the right
approach to justice and interests, China has taken an
active part in Africa's efforts to strengthen capacity-
building for the maintenance ofpeace and security. China
has actively participated in international cooperation
against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and has provided
assistance to the coastal States for capacity-building in
the area of infrastructure. China's naval escort fleet has
been invited to participate in join counter-piracy drills
with the navies of Nigeria and Cameroon. China has
provided the coastal States with material and equipment
for counter-piracy purposes. Chinese enterprises have
been active in building ports in the coastal States of
Nigeria, Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire. They will provide
solid support for the maritime operations of the regional
States. China will continue to implement the outcome
ofthe Johannesburg Summit between China and Africa,
cooperate with African countries for the maintenance
of security in the waters of the Gulf of Guinea, with a
view to creating an enabling security environment for
Africa's economic and social development, including
supporting African countries in their efforts to achieve
lasting peace and common prosperity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
would also like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a normal speed so that interpretation may
be provided properly. I wish to inform all concerned
that, given the length of the list of speakers, we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Robert
Dussey, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
African Integration of Togo.

