Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted against the convening of today's
meeting to review the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea because we
believe that it is an initiative that shows the Security
Council's growing interference in issues outside its
specific competency with respect to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Its competency is
clearly set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
which is the legal instrument that specifies the functions
of the various United Nations bodies in a careful and
precise manner.

The issue before us today on the human rights
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
is not within the competency of the Security Council.
Human rights issues must be addressed both by the
General Assembly and by the Human Rights Council,
a subsidiary organ of the Assembly located in Geneva,
which was specifically established to discuss human
rights issues and is duly empowered for that purpose.
We therefore call for focusing on the Universal Periodic
Review mechanism as the best way of dealing with
human rights issues.

At present, the international community is facing
the great and complex challenges that require action and
specific and timely attention with respect to protracted
conflicts owing to geopolitical and economic interests
of certain Powers, which are undermining the Council's
effectiveness as well as its credibility with the public.
The issue of terrorism and its spread, the Middle East
and the question of Palestine should be active priorities
for the Council, yet the Council has shown remarkable
inaction on those topics.

Venezuela reiterates its principled position on
rejecting the treatment of human rights issues for
politically motivated purposes or in a selective, partial
or biased manner with the sole purpose of putting
pressure on certain countries. Approaching human
rights issues through politicization and selectivity,
targeting certain countries, has proved to be ineffective
and counterproductive, since it only exacerbates
confrontation and undermines the Organization's
and its subsidiary bodies' objectives, which is to use
diplomacy to peacefully resolve conflicts. With these
measures, the path to peace is undermined by the
creation of an artificial differentiation between good
and bad countries that does not foster a harmonious
international climate or a dialogue in situations of great
fragility such as that of the Korean peninsula.

Accordingly, it is essential that we continue
exploring ways to promote respectful, constructive and
transparent dialogue with Governments such as that of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as dialogue
and cooperation are the only means for making progress
in all areas. Only a week after the unanimous adoption
ofresolution 2321 (2016), where we unified our position
with respect to nuclear and ballistic-missile activities
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, we have
taken an approach today that, by focusing on human
rights issues in our consideration of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, does help to create
conditions conducive to resuming the way towards a
sustainable political solution of the nuclear issue.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the Security
Council must strictly fulfil its obligations and review
issues that are directly related to international peace
and security. Today's debate, which is both outside the
Security Council's natural competencies and distinctly
different from the usual way of addressing the situation
of the Korean peninsula, could become an element that
upsets the pursuit of the Council's priority objectives for
the peninsula. Against the backdrop of military tensions
and the need to promote and support initiatives aimed
at denuclearizing the Korean peninsula, diplomatic and
political negotiations are the path that the parties must
follow if they are to achieve a lasting solution.

