Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, would like to express our gratitude
to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his comprehensive
briefing. Russia deeply appreciates the work he is
doing as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

Today's meeting underlines an important stage in
the development of events in East Timor. In this
connection, we are pleased to note the largely
successful results achieved by UNTAET during the
first year its work. UNTAET has made noticeable
progress towards the achievement of its goals by
helping to move the territory towards a comprehensive
form of self-determination. UNTAET has done very
important work in preparing for the forthcoming
elections, be it in the area of practical matters such as
the registration of the East Timor population or in the
area of a detailed discussion of what kind of election
should take place first.

Finally, we note some progress in preparing the
East Timor defence forces. We believe all these
positive signs give us grounds for optimism with
regard to developments in East Timor.

Together with other Council members, the
Russian delegation expresses its satisfaction with the
successful Security Council mission to Indonesia and
East Timor. We feel that it made a specific contribution
to ensuring peace and security in that region of the
world. One of the most acute problems in resolving the
East Timor situation continues to be the situation of
refugee camps in West Timor and the activities of the
pro-integrationist militias. Unfortunately, we must note
that the militia is continuing to persecute and
intimidate the refugees, and consequently they are not
yet free to choose. We are counting on the Indonesian
authorities to take measures to resolve these problems.

At the same time, we have drawn attention to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello's assessment of certain
progress made in the area of repatriation. We hope that
this trend will be strengthened. We also wish to draw
attention to the fact that in the Security Council
mission's report and in Mr. Vieira de Mello's briefing
repeated reference has been made to cooperation with
the Indonesian Government. We think this is a very
important point, one that supports the theory that
success, whether of the Security Council mission or, in
broader terms, in resolving the situation in East Timor
as a whole, should be based on constructive
cooperation with Indonesia.

