Mr. Boureima (Niger): I am taking the floor on
behalf of the four States members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and Benin.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Chadian
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December 2014 for having convened this important
open debate on terrorism and cross-border crime, under
the agenda of threats against international peace and
security, in general, and those relating to terrorism and
cross-border crime, in particular. We thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feldman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing on the very informative report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the United Nations
system to help States and subregional and regional
entities in Africa in fighting terrorism (S/2014/9), as
well as Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer
of the African Union, for his comprehensive briefing.

The presence among us today of high-level
representatives, including the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Chad, Nigeria, Luxembourg and Libya,
the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Argentina and
the Director General for Foreign Policy of Chile, is
eloquent testimony of the importance of the topic under
discussion as well as of the need to take appropriate
action.
As made clear in the concept note (S/2014/869, annex) usefully provided by the Chadian presidency to
the participants in today's debate and the report of the
Secretary-General, there can be no doubt that terrorism
and cross-border crime are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. Therefore, the connection between the
two phenomena is not without negative consequences
on subregional, regional and international conflict-
prevention and resolution efforts, including those of the
Security Council as the body primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. This also raises the issue, as the concept
note rightly underscores, of determining whether the
tools at the Security Council's disposal to achieve its
objectives remain appropriate for the situation on the
ground.

In this regard, the States members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and Benin - whose populations
have for several years suffered serious and frequent
attacks against peace and security, including acts
of terrorism i believe that, while we appreciate
the multifaceted support provided to our efforts by
bilateral and multilateral partners alike, it would be
very desirable to carry out an in-depth analysis of the
situation. This would allow a more appropriate strategy
to be designed. Such reflection is all the more needed
now that the United Nations itself is preparing to review
its peacekeeping operations in 2015 so as to adapt them
to current realities. To that end, it has already put in
place a High-level Panel, chaired by Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, former President of Timor-Leste and Nobel Peace
Laureate. Furthermore, the concept note prepared for
this debate contains elements that can serve as paths
to follow.

We fully endorse the arguments put forward by
the presidency in the concept note, according to which
cross-border organized crime has enlarged the field
of operation of terrorist groups to the detriment of the
capacities and authority of the States in which they
operate, seriously inhibiting conflict resolution efforts
because they are often found in troubled areas. In the
region covered by the Lake Chad Basin Commission and
Benin, the terrorist activities of Boko Haram, probably
in connection with other similar groups, are not only
undermining peace and security throughout the entire
region and beyond by expanding their activities, but
are also making serious inroads into the very stability
of the countries of the region. Indeed, in addition to
the horrific abductions of 300 young students from
Chibok, Boko Haram has also caused thousands of
people, especially women and children, to flee their
homes and seek refuge in neighbouring countries. The
humanitarian situation created as a result cries out to
our collective conscience and, given the urgency of the
situation, cannot be allowed to continue.

To that end, the States members of the Lake Chad
Basin and Benin appeal to the entire international
community, particularly the Security Council, for a
response commensurate the threat to the subregion
from the conjunction of the phenomena of terrorism
and transnational organized crime, so that this threat
may be forever halted and eradicated from the region.
Certainly, the partners at the Paris conference on
security in Nigeria, held in May, and at the Follow-up
Ministerial Conference on Security in Nigeria, held in
London in June, expressed their solidarity and pledged
assistance to the countries of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and Benin, which have since decided to
pool their efforts. Since then, they have taken significant
measures to create a centralized intelligence unit and a
multinational joint special forces unit that have yet to
be made operational.

With the unanimous adoption of resolution 2195
(2014), we place great hope that it will be usefully
implemented to effectively fight these two scourges
of our subregion and elsewhere, especially when the
Secretary-General reports on the issue.

