Ms. Citaku: It is always a great honour for me to
be able to come here and speak before the Security
Council on behalf of my country. It is not only an
honour. It is also an emotional experience, because at
times when we were voiceless, when our most basic
human rights were being targeted in the most brutal
way by the Serbian military and paramilitary forces,
all in the Council spoke up. They became our voice and
our hope. They restored our faith in humanity. They
restored our belief that, no matter whether one is big
or small, powerful or powerless, if you fight for a just
cause, you are never alone.

Since 1993 this organ has adopted seven resolutions
related to Kosovo - resolutions calling for peace and
putting an end to the war. For that we will be forever
grateful. Dozens of presidential statements have
also been issued, including presidential statement
S/PRST/2005/51, on 24 October 2005, wherein the
Council called for the start of a political process to
determine Kosovo's future status.

In honouring the will of the people of Kosovo, and
under the mediation of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Kosovo has a final status. Kosovo is a
free, independent and a sovereign State. And yet again,
at Serbia's request, the International Court of Justice
ruled unambiguously that Kosovo was within its rights
when it declared independence and that it did not
violate any international law, resolution 1244 (1999) or
the constitutional framework. Kosovo today is a young
republic. It faces challenges of course, but not the kind
of challenges that would require us to meet every three
months and take up the Councill's valuable time, which
is in heavy demand for issues of much greater need
and importance.
Once we were a nation of refugees; today we are
not. But there are 20 million refugees in the world
today, the largest number since the Second World War.
There are millions of women who are subjected to
sexual violence in areas of conflict, just like our women
were during the war in Kosovo. There are children who
are in desperate need of food, medicine and shelter,
just like our children once were. The millions that are
spent annually to maintain the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) could be put to
much better use. To justify my point, I am going to
quote the report of the Secretary-General:

"a fight erupted between a Kosovo Serb and
a Kosovo Albanian over a parking space."
(S/2016/666, para. 12)

On a serious note, if the Council decides to hold a
meeting every time people fight about parking spaces
in New York, or any other place in the world for
that matter, it would not have any time to talk about
anything else.

Another example from the report:

"funds were stolen from the Orthodox Monastery

of St. Jovan." (ibid., para. 27)
Actually, it was tips that were stolen. Most of the
incidents detailed in the UNMIK report are of that
nature, and they have nothing to do with inter-ethnic
violence. That is not to say that we live in paradise.
Kosovo today is still not the Kosovo we dreamed and
fought for. A lot needs to be done to strengthen the rule
of law and to fight corruption and organized crime, just
like in any young country.

Although, together with our international
partners, tremendous work has been accomplished in
that regard, we recognize that there is still more to
be done. Our citizens deserve equal opportunities to
prosper regardless of their ethnic, religious or political
backgrounds. We owe it to them, as they, every day,
more and more, are giving us reasons to be proud with
their hard work, selfless dedication and sacrifice. We do
not have to look far to be inspired by the extraordinary
stories of our people. Take the story of Fahrije Hoti
from the village of Krusha. Her husband, along with
241 civilians, was massacred by Serbian forces in
March 1999. In that small village, 139 women became
widows overnight, 500 children fatherless.

But, because of Fahrije and other women like
her, Krusa is no longer known only for its tragic past.
After the war, they came back to find their houses in
ashes. However, they did not despair; they did not lose
themselves to hatred or revenge. They rebuilt their
homes and they started working on their farms. They
opened small businesses and shops, with very little or
no institutional support. Because of Fahrije and other
widows of Krusa, today there is smoke coming out of
every chimney; there is life in that village. Despite
Fahrije's tragic past, although she was never offered an
apology, she talks about forgiveness:

"I will never be able to forget what happened. But
to forgive is human. A person cannot live if she
or he does not forgive. That would be too heavy a
burden to carry."

Fahrije is still waiting for the remains of her husband.
He is still classified as missing.

Kosovo is ready to move on, but Serbia needs to be
ready to let go. Serbia needs to reflect on its past and
learn from it. We in Kosovo do not want to leave our
children with any burden from the past. Last month,
Kosovo President Hashim Thaci visited and paid his
respects at two memorials honouring Serbian civilians
killed after the 1999 war in Kosovo. Two of them were
children. Although we never managed to shed light on

those events, and bring the perpetrators of these crimes
to justice, nonetheless we will never condone Violence
by anyone, and we will continue to ask for justice to
be made. I would note that those acts happened at a
time when our police and justice system was run by
UNMIK. We will also continue to fight for justice for
the 1,262 children that were killed in Kosovo during the
war by Serbian military and paramilitary forces - for
most of whom no one ever went to trial, despite clear
evidence on who the perpetrators were.

While Kosovo goes to great lengths and undertakes
unprecedented measures to contribute to peace and
stability in the region, I must ask what Serbia doing.
They want to erect a statue of Slobodan Milosevic. What
is the message that Serbia wants to send to victims from
Vukovar, Srebrenica and Kosovo? Is that how Serbia
views reconciliation? Rehabilitating the most notorious
war criminal in Europe since the Second World War?
And, more important, what message is Serbia sending
to its own people? After all, Milosevic and his regime
were responsible for Serbian lives lost as well.

As was revealed by Serbian officials, six
youngsters were killed in Pee in 1998, the so-called
Panda Bar case. Back then, the Kosovo Liberation
Army was blamed. But the truth was, as stated by
Serbian officials two years ago, Serbian paramilitary
forces were the perpetrators of that terrible act. But
no matter how Serbia acts, we will not allow Serbia to
drag us into a discourse of hatred and impunity. We
will move forward, and we hope that Serbia will join
us and the rest of the region on this journey. After all,
we are neighbours. We are committed to the dialogue
in Brussels, but we also believe that the process needs
to become more dynamic, and especially more results-
oriented. Dialogue is important, but implementation
and good faith are everything.

On behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo, I want to reiterate that, in line with our
Constitution, we will implement every single agreement
reached in Brussels. But our job is made difficult
when Serbia continues to finance parallel institutions
throughout Kosovo and tries to build colonies in
northern Kosovo, violating not only our Constitution,
but also resolution 1244 (1999). The current situation
is rather paradoxical. While Serbia takes part in the
Brussels dialogue for the normalization ofrelations with
Kosovo, it continues to meddle in our internal affairs
by supporting the operations of its parallel structures in
Kosovo, in breach of the Brussels Agreement reached
on the 19 April 2013.

That dualism of partially implementing Brussels
agreements on one hand, while maintaining parallel
structures on the other hand, allows Serbia to report at
the European Union about progress in implementation
and maintain its interference in Kosovo intact. In
some ways, the implementation becomes a cover for
interference and parallelism by Serbia. On the surface
it looks as ifthe agreements are being implemented, but
in reality the situation remains contradictory and far
from what we agreed in Brussels.

Kosovo institutions show their commitment
through acts. Since 2013, in addition to the annual
budget, northern Serbian-majority municipalities
received an additional €10 million from the special
fund established to improve the quality of life of its
citizens and to integrate northern municipalities. The
European Union alone invested over €54 million in
different projects in that part of Kosovo in the last three
years. We will not stop there. We will do everything
we can to demonstrate, through action, that any citizen
of Kosovo, regardless of their ethnicity or religion, can
feel at home and live without fear.

Kosovo will continue to be an active member of
the coalition of nations fighting terrorism. Attacks in
the streets of Nice, Turkey, Afghanistan and many other
recent tragic incidents remind us that we are fighting
a borderless war. While we express our deepest
condolences for all the lives lost, let me reassure the
Council that we will do everything we can to fight that
evil, which strives to implant fear and demolish our
way of life.

We in Kosovo are a multireligious and multicultural
society. In Kosovo there are cities where mosques
and Catholic and Orthodox churches share the same
courtyard. We have always coexisted peacefully. Today,
Kosovo is a secular republic. No matter how one prays,
whether one believes in God, in nature or in evolution,
as long as he or she is a law-abiding citizen, he or she
will live in peace.

Those are values that we hold dear, and we will
fight to defend them. For that reason, we have taken
very serious measures to fight the phenomena of foreign
fighters and radicalization. Kosovo was one of the first
countries in Europe to adopt appropriate legislation and
strategies to counter violent extremism. But we have
gone far beyond words. Some 19 non-governmental
organizations that fuelled radicalization and that
were financed with suspicious funds have been shut
down. The Kosovo Police has initiated investigations
against 199 people, and 102 people have been arrested.
Seventy were indicted, and 34 people have already been
convicted.

Today, around 50 Kosovars are in Syria and Iraq.
However, because of the measures taken by our law-
enforcement mechanisms, the number of Kosovars who
have joined the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
over the past 12 months is zero. I would like to quote
United States Vice-President Biden, who, during his
recent visit to the region, not only praised Kosovo's
actions in countering violent extremism but also clearly
said, "Kosovo is an example to follow".

During the reporting period, our international
status was strengthened by the recognition of our
independence by Suriname, by our becoming part
of the Apostolic Convention and by our joining the
International Exhibitions Bureau as its one hundred
and seventieth member. In addition, Kosovo established
diplomatic relations with three other countries, thereby
expanding and strengthening our ties with the free
world.

While the overall political discourse in Kosovo
remains fierce, and while political parties are
expressing their disagreements on some very sensitive
and important issues, including the border demarcation
with Montenegro, all of those parties were unanimous
in condemning violence, including, specifically, the
three attacks that occurred in the past few weeks in the
Parliament building, at a public broadcasting company
and in a private home. Police and other Kosovar
and international law-enforcement mechanisms are
working hard to bring the perpetrators to justice. There
is no room for violence in our new republic, as we are
struggling every day to build dialogue among ourselves
and with our neighbours. That is the only way forward.

Although the sky might sometimes seem grey,
I know that there is hope for Kosovo. I know that
because our people, our young people, are giving us
shining examples every day. Doruntina Sylejmani,
a teenager from Kosovo, brought home a medal from
the International Mathematical Olympiad. In a tough
and rigorous competition, with the best and brightest
from all around the globe, Doruntina won. Although
she comes from a country that still needs to do a lot
to improve the quality of education, she won, thereby
inspiring thousands of young Kosovar children to
dedicate themselves to science.

Then there is our golden pride, Majlinda Kelmendi,
who brought us our first Olympic medal ever. Majlinda
was offered millions to compete for other countries
while Kosovo was still struggling to become a member
of the International Olympic Committee. She declined
those offers and waited for her chance to represent her
country. She gave us all a lesson, especially those of us
working in the public sector, that not everything is for
sale and that there are things that money cannot buy.
She became a hero to her people and an inspiration
worldwide, as her story was showcased across the globe.

Women like Fahrije, Doruntina and Majlinda are
the new heroes of Kosovo. They push our limits and
make us become a better version of ourselves. They
teach us that there is no excuse for failure, that no
dream is too big and no hope is too high if we work
hard and put our hearts into it.

