Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will start where my
Belgian colleague left off and thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding very successfully over the Security
Council during the month of May. I have my batik shirt
ready for the party tonight.

Last month, Germany kept the curtains open
throughout its Council presidency last month. We see
that there has been some pushback. We hope that under
the Kuwaiti presidency, there will be pushback against
that pushback.

Turning to the matter of this meeting, we first
welcome the extension of the sanctions regime in South
Sudan. I listened very carefully to what was said by our
African friends and by the representatives of Russia and
China with respect to the current situation, and I must
admit that I do not quite follow their logic. The security
situation has improved. In the face of such improvement,
what effect would the lifting of the sanctions and the
shipment of weapons have? As our South African friend
remarked, there is a volatile political process. In that
context, what effect would the shipment of additional
arms have? We know that the parties have failed to
adhere to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. One
month ago (S/PV.8519), I expressed my doubts that
the deadline in mid-May would be met, and it was not
met. Why then should additional arms be sent? I think
the one thing the country does not need is additional
arms. We have also seen a reduction in human rights
violations. Our Polish colleague linked that to the fact
that there are fewer arms available there.

That notwithstanding, in our view the human
rights situation remains very dire. The issue of sexual
and gender-based violence remains. I would very much
appreciate it if, during the next debate on this item, we
could have a briefing on the human rights situation.
Germany is of the view that the money saved on
weapons would be much better spent on improving the
justice system so that the perpetrators of sexual crimes
there could be brought to justice. The Ambassador of
South Africa also mentioned the dire humanitarian
situation. Why not have those who want to buy arms
spend the money on humanitarian resources instead?

