The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Panama.

I would like to begin by thanking Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing. My
thanks go also to the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), represented by
Mr. Atul Khare, for its efforts, and to South Africa for
its interest, reflected in a variety of actions. The
concern and endeavours of Australia, Indonesia and
other countries of the region during these difficult
times for Timor-Leste are also to be acknowledged.

Today, we recognize the progress made by Timor-
Leste and UNMIT in 2007. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/26) highlights, among other things,
the holding of elections, the security sector reform and
the building of democratic institutions. We could list
other areas of progress.

However, despite the calm that has prevailed in
Timor-Leste following the recent attacks against two
high representatives of the legitimate institutions, the
attacks show that a long road remains to be travelled to
address and remedy the causes of the conflict. We note,
furthermore, that in recent years the members of the
Council have acknowledged the wide range of
activities required to achieve these ends, many of
which do not fall within the traditional concept of
peacekeeping. This is a good time to recognize that
fact. The Charter of the United Nations lays down, as
one the Organization's purposes, the maintenance of
international peace and security and grants to the
Security Council the prime responsibility for that
function. At the time, the immediate concern of the
authors of the Charter was disputes between States. In
the post-war world that goal of maintaining peace
meant peace between States.

However, a constitutive charter - and the United
Nations Charter is one - should develop in keeping
with the needs of the times, or it ceases to be a living
document and may well become a dead letter. The
Charter should, moreover, be interpreted as a whole. Its
principles include protection of human rights and
promotion of development. The concepts of peace and
security should therefore be interpreted as something
more than just the absence of war or armed conflict.

The experience of Timor-Leste is an example of
the importance of this conceptual evolution as regards
peacekeeping. UNMIT is not the first time that the
United Nations has sought to tackle problems in that
region. Today, more than ever, it is clear that the
priorities of UNMIT's future mandate should include
not just the maintenance of peace and security but also
should attend to political, institutional, humanitarian,
human rights and sustainability aspects, because
without them, peace and security will remain elusive.
Consolidating dialogue and reconciliation, deepening
reform of the justice and security sectors, resolving the
problem of internally displaced persons and promoting
economic development are among the various factors
that must be dealt with.

In that context, allow me to support and echo the
statements of Ambassador Urbina of Costa Rica on the
need to build capacity and not dependence. He warned
in particular about the need to strengthen the armed
forces in Timor-Leste as a matter requiring very careful
consideration. The experience of Panama and Costa
Rica runs counter to such a trend.

Lastly, allow me to repeat that this Council
should demonstrate its commitment to Timor-Leste
through efforts to deal with problems and projects in a
cross-cutting manner. In the various areas of its
mandate it should be both flexible and robust and
should present clear goals, sufficient to allow the
Secretariat, as our executive body, to draft clear,
verifiable and immediate goals and eventually to
prepare procedures for an orderly and successful
withdrawal.

I cannot end without expressing our recognition
of the irreplaceable leadership work carried out by
President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmao and expressing our hopes for a speedy
recovery to President Ramos-Horta.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now call on the representative of Australia.
