I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to present the various challenges that we are currently facing in the country, in a context marked by political tensions and an upswing of violence in certain parts of the east, amid a fragile socioeconomic situation. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has introduced an additional layer of complexity and concern into the existing issues that we face in the country. The Government has, understandably, been focused these past several months on the immediate response to the threat posed by the global pandemic. Assisted by the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the Council (S/2020/554), the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have undertaken a variety of efforts to limit the spread of the virus and alleviate the additional socioeconomic burden placed on the population by the movement restrictions, border closures and other measures taken to deal with the pandemic. That necessary work has nonetheless slowed the pace of the Government's programme and reform agenda. With respect to the overall political situation, to date the ruling coalition, composed of President Tshisekedi's Cap pour le changement and former President Kabila's Front commun pour le Congo, continues to hold together. I believe that there has been an understanding on the part of the political leadership that maintaining this political coalition intact is a fundamental prerequisite for making progress on the wide array of governance, security and socioeconomic challenges that still stand in the way of the country's long-term stabilization. At the same time, there are indeed serious tensions within the coalition, which is frequently unsettled by partisan manoeuvring leading to an erosion of trust between its partners. Unfortunately, over the course of the past days, the coalition has been put to the test following the introduction of three bills by Front commun pour le Congo parliamentarians that are considered by both the Union pour la democratie et le progres social (UDPS) and the opposition to undermine the separation of powers and weaken the independence of the judiciary. Yesterday a large number of UDPS supporters breached the enclosure of the National Assembly and vandalized a number of private properties to demonstrate that development. Those actions were broadly condemned, including by the President. Maintaining popular support for the Cap pour le changement-Front commun pour le Congo coalition and the overall political dispensation has also been challenged by the trial, conviction and sentencing of the President's Chief of Staff, Vital Kamerhe, and disagreements over the renewal of the Independent National Electoral Commission. I therefore spare no effort in the context of my good offices to remind interlocutors of the opportunity presented to them by the outcome of the 2018 electoral process and of the fact that the country's progress rests on the readiness of actors across the political spectrum to put aside partisanship in order to prevent a political crisis that could have major consequences for the stability of the country. At the same time, many parts of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to be torn by violence as a result of the activities of armed groups and intercommunity conflicts. That trend has been fuelled by the effects of the political turmoil and the pandemic, which have an impact on the Government's ability to take structured and comprehensive measures against actors perpetrating violence against civilians. The situation in parts of Ituri in particular has gravely deteriorated over the past months. An intensification of attacks on civilians and security forces by assailants associated with the Lendu community has in turn triggered Hema and Alur youth to create self-defence groups, sparking fears of a further ethnicization of the conflict. Equally, reports of incursions by elements of the South Sudan People's Defence Forces in Aru territory, northern Ituri, have led to additional protection-of- civilians concerns and the displacement of the local population. In North Kivu, there is concern over what appears to be the intention of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) to regroup and intensify attacks, resulting in increased civilian casualties. On 22 June, a MONUSCO convoy was ambushed by presumed ADF elements close to Beni town while returning to base after reconstructing a damaged bridge. One Indonesian peacekeeper lost his life and one was injured in that tragic incident. This is a stark reminder of the ultimate sacrifice that our peacekeepers are willing to make to protect civilians and advance peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like to seize this opportunity to reiterate my condolences and that of the entire Mission to the Government of the Republic of Indonesia and the family of the deceased. In the hauts plateaux of South Kivu, ongoing intercommunity conflicts have further degenerated with the proliferation of militias among all communities. I condemn in the strongest terms attacks on displaced populations and the use of hate speech, which incite further violence. Efforts to de-solidarize communities from those militias and preventing external actors from supporting their agendas will be vital to addressing the escalation of tensions in the area. Finally, in Nyunzu territory, Tanganyika province, more than 100 civilians have been killed in intercommunity conflicts between Twa and Bantu over the course of the past months, and tensions remain high in neighbouring areas. To address those issues, MONUSCO continues to pursue a comprehensive approach that combines active troop deployments to hotspot areas; community engagement; the development of targeted protection strategies; and the provision of critical, large-scale logistical support for Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) operations. I would like to highlight and pay tribute to the soldiers of the FARDC and the uniformed contingents of MONUSCO, who are performing in an extremely difficult and dangerous environment. The security forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo need our full support for the work that they do and are indeed in need of continued significant assistance to improve their logistical, training and operational capacities. Security-sector reform therefore must continue to be a priority for the Government and a vital area that the Mission and the international community must support. It is important to note that, notwithstanding the increased violence in several provinces, the Mission continued to actively seize opportunities to support the Government in its local reconciliation efforts. In southern Irumu territory, for instance, the security situation has continued to improve since the signing of the peace agreement with the Force de resistance patriotique de I' Ituri (FRPI), laying the foundation to overcome a conflict that has lasted almost two decades. In view of the interlinked nature of political stabilization, security and socioeconomic development, MONUSCO, along with the United Nations country team, is giving priority to the implementation of programmes to support transition in areas moving towards a state of post-conflict. We are therefore looking to enhance cooperation with the World Bank and other partners to assist with economic development and social cohesion in the Kasais. I believe strongly that the implementation of such transition programming is a crucial element of ensuring an environment that permits the responsible and sustainable exit of the Mission. I would also like to take this opportunity to underline the synergies that MONUSCO benefits from in the efforts to improve the political climate in the broader Great Lakes region. In that regard, the Mission works closely with the Office of the Special Envoy on a range of issues, including to promote non-military measures to resolve conflict in the region. The African Union and regional organizations also continue to play an essential role in promoting peace and development in the subregion. The Southern African Development Community, for example, remains a key partner in these efforts, as demonstrated by its active role in helping to resolve the recent border dispute between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia. As I have emphasized in my recent briefings, there remains an opportunity for long-term progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which can pave the way for a responsible and sustainable withdrawal of the Mission in the coming years. While restrictions linked to COVID-19 and the increased violence in the east have hampered efforts to hold a structured dialogue with the Government, as requested by the Council, the Mission is pursuing its internal planning and hopes to build on the constructive relationship to accelerate the development of a joint strategy as soon as the context becomes more conducive. In that regard, I ask the Council today for its continued support for MONUSCO's work and the United Nations country team, including to stop the spread of COVID-19 and respond to the multiplicity of humanitarian emergencies that the population continues to face. Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to the troop-contributing countries, which have demonstrated great flexibility in terms of the temporary halt on troop rotations that have been necessary to ensure that the Mission itself does not become a vector for the transmission of COVID-19. I also thank the Mission's civilian staff, who are carrying out indispensable work in this time of increased uncertainty and movement restrictions.
