The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which she requests to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Booto
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/lOl4, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France.

I wish to draw the attention of the members also
to document S/2006/892, containing a letter dated 15
November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1736 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.15 am.
06-67928

