Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing
and her tireless efforts on behalf of the world's young
people. I also thank Executive Director Mr. Lake for his
remarks and distinguished service. Special thanks go
to the Foreign Ministers of Luxembourg and Argentina
and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Lithuania for
travelling here today and for lending his weight to
addressing this critical issue.

I especially welcome Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, whose
knowledge of the challenge that we are discussing
today is so deeply personal. The events in Sierra Leone
in the late 1990s did much to awaken the world to
the dimensions of the tragedy of children and armed
conflict. As a former child soldier abducted when he
was just 10 years old, Alhaji's presence is a reminder
that the principles that we refer to here are not abstracts.
In fact, their implementation can spell the difference
between hope and trauma and between life and death.

My colleague's few issues are of a graver
humanitarian concern than the impact of armed
conflict on civilians. The horror is especially acute
when the Victims or the perpetrators are boys and girls.
In recent years, the tragic connection between children
and war has assumed a prominent place on the global
agenda. In 2008, the United States appoved the Child
Soldiers Protection Act, which curtails United States
military assistance, licences and sales to Governments
that recruit or use child soldiers and which has given
our diplomats leverage to engage constructively with
Governments on the additional steps that they need to
take.

In 2012, as one example, the United States withheld
security assistance that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo needed to develop a second light infantry
battalion until the Government there signed an action
plan with the United Nations to address the use and
recruitment of child soldiers. Within just a couple of
weeks, the Government signed the action plan and is
now working with the United Nations in a sincere effort
to address the challenge. In 2012, the International
Criminal Court sent a welcome message when it found
Thomas Lubanga guilty of forcibly conscripting child
soldiers in Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Meanwhile, the United Nations has launched a
systematic campaign to help Governments and armed
groups develop action plans to end the use of child
soldiers, 18 of which have now been signed. Chad and
Yemen are among the countries that have recently
made a commitment to further progress. To that end,
I commend Ambassador Lucas for leading a Security
Council working group trip to Burma to review the
country's effort to fulfil its action plan.

Rescuing children from armed conflict is not
always a simple process, especially when they have
experienced the trauma of direct involvement in
Violence. Reintegration requires careful planning,
money and the recognition that some scars, whether of
body or mind, will heal slowly, if at all

Yet for all the helpful activity, too many children are
still being exploited, and some leaders have not thrown
their weight behind eliminating this scourge. No State
or armed group has yet been delisted by the Secretary-
General and 28 of the 52 listed parties are persistent
perpetrators, who have been listed for more than five
years. The Sudan is the one listed Government that
still has not signed an action plan. But even when plans
are developed, they have value only if implemented.
Donors can help by sharing resources, and the United
Nations must provide assistance and monitoring.

The United States encourages the deployment
of child protection advisers in all relevant United
Nations missions. Further, we urge the United Nations
to develop standardized training on child protection
responsibilities so that United Nations peacekeepers
who encounter violations respond effectively. These
training standards should be shared with Member States,
the African Union and other regional organizations
involved in peacekeeping activities. All of us must
press for the creation of birth registration systems in
order to verify that a child is a child. As resolution 2143
(2014) does, we must each urge greater protections for
schools, which are too often militarized.

Today, Syria is at ground zero ofthe most appalling
humanitarian catastrophe of our era, and children,
Syria's future, are among the principal victims. Since
the civil war began, more than 10,000 boys and girls
have been killed, more than 1.2 million have become
refugees, and more than 3 million are unable to attend
school. The United States is part of the United Nations-
led "No lost generation" initiative that is striving
to shield children from the fighting, reunite broken
families and deliver opportunities for education. One
four-year-old refugee in Turkey told UNICEF that he
wants to become a surgeon so that he will be able to
save his brother, who is still in Syria, should he get hurt.

According to the Secretary-General's report of
27 January (S/2014/31), the Government and extremist
groups have inflicted direct and unspeakable violence
against children, including kidnapping, torture,
maiming and murder. Pro-Government forces have
detained children as young as 11 for alleged association
with the Opposition and subjected them to beatings and
other brutal mistreatment in order to extract confessions.
Both sides have prevented injured children from
receiving medical treatment and both, but especially
the Government, have launched indiscriminate attacks
in which children and other civilians have been killed.
Babies, some killed and others barely breathing, have
been pulled from the rubble caused by barrel bombs.

On 22 February, the Council demanded a halt to
such attacks and to the sieges that have forced many
Syrians to choose between the certainty of starvation
and the false promise of safety through surrender. The
Al-Assad regime may be sure that our scrutiny of its
actions as well as those of any who would recruit or
target children will not let up until our demands are met
and the savagery is stopped.

In recent months, the Central African Republic has
also been the scene of horrific violence. The cycle of
vengeance between the Se'le'ka and anti-Balaka militias
has been singularly repulsive in that nearly all of the
victims on both sides have been unarmed. Children
have been attacked, beaten, maimed, raped and killed,
some by beheading. An estimated 6,000 young people
have been recruited and trained to kill by armed groups,
and in some cases girls have been forced into marriage.

In addition, the outlawed Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) remains a threat in the Central African Republic
and parts of South Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is heartening that, in December,
19 soldiers, including six young boys, defected from the
LRA, and that they cited radio broadcasting produced
by invisible children as giving them the courage to take
that brave step. It is encouraging as well that the LRA
has been forced to break up into small groups and that
in 2013 the number of their attacks went down. The
level of deaths and abductions attributable to those
attacks, however, remains far too high. The world must
not rest until Joseph Kony and his clique have been held
accountable and the LRA has become just a horrible
memory.

Finally, in South Sudan, children are once again
being made subject to all the ravages of war because the
country's leaders have failed to settle their differences
peacefully. Scared youngsters are wandering among
the thousands of displaced persons, searching for their
mommies and daddies. Our hearts go out to Mangok
Bol, a former lost boy now living in Boston, who has
returned to his home village in South Sudan to try to
find his nieces and nephews who have been abducted
by militants from a competing ethnic group.

When the 14 year-old Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
testified before the Council in 2001, he said "taking
my gun from me was a vital step" (S/PV4422, p. 8). In
that context, I commend the Special Representative for
her "Children, not soldiers" campaign. Boys and girls
belong in playgrounds, not battlegrounds. Around their
young shoulders, they should have school backpacks,
not ammunition belts. Their hearts should be filled with
optimism and hope, not terror at what the next day may
bring.

To make matters right for all of the world's children
is a daunting mission, but none could be more worthy of
our resources, our dedication or our time.

