Mr. Mitri: I am pleased to be briefing the Council for
the first time in my capacity as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya. I will take this
opportunity to update Council members on the situation
in Libya since the most recent comprehensive briefing
on 12 September (S/PV.6832) and the briefing on the
situation in Bani Walid they received two weeks ago
from Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun.

On 23 October, Libyans celebrated the one-year
anniversary of the liberation of their country. As we
have highlighted in briefings to this Council over the
last year, the country has moved forward in its political
transformation. The July elections were a significant
case in point, as was the formation of the new
Government last week. But as all here are aware, many
challenges remain, particularly in the area of security.

Let me first turn to the formation of the new
Government, which was completed on 31 October.
During the briefing on 12 September, Council members
were informed that the General National Congress
(GNC) had voted to elect Mustafa Abushagur as Prime
Minister-elect. Mr. Abushagur presented Cabinet
nominations on 3 October and withdrew the list on
4 October, submitting a revised "crisis Cabinet" on
7 October. The GNC voted to reject the Cabinet and
called for Mr. Abushagur to step down.

The GNC, mindful of the political vacuum created
and the need to move quickly, initiated a process of
consultations involving political blocs and independent
groupings. Mr. Ali Zeidan was subsequently elected on
14 October and given two weeks to form a Government.
He pledged to form a Government of national unity and
make security his top priority.

On 30 October, Prime Minister-elect Zeidan
presented his Cabinet of three Deputy Prime Ministers,
27 Ministers and two Ministers without portfolio to
the GNC. In forming that Cabinet, he sought inclusive
political and regional participation. A large majority
of GNC members voted for the Cabinet following the
commitment of the Prime Minister that any Ministers
who did not meet the standards of the Commission for
Integrity and Patriotism would be promptly replaced.
While it was generally well received across Libya,
a small number of protestors disrupted the GNC
proceedings, delaying the vote until the following day.

On 1 November, I issued a statement welcoming
the formation of the new Government and wishing
it success in addressing the many challenges the
new Libya is facing, including in building security
institutions, promoting national reconciliation and
upholding the rule of law.

I met with Prime Minister Ali Zeidan to convey
the United Nations commitment to working with the
new Government, with particular emphasis on the
support of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to the security sector and transitionaljustice.
The Prime Minister said that Libya wants its relations
with the international community to be based on mutual
respect and cooperation and to promote international
peace and security, and expressed the wish to build
constructive relations with regional States in a manner
that preserves security and promotes common interests.
The Prime Minister indicated that Libya's priorities will
be internal affairs, security-related issues in particular,
but also reconstruction and economic development. The
Prime Minister affirmed that, despite the challenges,
Libya is making progress, and he expressed the hope
that the international community would understand
the magnitude of the challenges faced by the State and
support its efforts in confronting them. He welcomed
the proposals for technical assistance that UNSMIL
had submitted for his consideration.

In the area of institution-building, the United
Nations will continue to work closely with the GNC and
the new Cabinet, as we did previously with the National
Transitional Council and the previous Government.
Workshops have been organized for the GNC to share
the best practices of parliamentary systems across the
globe. The United Nations also launched its second
phase of a three-month training for trainers of civil
society representatives on civic education, including
constitution-making.

With the formation of the new Government,
the major task ahead for the GNC is to intensify
consultations and reach decisions regarding the
constitutional process, starting with the establishment
of the constitutional commission. The GNC is working
towards clarifying the mechanism by which members
of the commission are to be selected. UNSMIL has
offered the GNC's Constitutional Committee technical
support on selection criteria and the subsequent
working process. We shall make ourselves available to
provide legal and other technical assistance, as needed
and as requested by the authorities. We will continue
to urge the GNC to consult widely and move swiftly on
the process of drafting a constitution.

On 23 October, the Council was briefed on the
situation in Bani Walid, a major concern and thorny
issue for the GNC and the Government over the past
week. During a speech on Liberation Day, the GNC
President conceded that mediation efforts had failed
and that a military solution was inevitable in order to
extend the State's authority to Bani Walid and arrest
those acting outside of the law. He pledged that every
effort would be made to protect the civilian population.

On 24 October, the authorities declared military
operations in Bani Walid over and announced that
the Libyan army had taken control of the city. The
Government also announced plans for ensuring
security, restoring public order and replacing brigades
with units from the Libyan army. Additional days were
required for the army to assume control amid reports of
looting and the burning of some homes.

In meetings with the President and the Prime
Minister, I strongly conveyed the concerns of the United
Nations and the international community with regard to
the protection of civilians and urged the return of the
displaced families in the shortest time possible while
ensuring basic services. I was encouraged by their
assurances that measures had been instituted to restore
public order and minimize retaliatory acts against
residents or their property, as well as for the regular
army and police to replace the brigades.

I also offered my good offices and met with
Bani Walid delegations, Government officials, GNC
members and members of political forces, with the aim
of avoiding an exacerbation of tensions between regions
and the spillover of violence to other areas.

As conditions permitted, UNSMIL and the United
Nations country team conducted four missions around
and inside Bani Walid in order to assess the needs of the
tens of thousands of internally displaced persons and
to provide assistance. UNSMIL also dispatched a team
to assist the regular army in undertaking munitions
clearance. On 31 October, the Government began to
allow families to return to Bani Walid.

The fate of those detained following the cessation
of fighting is of considerable gravity, particularly
given Libya's unresolved detention-related issues over
the past year. While the President and Prime Minister
provided assurances that all detainees would be placed
under the authority of the judiciary, I stressed the need
to institute measures to properly account for them
and ensure they were treated humanely and afforded
fair trials. UNSMIL will continue to follow up on the
situation of detainees.

In response to allegations of looting and burning
of homes and other human rights violations, the GNC
established a fact-finding committee to look into the
alleged events. The Government also established a
crisis management cell to coordinate all Government
activities related to Bani Walid.

Elsewhere, on 20 and 21 September, fighting broke
out in southern Libya between residents of the town
of Al-Shati and Tripoli-based armed brigades, amid
reports of the attempted arrests of alleged wanted
personnel affiliated with the former regime. The
regular army brought an end to the fighting and worked
with local leaders and civil society representatives to
broker an agreement. The fighting left several dead and
wounded.

Tripoli also experienced bouts of fighting between
armed brigades that left several wounded, while
Benghazi and the east continued to suffer from a
number of serious security incidents. Assassination
attempts continued, targeting security officials, a
religious leader and a brigade commander. Car bombs
also targeted two Benghazi police stations.

Following the attack on the United States
diplomatic office in Benghazi on 11 September, in
addition to official condemnation from the President
and the Prime Minister, many in Benghazi and beyond
expressed widespread outrage. They denounced the
attack and affirmed the population's demand for the
rule of law and the building of national military and
security institutions.

In the greatest expression of indignation, on
21 September, approximately 30,000 residents of
Benghazi participated in a demonstration to save
Benghazi, as they put it. Demonstrators marched on
compounds held by armed brigades and demanded
the building of a national army and police and the
integration of fighters, as well as security and prosperity
for Benghazi. They also called for brigades to evacuate
buildings, for the Government to crack down on illegal
ones and for the Prime Minister to appoint qualified
ministers to his Cabinet.

On 22 September, GNC President Mohamed Yousef
El-Magariaf and the army Chief of Staff announced a
series of measures that included the establishment of a
joint operations room under the authority of the Chief
of Staff, the dismantling of unauthorized checkpoints,
patrols and brigades and their removal from public
buildings. Steps were taken to implement those interim
measures, including by bringing more brigades under
the direct control of the Chief of Staff and appointing
military officers to head them up. The Chief of Staff
subsequently announced the deployment of a national
mobile force, initially in Tripoli, to assume control over
public buildings occupied by brigades, with a plan to
subsequently deploy in Benghazi.

As illustrated by the demonstration of 21 September,
public pressure is mounting on the Government to act
decisively and quickly to build and reform the State's
security institutions. While that large outpouring of
public support underscores the urgency of the issue,
it also provides the new Government the opportunity
to move swiftly and decisively in advancing security
sector reform.

While some progress has been made, security
conditions remain precarious. The events of Bani
Walid, Tripoli and Benghazi underscore the need
for rapid and effective policy decisions and practical
measures to be taken in the area of security sector
reform. Such initiatives include the implementation of
a national security coordination mechanism; interim
security measures while new Libyan defence and police
forces are built and supported by national intelligence;
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former revolutionaries; and a weapons and ammunition
control programme. In that way, the responsibility and
capability of maintaining security and the monopoly on
the use of legitimate force is held solely by the State, in
line with the expectations of the population.

UNSMIL has been active in advising and assisting
the Libyan authorities on those initiatives, many of
which could be implemented quickly with appropriate
assistance from the international community.
Consultations with the army Chief of Staff have been
ongoing on establishing a vision for a new Libyan
defence policy and the delineation of roles and
responsibilities as well as, notably, the drafting of a
background document for a defence white paper. Libyan
intentions are to ensure civilian oversight of the defence
forces and to create a professional and apolitical force
capable of securing the country's borders, protecting
the population and upholding the country's Constitution
and laws.

UNSMIL continues to support the Ministry of the
Interior and to help coordinate international offers of
assistance in the areas of police reform, with a view to
developing a professional Libyan police service under
the command of a uniformed chief of police.

UNSMIL has established an overarching system
of coordination meetings with regard to the security
sector, including working groups on police and defence
reform, arms and ammunition, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, to match various
offers of international assistance with requests from the
Libyan Government.

Along with security sector reform, it remains just
as urgent for the Libyan authorities to fully activate the
judiciary so that perpetrators are held to account and the
rule of law is upheld. UNSMIL continues to work on the
issue of conflict-related detentions, including by urging
the Ministries of Justice, Defence and the Interior to
accelerate the screening of detainees and to investigate
cases of mistreatment and torture. In Misrata, where
many are held outside of the State's authority, national
and local authorities have recently taken the initiative
to institute a comprehensive screening process. This is
a step forward, and UNSMIL stands ready to assist in
its implementation.
Little progress, however, has been made in
transferring detention facilities from brigades to the
Ministry of Justice. While many of the facilities are
nominally under the control of local military councils
or security committees linked to the Ministry of
Defence or Justice, some remain outside the purview of
State organs. UNSMIL continues to raise the issue, to
Visit places of detention and to receive information on
death in custody and allegations of torture of detainees.
UNSMIL continues to engage with interlocutors on
programmes such as training the judicial police and
advising the General Prosecutor to develop an overall
strategy for prosecuting former regime figures and
others who have committed serious human rights
violations. UNSMIL is also urging the GNC and the
Government to pursue a comprehensive transitional
justice strategy, including by implementing a dynamic
truth-seeking process.

In addition to the political, security and rule of
law areas, last month UNSMIL and the Government
finalized the Strategic Framework 2013-2014, which
provides a coherent United Nations country team
response in the transition period and a foundation to
adapt to evolving Libyan needs. That initiative will be
followed up with the new Cabinet.

I would like to recognize once again the progress
achieved over the past year towards stabilizing a
country bereft of democracy, institutions, human
rights and the rule of law over the past 42 years. The
problems faced should not be underestimated but are
not insurmountable. Building a democratic State is
a cumulative process that needs time and patience,
but it necessitates, first and foremost, a sustained,
coherent and determined effort by the Government.
One year since the liberation, the people of Libya are
demanding more of their elected authorities. That is a
sign of a vibrant democratic life. UNSMIL has spent
the past year working closely with the Government,
civil society and the international community to ensure
that no effort is spared in helping achieve the objective
of democratic State-building. I look forward to
continuing our engagement with all the determination
and perseverance it deserves.

