Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Ian Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
his briefing, and in thanking the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2008/454).

After years of internal conflict, Nepal deserves
peace, stability and prosperity. Momentum in realizing
this hope is now evolving in Nepal. We congratulate
the people and the Government of Nepal on the
successful conclusion of the Constituent Assembly
election and on the progress made towards a
democratic, representative process and the creation of a
federal democratic republic.

That accomplishment is indeed a historic triumph
for the people of Nepal, and we are looking forward to
the successful holding of the presidential election
tomorrow. The role of the Nepalese Electoral
Commission in the Constituent Assembly election is
commendable. The Commission has served as an
important catalyst in the promotion of electoral
democracy in the country. My delegation also
recognizes the 25 June 2008 signing by the Seven-
Party Alliance of an agreement which provides for the
time-bound solution of some key issues in the peace
process.

Those achievements should serve as a stepping
stone for further tangible progress on other critical
goals as stipulated in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). We therefore believe that all
concerned parties in Nepal should remain committed to
the peace process and exercise the utmost restraint with
regard to actions that could undermine the peace
process.

The conclusion of the Constituent Assembly
election is only the beginning of the hard work of
hammering out a democratic process and the formation
of a representative government. In the post-election
period, there remain critical matters that the future
government of Nepal will have to tackle.

As the Secretary-General observed in his report,
completion of the peace process remains a challenge.
Management of arms and arms personnel still needs to
be completed; this is one of the main pillars of the
CPA. Former combatants have yet to be integrated and
rehabilitated. That will require not only sufficient
funding but also institutional and administrative
measures. In this regard, my delegation attaches great
importance to the formation of a special committee
mandated to verify combatants and to integrate and
rehabilitate them.

Robust democracy in Nepal will come about if
support is truly popular and includes all segments of
Nepalese society across political lines and ethnicity. In
this regard, we welcome the representation of a variety
of ethnic groups that had previously been under-
represented in the Assembly.

With regard to the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN), my delegation commends the
Mission, under the leadership of Mr. Martin, for the
technical assistance and advisory services it provided
to the Nepalese authorities before and during the
election. With the successful conclusion of the
election, my delegation welcomes the Secretary-
General's recommendation for a phased, gradual
drawdown and withdrawal of UNMIN staff. As to the
future of UNMIN, we take note of the Government of
Nepal's letter of 8 July 2008 which, inter alia, requests
an extension of the remainder of UNMIN's mandate for
an additional six months.

Indonesia believes that since UNMIN's
deployment was requested by Nepal, its future should
naturally be decided by the people and the Government
of that country. For its part, the Council should stand
ready to respond to the wishes of the Nepalese people
unanimously and decisively, as it did when UNMIN
was established in January 2007. Indonesia thus
supports the request of the Government of Nepal and
the recommendation of the Secretary-General, as just
conveyed by Mr. Ian Martin, for the extension of the
mandate of UNMIN for a period of six months.
Continuing on a smaller scale, UNMIN could focus on
the ongoing work of monitoring the management of
arms and armed personnel, and assisting Nepal in
moving the peace process towards its conclusion.

