Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to thank the Chairmen of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their informative briefings. Switzerland is
firmly committed to combating terrorism and has a
great interest in effective and legitimate measures to
ensure the full implementation of United Nations
sanctions.

I shall limit my remarks to two issues: first, the
challenges in implementing the sanctions regime of the
1267 Committee and, secondly, the need to improve
coordination in order to increase the effectiveness of
the collective response to terrorism.

Switzerland commends the efforts of the 1267
Committee to improve listing and delisting procedures.
We welcome the important improvements that are
reflected in resolution 1822 (2008) and in the
Committee's revised guidelines adopted last December.
However, some concerns remain, as highlighted by
recent studies, including the report by the Eminent
Jurists Panel on Terrorism, Counter-Terrorism and
Human Rights and the latest report of the Monitoring
Team. Critics see the continuing lack of fair and clear
procedures within the current sanctions regime as
undermining the effective implementation of targeted
sanctions. Several States face major legal challenges in
implementing the 1267 Committee's sanctions regime.
Member States find themselves in a dilemma when
national or regional courts question the legality of
domestic measures to implement sanctions.

Switzerland itself is a defendant in a case before
the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
The applicant is challenging the legality of our
domestic measures to implement United Nations
sanctions, while in fact targeting the United Nations
sanctions system as a whole. The outcome of this case
will affect not only Switzerland but also the 46 other
States members of the Council of Europe. The proposal
by Switzerland and other countries last year to
establish an experts panel appointed by the Security
Council to assist the sanctions Committees in the
consideration of delisting requests could be a way to
strengthen the existing procedures and to help targeted
sanctions to withstand appeals in national or regional
courts.

In the new resolution that will review the
measures set forth in resolution 1822 (2008), the
Security Council may wish to take into account
growing concerns about the respect of human rights in
the fight against terrorism. By doing so, it would
enhance the effectiveness and legitimacy of its
sanctions regime.

Switzerland welcomes ongoing efforts to increase
coordination between the three counter-terrorism
Committees of the Council. It is essential to ensure the
integrated implementation of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and coordination between the
relevant parties in that regard. In that context,
Switzerland, along with other States, launched an
international process on global counter-terrorism
cooperation in 2007. One of the recommendations that
emerged was to hold regular meetings of national
coordinators and focal points of Member States to
review the status of efforts to combat terrorism at the
national and international levels.

With the support of the relevant bodies of the
United Nations, Switzerland envisages the holding of
informal international and regional meetings that
would provide Member States with a platform to
address their practical counter-terrorism needs. Such a
platform could also serve as an informal forum to
increase interaction between representatives of national
agencies with the relevant United Nations bodies.
Switzerland and the other sponsors will soon provide
more detail about this idea.

