Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and to wish you and the delegation of
friendly Germany every success.

The people of Yemen aspire to peace, security
and stability. The need for peace has been repeatedly
underscored by President of the Republic Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, in particular in his most
recent speech before Parliament, which convened
in Hadhramaut governorate last Saturday. In this
regard, the Yemeni Government has made major
efforts to arrive at a lasting peace. To that noble end
we participated in many rounds of negotiations under
the auspices of the United Nations. Nonetheless, the
armed Houthi militias, supported and pushed by Iran,
have deliberately worked to ensure the failure of the
negotiations and to undermine prospects for peace
through their rejection of what was agreed upon by the
most recent Stockholm Agreement.

More than four months have elapsed without
the slightest progress in the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement because the Houthi militias
refuse to work towards peace, while using delaying
tactics accompanied by arrogance, in order to benefit
from the suffering of the Yemeni people and achieve
political and military gains so as to implement their
sectarian and dynastic projects.

During this period, the Government of Yemen
has shown a great deal of patience and flexibility,
as have our brothers in the coalition, with a View to
implementing the Stockholm Agreement. This would
be a positive step towards achieving lasting peace based
on the agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference and Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015), with
a View to relieving the suffering of the Yemeni people
and ensuring that humanitarian assistance reaches
those who are starving, ill or suffer from cholera. This
disease has resulted in the death of hundreds of our
people because the Houthi militias refuse to allow the
delivery of vaccines to the areas affected. I would have
liked to hear Mr. Lowcock refer to this issue, which has
caused an increase in the number of deaths resulting
from cholera, which is spreading in areas controlled by
the Houthi militias.

The Government of Yemen has worked
constructively with the United Nations, through its
Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths. We have
supported all the redeployment and withdrawal plans,
including the plan presented by Lieutenant General
Michael Lollesgaard on 18 February, which has two
phases. We agreed to begin implementing the first phase
by taking measures and actions to resolve security-
related issues. His Excellency President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi, during a meeting with the Special Envoy
at a time when the Houthi militias had rejected the
redeployment, presented his vision for addressing the
security issues, including the establishment of a joint
tripartite mechanism. That proposal was approved by
the Special Envoy and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard.
However, the Houthi militias rejected it. Those militias
often send messages to the Council on the eve of its
meetings on Yemen, providing verbal acceptance and
later refusing to implement on the ground. They go
back on their statements by deceiving the international
community and the Security Council. The militias
hamper the work of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee in Al-Hudaydah and prevent any kind of
progress. They have repeatedly refused to allow the
Chair of the Committee to pass through and meet with
the Government team in regions under the Yemeni
Government's control.

On the other side, members of the Government
team risk their lives to participate in the meetings that
are convened by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard in
areas under the control of the Houthi militias in order
to facilitate the work of the United Nations mission and
support its efforts to carry out withdrawals and execute
redeployment. The militias target the sites of the joint
meetings with the Chair of the Committee by launching
mortar shells, drones and Katyusha rockets against
them. That is a flagrant Violation of United Nations
rules and clear intention to undermine the Al-Hudaydah
agreement and the peace process as a whole.

Last week, the Houthi militias targeted the convoy
of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard and humanitarian
workers preventing them from reaching the Red Sea
Mills, which contain 51,000 tons of grains, enough to
feed 3.7 million Yemenis for a month. That could allow
the grain stocks to rot.

I agree with the representative of the United
Kingdom in asking Mr. Lowcock: Who is preventing
United Nations agencies and World Food Programme
from reaching the Red Sea Mills? The Yemeni
Government is always ready to cooperate with the
United Nations and its agencies, including the World
Food Programme, in order to facilitate access to the
Mills and make sure that humanitarian assistance
arrives to the safe areas that are under the control of the
Yemeni Government.

The number of Violations committed by the Houthi
militias since 18 December 2018 has surpassed 3,047.
They have sought to provoke the national army forces
and the Arab coalition, claimed numerous victims and
caused enormous material damage. In fact, 134 martyrs
have fallen and 668 people have been injured, including
women and children. The militias continue to intensify
their confrontation with the national army forces.
They use the territories of Al-Hudaydah governorate
to launch their drones and speed boats. They continue
to target civilians and public and private facilities and
to send more military reinforcements and fortify their
defensive sites by planting mines, erecting barricades
and digging tunnels. More than 777 tunnels have been
dug to date, while the number was 70 in December
2018. All of that demonstrates that the Houthi militias
do not have a sincere desire to implement Stockholm
Agreement. Instead, they are exploiting time,
misleading the Council and deceiving the international
community.

The Houthis are not only creating obstacles to
the Al-Hudaydah agreement, but are also refusing to
implement the agreement concerning the release of
prisoners, arbitrarily arrested detainees, the forcibly
disappeared and those who are under house arrest. That
was the only agreement which was reached before the
round of negotiations in Sweden. The Houthi militias
are trying to manipulate the agreement, which calls
for the release of everyone, in order to make gains
to the detriment of those who and their families are
suffering. There can be no political bargaining on this
humanitarian issue.

The Yemeni Government has adopted a number of
economic measures and taken decisions in an attempt
to save the Yemeni economy, improve the economic
situation, end the collapse of our national currency,
relieve the suffering of our people, improve living and
humanitarian conditions, and reclaim the monetary
cycle, financial flows and business transactions from
the black market to the official banking market,
which is committed to installing controls and meeting
international requirements in order to combat the
financing of terrorism and money-laundering and to
limit randomized speculation against our currency,
while dropping the demand concerning foreign
currency.

The Yemeni Government has undertaken a number
of measures to honour its commitments to our citizens.
We pay salaries to retirees and to public civil servants in
Al-Hudaydah governorate, as well as to those who work
in the education and health sectors. We intend to pay
the salaries of all civil servants as soon as we can start
collecting and managing all governmental revenues, in
cooperation with the international community.

We thank donor countries and international
organizations for their generous support pledged at the
2019 high-level conference to fund the humanitarian
response in Yemen, which was convened in Geneva on
26 February with the aim of alleviating the suffering of
the Yemeni people. We particularly thank the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State
of Kuwait, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany as well
as all the friendly and brotherly countries. We reiterate
our appeal to make sure that those pledges are honoured.

On Saturday 13 April, an extraordinary session of
Parliament was convened in the city of Seiyun, in the
governorate of Hadhramaut. That was a confirmation
and demonstration of the unity of the Yemeni people,
regardless of their parties, positions and social class.
The session was based on legal grounds and national
spirit, while deferring to the leadership of Parliament
to activate the role of the constitutional institutions,
achieve many legislative tasks that support the executive
authority in restoring the State, put an end to the coup
d'etat and armed rebellion by the Houthi militias,
supported by Iran, restore State control throughout
the country and attain peace, security and stability, in
addition to implementing the outcome of the national
dialogue and pursuing the political process. At this
session, Parliament is discussing, inter alia, the 2019
budget submitted by the Prime Minister.

In 2014, the Government of Yemen signed with
the United Nations a programme of work to put to an
end to child recruitment. In December 2018, it also
signed a road map to implement the plan and prevent
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts.
The Government is working with the country team
to implement that plan. The Republic of Yemen has
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and the Yemeni
Government makes great efforts to rehabilitate and
reintegrate the children who had been recruited by
the Houthi militias. We return them to their families
through Ma'reb Rehabilitation Centre for Children,
which is funded by the King Salman Humanitarian Aid
and Relief Centre. In this regard, we thank the coalition
countries, notably the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, for
their great efforts to help the Yemeni Government
protect children and prevent their recruitment while
rehabilitating and reintegrating them into society.

I would like to ask Ms. Gamba the following
question on recruiting girls. Who is responsible for
recruiting girls? The Houthis have an armed group
called the Zeinabites. This armed group forces
girls to be recruited while taking advantage of their
humanitarian circumstances.

I want to reaffirm once again and to add to what
Mr. Lowcock said about the Visa issue. The Yemeni
Government has demonstrated its willingness to
cooperate with the United Nations and its agencies by
issuing visas through all its embassies throughout the
world without delay or hindrance. It is our responsibility
as the Yemeni Government to support the United
Nations efforts. However, those who are impeding the
entry of United Nations personnel and its agencies to
Yemen are the Houthis themselves.

We call on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibility and maintain credibility while
implementing its resolutions on Yemen. It should
exert greater pressure on the armed Houthi militias to
implement the Stockholm agreement without delay. The
agreement is the focus of attention and the cornerstone
of the political process. It is necessary therefore to
identify the entity that is undermining the agreement
because its failure would kill the hopes of the Yemeni
people to achieve sustained peace and end the conflict.

