Archbishop Auza (Holy See): My delegation believes
that the worst development in the evolution of armed
conflict is that civilians not only are less protected and
not spared from armed conflicts but have increasingly
become targets. The use of civilians as weapons of war
represents the most execrable kind of human behaviour.
The international community should show itself at its
best by holding those who commit such heinous crimes
accountable and by rising above narrow national and
geopolitical interests to spare innocent civilians from
the scourge of war. Unspeakable violence wilfully
inflicted upon civilian populations and the flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law in many
current conflicts are becoming commonplace.

Today's discussion provides a much-needed
opportunity to focus on the impact that modern
weapons and technology are having on civilians caught
up in armed conflict. The technological modernization
of weapons blurs the distinction between weapons
of mass destruction and conventional weapons. So-
called modernized conventional weapons increasingly
resemble weapons of mass destruction in terms oftheir
indiscriminately targeting civilians and destroying
extensive areas, together with their inhabitants. Any
weapon with such devastating impacts on civilians is
against all international humanitarian law and all ideas
of civilization.

The intentional destruction of the infrastructure
critical to the survival of the civilian population,
such as hospitals and water supplies, has become a
strategy of choice in recent and ongoing conflicts in
many areas of the Middle East. It is the obligation of
the international community, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, to protect civilians and their
critical infrastructure from this brutality and barbarity.
A little over a week ago, Pope Francis observed:

"We say '[War]: Never again,' yet we continue to
produce weapons and sell them to those who are at
war with one another."

Copious international discussions on ending
violence and conflicts are almost pointless if at the
same time untold quantities of arms are continuously
produced, sold or gifted to dictatorial regimes,
terrorist groups or organized-crime syndicates. Arms
producers, traders and traffickers must be made aware
that they are directly and indirectly abetting mass-
atrocity crimes, enabling violators of fundamental
human rights, and turning back the development of
entire peoples and populations. Strengthening relevant
laws and conventions at the multilateral, bilateral and
national levels is a necessary step in the right direction
in the protection of civilians caught in armed conflicts.

My delegation believes that the Security Council's
mission to protect innocent civilians caught in armed
conflicts should be considered within the framework
of the responsibility to protect. There exists a graver
responsibility, first for the States where the crimes
were committed, and then for the international
community, to defend those who are exposed to war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and ethnic
cleansing. Moreover, the 2005 World Summit Outcome
provides that if a State is manifestly failing to protect
its populations, the international community must
be prepared to take appropriate collective action in a
timely and decisive manner and in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.

In his 2016 report entitled "Mobilizing collective
action: the next decade of the responsibility to protect",
the Secretary-General affirms,

"It is time for Member States to show greater
resolve in defending and upholding the norms that
safeguard humanity, on which the responsibility to
protect rests. If we do not, the achievements made
in the first decade of the responsibility to protect
will be eroded." (S/2016/620, para. 62)

Due to the unacceptable human costs of continued
inaction, the Holy See appeals once more for the
United Nations to define clear and effective criteria for
applying the principle of the responsibility to protect
and integrating it with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
