Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me join
others in congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency and, of course, assure
you of Sweden's full support during this month. I also
take this opportunity to thank Bolivia for a successful
presidency last month. We thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for being with us
again and for her informative briefing to the Security
Council today.

The International Criminal Court plays an
indispensable role in the pursuit of international justice
and accountability. At a time when the Court, as well
as the rules-based international order itself, are under
increased pressure, renewed support for the ICC is
crucial. We must all respect the integrity of the ICC;
not doing so undermines our commitment to ending
impunity for atrocity crimes. It is also worth recalling
that the ICC is a Court oflast resort under the principle of
complementarity: it acts only when national judiciaries
are unable or unwilling to investigate and prosecute
serious international crimes. Therefore, the Council
must take timely and effective measures to enable the
Court to carry out its mandate. That is particularly true
for the situation in Libya, where suspects remain at
large despite arrest warrants issued against them.

We are gravely concerned about the recent reports
of escalating violence and civilian casualties around
Tripoli and Derna. The forced eviction of the Tawergha
population and the abductions of military, civil society,
political and foreign targets are deeply worrisome
as well. In addition, the treatment of international
migrants in transit, including reports of killings, sexual
violence and torture committed in detention centres,
is particularly concerning. Violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights must be investigated and those responsible
brought to justice.

We reiterate yet again our strong support for the
Office of the Prosecutor and commend its steadfast
commitment to bringing justice to victims of serious
international crimes in Libya. Despite the continued
volatility of the security situation on the ground,
the Office of the Prosecutor has continued to pursue
its important task with great determination. We are
pleased to see the inclusion of the gender perspective
in the report, in line with the Office's June 2014 policy
paper on sexual and gender-based crimes.

We also greatly appreciate the support that the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salame and the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office
have provided. The efforts of international and regional
organizations, including civil society, are also very
important. We are grateful for their unwavering
commitment to serve and support the justice sector in
Libya, despite the harsh circumstances.

We regret that seven years have passed since the
arrest warrant against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi was
issued, and yet he remains at large. We also regret that
the arrest warrants against Al-Werfalli and Al-Tuhamy
likewise remain outstanding since our previous
briefing on this matter in May (see S/PV.8250). The
reports of executions carried out by Al-Werfalli on
multiple occasions, possibly amounting to war crimes,
are deeply disturbing.

We support the Prosecutor's call on Libya to
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and
immediately arrest and surrender all the suspects to
the Court. We stress that cooperation with the Libyan
Prosecutor-General's Office, Libyan authorities, State
parties, other United Nations States Members and other
relevant entities is crucial to assist the Office of the
Prosecutor in fulfilling its mandate.

The ICC referral is an essential part ofthe Council's
broader measures in relation to Libya, including
sanctions. The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
and its Chair are currently on a mission to Libya and
we will receive this mission's input to the Council
next week. It is important that the Council address
the situation comprehensively. Accountability and
strengthening the rule of law, in which the ICC plays
an important role, is an essential component of the
Council's broader efforts towards peace and stability in
Libya. Cooperation with the ICC therefore deserves the
Council's full support.

Finally, I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate Sweden's sincere appreciation to the Court
and its officials in all organs. Their work continues to
make a significant contribution to accountability for
perpetrators andjustice for victims of serious crimes of
international concern. We also extend our gratitude to
the Kingdom of the Netherlands in its capacity as host
nation of the Court.

