Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for personally attending the meeting
today. I think that underlines the importance that
Kuwait, based on its history and experience, attaches
to this issue. While I am praising you, I would also
like to extend my congratulations to your Permanent
Representative, Mr. Mansour Alotaibi, who worked
very hard to get this done today. It is also his
personal success.

What Kuwait did is very much in line with what
Germany and France did during their joint presidencies
when we placed humanitarian issues very high on the
Security Council's agenda. I think it is very important
that this body deal with those issues.

I would like to thank both of the briefers for their
very impressive reports. I was dismayed by what Peter
Maurer told us at the beginning ofthe meeting that there
has actually been an alarming increase in the number
of missing persons, despite the fact that we have clear
international laws on that issue. That should really
concern us. I would also like to express on this occasion
my gratitude to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), which has 150 years of experience, for
what it does and what its work means and, when there
are successes, what that means for individual families.

Germany is participating, of course. The German
Red Cross is also working very hard on the issue. It has
a long history, but at the same time we are focusing right
now on current issues. We are working hard to locate
the relatives of refugees and migrants who have arrived
in Germany in the past years. Most of the requests that
we have been able to meet came from Afghanistan,
Syria, Somalia and Eritrea.

Syria is, for us, the toughest case. The Secretary-
General, in his report (S/2019/373), expresses particular
concern about Syria. There are more than 10,000 cases
of missing persons, but the total number of people
arbitrarily detained and missing persons is believed to
be more than tenfold that amount. I think our colleague
from the United Kingdom mentioned 60,000. I think,
if one takes into consideration everything, it would
be even more. The problem and challenge in Syria is
that this continues and there is no end to the missing
persons; their numbers continue to grow. We therefore
encourage the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria to work with the parties to secure the release
of detainees and the location of missing persons, and
we call for full cooperation.

It is clear that the Syrian regime has engaged
in a systematic and widespread pattern of forcibly
disappearing persons for political reasons, retaliation
and gathering-intelligence. That is unacceptable and
needs to be to be addressed.

Unfortunately, Syria is not the only case. Others
have been mentioned already, including that of Nigeria.
We all know the heartbreaking cases of the girls who
have been abducted by Boko Haram. There have been
other cases in South Sudan, Myanmar and, during
an earlier war, in the Balkans. My British colleague
mentioned the conflict between Serbia and Kosovo.
There are still missing persons from that conflict today.
We encourage all efforts to resolve those issues, which
is very important not only for the families, but also
for reconciliation.

With regard to resolution 2474 (2019), we
co-sponsored it and we are very happy with it, but we
would have liked the point with regard to accountability
to be stronger. There is no reference to international
criminal mechanisms because some members of the
Council were against that. The Rome Statute clearly
refers to enforced disappearance as a crime against
humanity. We would have liked to have that reference
in the resolution. We also want to take this occasion
to underline our full support for the work of the
International Criminal Court.

I want to come back to the main issue, which is that
this is a humanitarian issue. That was underlined in the
remarks by the President of the ICRC. In the end, we
have to make sure that all parties uphold the right of
families to receive information on the fate of missing
relatives. Governments, armed forces and armed groups
have an obligation to provide information and to help
reunite families. We call on all parties to work with
the ICRC to ensure that appropriate mechanisms are in
place that deal with missing persons, and that has to be
done early on. The President of the Council mentioned
how important it is for this to be already done when a
conflict breaks out.

At the same time, in conflicts, as is the casein Syria
and other places, we need Governments and parties to
allow and facilitate the access of humanitarian personnel,
and we need to safeguard humanitarian space.

Ultimately, resolving the issue of missing persons
is very important for reconciliation and having a policy
of preventing disappearance in place is very important
for conflict prevention. That is why Germany has
ratified the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. We also
believe that the work of the International Commission
on Missing Persons is important.

Lastly, I would like to refer to what my colleague
from Equatorial Guinea said with regard to how
important is that the Security Council deal with
questions of international humanitarian law and that
international humanitarian law be respected because
that relates directly to the preservation of peace and
security and to the prevention of conflicts.

