Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his presentation. The established practice of receiving
information from the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the Council also greatly pleases us. We also
appreciate and believe the information provided by the
International Committee ofthe Red Cross to be of great
importance. In addition, we thank the Mission of the
Republic of Korea, as President of the Security Council
for this month, for having convened this open debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
circulated by the representative of Jordan as President of
the Human Security Network. In our national capacity,
we would like to underscore the following additional
elements.

We acknowledge the multidimensional nature of
conflict and the increasing need to respond with more
complex mandates for peacekeeping missions that
include clear protection aspects. As the concept note
before us (S/2013/75, annex) points out, some ofthe most
significant elements are establishing early warning
mechanisms, supporting the efforts of host country
national authorities to implement their responsibilities
in protecting civilians, and assisting the host country in
the effective functioning of its rule of law and security
institutions.

The international community must put further
emphasis on the necessary national capacity-building
in order to ensure accountability for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, in
particular the most serious breaches. It must also work
not only on security sector reform but also on reforming
the judicial sector and on establishing specific capacity
for the prosecution and trial of the most serious crimes
against humanity.

As we have indicated on previous occasions,
justice is necessary for peace to be sustainable. To
fully exercise its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security, the Security Council has the duty to
promote the full exercise of the rule of law and justice,
at both the national and international levels.

Concerning the international response, the Security
Council should play a more proactive role, establishing
or strengthening international commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions and following up on their
findings. These all are tools that the Council can use
with greater regularity and frequency.

Greater consistency is also needed in referring cases
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) and in terms
of follow-up and support, including financial support
and the establishment of cooperation obligations with
the Court. The relationship between the Court and
the Security Council should be governed by unbiased
principles of general application. That is why we
support the idea of establishing a verification protocol
or checklist for the consideration of referrals. We once
again urge the Council to establish a subsidiary body in
order to provide follow-up on such cases.

My Government remains concerned at the serious
situation in Syria and by the lack of accountability with
regard to breaches of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We reiterate our
request that the Council refer the Syrian situation to the
ICC, and we hope that the Council will respond to the
call made by a significant number of countries in this
area. The number of civilians affected by the conflict
and by the actions of both parties has now reached
shocking numbers, as highlighted this morning by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

As it has been necessary to broaden traditional
military objectives for peacekeeping missions and
provide for a greater civilian presence in that context, we
also believe that it is key, as indicated in the President's
concept note, to broaden the range of actors involved
in the task of protecting civilians and strengthening
the ties and cooperation of the United Nations in that
area with Governments and regional and civil society
organizations.

As indicated in paragraph 52 of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/376), peacekeeping missions
are not the only protection actor on the ground. Other
United Nations entities and humanitarian organizations,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross
and a number of non-governmental organizations, have
for some time played a recognized role that is of vital
importance.

In some places where civilians face serious threats,
it is not actually viable to establish a peacekeeping
mission. In such circumstances, the protection of
civilians might be very much enhanced by the presence
of disarmed civilians working towards that end. Those
kinds of actors often have the advantage of being
involved from a very early stage. That is particularly
true of civil society organizations, which can work
more closely with their counterparts on the ground.

The experience of those organizations in developing
methods for the protection of civilians without resorting
to the use of armed force is also very valuable in order to
prevent the risk of the "bunkerization" of humanitarian
operations. As indicated by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 20 ofthe annex to his report, we must enhance
our capacity to build acceptance among communities
and the parties to conflict in the context of sustained
processes and to explore that type of approach more
broadly.

My delegation cannot but mention in this context,
as did the Secretary-General in his statement, the
invaluable opportunity presented by the upcoming
United Nations Final Conference on the Arms Trade
Treaty, to be held next March. That Conference will
represent a significant opportunity in the context of
the protection of civilians. As noted in paragraph 25
of the report, the poorly regulated arms trade and the
widespread availability and misuse of weapons have
a human cost. We must demonstrate our commitment
to the protection of civilians by reaching a robust
agreement at the Conference.

Finally, Costa Rica welcomes the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/2) adopted earlier. We would
like specifically to highlight the elements thereof that
we deem important: the reference to armed forces and
groups that persist in committing violations and abuses
against children; the call concerning the importance
of cooperation between States and the International
Criminal Court; the commitment to ensuring effective
follow-up of the Council's decisions in that respect;
the reaffirmation of the Council's readiness to adopt
appropriate measures aimed at those who violate
international humanitarian law and human rights
law; and the reaffirmation of the provisions on the
responsibility to protect contained in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1).

