Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The prospects for peace
and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina have never been
brighter. The General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina initialled in Dayton, Ohio, last
month and signed in Paris yesterday ushers in a new era
of hope where there was despair, accommodation and
cooperation where there were confrontation and conflict.
This is in no way a perfect peace; that is to be expected
after three and half years of hostilities. There is no doubt
that the scars of the deep wounds that the people of
Bosnia inflicted upon one another during the war will
remain visible for a long time to come, but the

 

Agreement signed yesterday offers the best prospects for a
peaceful future. The onus is squarely on the parties:
resumption of hostilities or adherence to the Dayton Peace
Agreement. They should seize the opportunity presented by
this Agreement to create conditions conducive to a secure
and durable peace in their country. They should turn over
a new leaf and start a journey on the road to national
reconciliation and healing and a peaceful future. They owe
this to future generations of Bosnians. The international
community can only assist them in building a sense of
nationhood and unity, justice and a shared destiny.

We urge the donor community to contribute
generously to the process of reconstruction and
development in Bosnia. But this too will depend upon the
readiness and willingness of the parties to cooperate not
only with their partners but, more important, among
themselves.

As we bid farewell to the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR), we bow our heads in homage to the
United Nations peace-keepers who paid the supreme price
in the service of peace in the former Yugoslavia. We also
pay a well deserved tribute to all the men and women of
UNPROFOR who tried in difficult conditions to keep the
peace when there was clearly none to keep. Their work, as
well as that of those who lost their lives, was not in vain.
Many lives were saved thanks to their contribution and
sacrifices.

A lot has been said and written about the United
Nations peace-keeping operation in the former Yugoslavia.
The lessons to be drawn from it are not ordinary lessons.
We have to do a lot of soul-searching in order to draw
conclusions about the many setbacks and about the
successes. There is no doubt that the United Nations peace
forces played an important role in Bosnia. But they were
sent on a mission impossible. The ferocity displayed by the
warring parties, to kill each other with total abandon, made
it imperative for the international community to intervene
to rescue Bosnia from self-destruction. When the United
Nations made the decision to get involved in Bosnia, this
was in a bid to search for a peaceful solution to the
conflict. Unfortunately, the United Nations peace-keeping
operation became one of the victims of the war.

First of all, the parties to the conflict became
unreliable partners in the search for peace. They felt, with
differing degrees of bellicosity, that they could gain more
on the battlefield than at the negotiating table. Secondly, the
United Nations did not have at its disposal the financial,
manpower and logistical resources required for the task.

 

UNPROFOR came under heavy attack for failing to do
things it was not equipped to do. Those who bore the
main brunt of the war thought that UNPROFOR would
fight the war on their behalf. In their situation of distress
this was understandable. But they missed a fundamental
point: UNPROFOR could not fight the war on the side of
any of the parties, nor was it ever mandated to fight a
war. It was of paramount importance that it remain an
impartial arbiter, since its primary mission was to keep
the warring parties separated and to ensure delivery of
humanitarian supplies to the needy. But it was certainly
not a fighting force. The population was disappointed that
UNPROFOR could not provide them with the
impenetrable protection against attack that they had hoped
for.

Thus, the credibility of the United Nations was put
on the line. Its reliability as an instrument for the
maintenance of international peace and security was
called into question. The perceived failure of the United
Nations to restore peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina
resulted in the parties seeking help elsewhere.
Nevertheless, the victims of tragedies, such as that which
befell the people of Bosnia, continue to look to the United
Nations for assistance in the mitigation of their conflicts
and the alleviation of the misery and wretchedness Visited
upon them by these wars.

To recap, the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina offers the best promise
for peace in that area so far. Whether there will be a
bright or a bleak future in that country and its
surroundings rests with the people of the area themselves
and with their neighbours. The Peace Agreement has laid
down the framework, the starting point from which they
can make improvements where there are shortcomings in
the Agreement. But what is most important is the political
will and the commitment to give peace a chance.
Excruciating as it may sound, the unhappy past should, as
much as possible, be forgotten and the innocent people
exculpated so that they can resume leading normal lives.
The machinery is in place to deal with the perpetrators of
war crimes. There should be no place for them to hide;
they must be pursued to the ends of the Earth and
punished for their crimes.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

