The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Germany, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
the Netherlands, Pakistan and Turkey, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ghafoorzai
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table; Mr.
Rudolph (Germany), Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy), Mr. Biegman
(Netherlands), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan) and Mr. Celem
(Turkey), took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 11 April 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Ambassador Engin A. Ansay, Permanent Observer of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, during the Council's forthcoming
discussion of the item entitled 'The situation in

I"

Afghanistan .

That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/ 1997/305.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Engin
A. Ansay.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/240 and Corr.l, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General dated 16
March 1997 on the situation in Afghanistan.

The first speaker is the Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, on whom I now call.


