Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I would like thank you, Sir,
for convening today's meeting, and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I am also grateful to
Ambassador Riyad Mansour, Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine, and Ambassador David
Roet, Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel, for
their statements.

The Japanese statement today touches upon two
issues: first, on the Middle East peace process and,
secondly, on the situation in Syria. For the sake of time,
however, I will read out only the first part, as the text
will be distributed in the Chamber.

Japan is deeply concerned about the recent
escalation of violence between the Gaza Strip and
Israel, including the launch of an Israeli ground
operation in Gaza, and the growing number of
casualties. It is deplorable, that despite efforts by the
international community, including the Egyptian
proposal and the Security Council's demand for a
ceasefire, violence continues and Palestinian militants
have not accepted any international peace efforts. Both
Israeli and Palestinian civilians face a serious security
threat. We profoundly deplore the loss of so many lives
among innocent civilians. The current vicious cycle of
violence might also pose a great risk to regional peace
and security.

Japan joins the Council and the Secretary-General
in calling for de-escalation and an end to the violence.
The international community must speak with one
voice to urge both sides to exercise maximum restraint
and calm the situation. In that regard, we would like to
commend Egypt, the United Nations, the United States
and others for their mediation efforts. Japan will play its
part in such international efforts to restore a ceasefire.
Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe spoke with Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu by phone today
and appealed to him to exercise maximum restraint and
to make a courageous decision to achieve a ceasefire as
soon as possible.

Japan's Parliamentary senior Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Nobuo Kishi, has embarked on a trip to
the region. Last weekend he had meetings with Egyptian
President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi and Foreign Minister
Sameh Shokry in Cairo. Senior Vice-Minister Kishi
conveyed Japan's support for the important role played
by Egypt, especially its proposal for a ceasefire and its
willingness to work to calm the situation and achieve a
lasting ceasefire in coordination with the international
community. He will be continuing his Middle East tour
and will travel to Jordan, Israel, Palestine and Turkey
starting today.

Japan will also continue to help address the
worsening humanitarian situation in Gaza. In
consultation with United Nations agencies, including
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Japan will consider
providing humanitarian assistance based on the needs
on the ground.

Even against that harsh backdrop, we should
not lose hope for a two-State solution. The crisis in
Gaza underscores the urgent need to achieve a just,
sustainable and comprehensive peace. It is important for
the international community to overcome the current
crisis and foster a proper environment that would allow
both the Palestinian and the Israeli parties to resume
talks.

Japan will continue to assist Palestinian
State-building efforts that aim at achieving a two-
State solution. The Corridor for Peace and Prosperity
and the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian
Countries for Palestinian Development are part of
our initiatives. My Mission will elaborate on Japan's
assistance at an appropriate occasion in future.

