Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me begin by thanking Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx for their briefings, which we very much appreciated. We are also very grateful to the participant from civil society, Ms. Mona Freij, for her courageous briefing to the Security Council today. Her briefing serves to remind us of the horrors perpetrated by Da'esh, as well as the resilience of the human spirit in surviving and overcoming such devastating experiences. On the subject of resilience, we note with concern the findings of latest strategic-level report (S/2020/95) of the Secretary-General on the resilience of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its toxic ideology, despite seemingly devastating setbacks. It is clear that - despite having lost its territorial presence in its self-declared caliphate in the Middle East and having suffered the death of its leader and other senior figures - ISIL nevertheless continues to be resilient, remaining a threat to international peace and security, which merits the Security Council's attention. That demonstrates the group's highly adaptive and resourceful nature and the dogged commitment of some of its followers to its ideology and agenda, which will require our equal determination to effectively counter their actions and narrative. In doing so we must ensure that there is accountability for the group's barbaric crimes. We commend the continued efforts of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant on the significant strides that it is making in that challenging task. We are of course particularly alarmed by the report's findings concerning our continent. The report is in line with our own assessment, which suggests that ISIL has begun to expand its presence on the African continent in the face of pressure in the Middle East and elsewhere. Those efforts have seen the group attempt to exploit the continent's security challenges to perpetuate its existence and agenda via regional affiliates that utilize Africa as an operational base and a target for attacks. Allow me to reiterate South Africa's steadfast commitment to standing together with our fellow A frican brothers and sisters in the fight against terrorism on the continent so that its terrible scourge is not allowed to erode the hard-won progress that we have collectively made in prioritizing the continent's development. As previously stated, South Africa remains committed to addressing terrorism holistically. That is to say that we believe that, in order to effectively counter the scourge of terrorism, we must give the same weight to addressing the conditions and factors that give rise to and sustain it that we give to addressing its security dimensions. It is also critical that counter- terrorism measures be implemented in full compliance with international law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian law, and that States avoid unilateral counter-terrorism measures, which often result in unintended casualties, stoking further resentments and a continued cycle of violence. The international nature of the terrorist threat, which knows no boundaries, demands a multilateral response, which is best coordinated by the United Nations. In that regard, we value the work of the United Nations counter-terrorism bodies in assisting Member States to fight the scourge of terrorism, including through capacity-building measures such as the development of handbooks on children affected by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, as well as the guidelines on mutual legal assistance developed in collaboration withthe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the International Association of Prosecutors. South Africa also welcomes efforts to improve cooperation with regional bodies, including the African Union, to improve our joint capacity to counter terrorism. In that regard, we commend the Secretary- General's international regional conferences, including the African Regional High-level Conference on Counter-Terrorism and the Prevention of Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism, which was held in Nairobi in 2019. The outcomes of that meeting and other regional conferences elsewhere in the world will complement the counter-terrorism week to be held at the United Nations in June. Domestically, South Africa remains committed to improving its counter-terrorism capacity in line with all United Nations recommendations and actively cooperates with its region on those matters. We were pleased to host in December 2019, in collaboration with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, a joint subregional dialogue for select member jurisdictions of the Eastern and Southern Africa Money-Laundering Group on improving capacity to counter the financing of terrorism in the subregion. Allow me to conclude by reiterating that South Africa will continue to remain a committed and responsible partner in all United Nations counter- terrorism bodies, underpinned by the principles that have been highlighted.
