Ms. Jakubone (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres for their
comprehensive briefings.

We are facing the world's largest humanitarian crisis,
one that is having a grave impact on international peace
and security. Trapped civilians, refugees and internally
displaced people are desperately waiting for the end of
the senseless bloodshed in Syria. The numbers speak for
themselves. Since the conflict began, 200,000 people
have been killed; 12.2 million, half of them children,
are in immediate humanitarian need and 3.8 million are
refugees. Thousands of civilians have fled their homes,
seeking refuge wherever they can, some of them risking
their lives to cross the Mediterranean, some finding
themselves locked into the war zone in no-man's land.
The host countries, Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and
Egypt, have been generous to the Syrian refugees. To
cope with that extraordinary challenge, they need more
aid and development assistance.

Resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) have outlined key obligations under international
humanitarian law that should be unconditionally
respected by all parties at all times. Nothing has been
done so far. On the contrary, indiscriminate aerial
bombings, including Al-Assad's barrel bombs, shelling
by the armed opposition and killings by terrorists and
extremists continue every day. We are witnessing the
deliberate refusal of the Al-Assad regime to carry out
its primary responsibility for protecting its civilian
population.

No one is immune in today's Syria. Hundreds of
medical personnel and humanitarian workers are being
killed. Schools are attacked, ransacked and destroyed.
Journalists and activists documenting violations and
abuses of human rights disappear and are detained,
tortured and killed. War crimes and crimes against
humanity have been committed by the Al-Assad regime
as well as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
other terrorist and extremist groups, for which enormous
amounts of evidence have been documented by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Syria. We condemn unreservedly the widespread and
systematic violations of international human-rights
and humanitarian law and the gruesome abuses and
violations of human rights that have been perpetrated
by all parties to the Syrian conflict.

We greatly value the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and of
other United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations. Violence and insecurity, shifting conflict
lines, deliberate interference with and closing of
operations, obstructive administrative procedures and
financial shortfalls continue to constrain humanitarian
access and timely and efficient humanitarian aid across
Syria. The 2015 humanitarian appeal for Syria has
increased twelve-fold since the beginning of the crisis.
Yet only little bits of humanitarian assistance reach
those in need, in amounts that are far from enough to
help those suffering in a sustained way. But we must
continue. It is our human and moral obligation to help
those in desperate need. In that regard, we sincerely
welcome the upcoming third pledging conference for
Syria to be held in Kuwait.

There is neither a military nor a humanitarian
solution to this crisis. A political settlement must be
found. The Council should do way more to push for
a genuine and sustainable political solution, based
on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
inclusively addressing the aspirations and grievances
of all Syrians. We support the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in his
efforts to reduce violence, as a stepping stone towards
an ultimately genuinely Syrian-led political process.
All parties to the conflict must fully comply with the
relevant resolutions without further delay. We fully
support the Secretary-General's call for the siege of
212,000 people to be immediately lifted, access for
medical and surgical supplies to all parts of the country
ensured, the practice of using denial of key services as
a weapon of war ended, Syria's education system rebuilt
and the use of barrel bombs prohibited.

Lastly, the Council must live up to its stated
intention to take further measures in the event of
continued non-compliance. There can be no impunity
for crimes committed, and their perpetrators must
be brought to justice. The role of the International
Criminal Court should not be forgotten, although the
Council's inaction in May created a licence for all
perpetrators to kill, torture and rape again. Justice and
accountability are prerequisites for a lasting peace in
Syria for all Syrians.

