Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The rights of the child have become among
the most important areas of human rights throughout
the United Nations system. We recently marked the
tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, a document that was the first-ever universal
bill on the rights of the child and provides legal
protection of children's rights. The strength of the
Convention lies in its recognition of the need to ensure
special protection and assistance to children.
Unfortunately, those lofty principles are not always full
applied in practice. The suffering of children from
hunger, sickness and violence is not a thing of the past,
but the bitter reality of today.

Adults start wars, but it is mainly children who
suffer in them. Today, we heard first-hand one of the
hundreds, perhaps thousands, such stories of suffering.
The nature of conflict has changed and over 90 per cent
of victims are now civilians, at least half of whom are
children. Children constitute over 65 per cent of
refugees and internally displaced persons. Behind these
dry statistics lies enormous human sorrow, borne on the
still frail shoulders of children. They lose parents, their
homes are destroyed, their families are shattered, they
live in destitution, they are unable to pursue an
education and they suffer long-term psychological
trauma.

Obviously, the international community must take
steps when serious situations develop that cause
children to suffer. The best way to protect children,
however, is to prevent conflicts from erupting or to
settle them before they become so destructive. The role
of the United Nations and its Security Council can
hardly be overstated in that regard.

We are pleased that our Council, the organ
bearing primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, is focusing on the
child dimension of armed conflicts. Moreover, Russia
believes that the undertaking of humanitarian tasks in
the context of protecting children is primarily the
prerogative of the specialized agencies and
humanitarian organizations, including the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
bodies with their own mandates that are autonomous at
the operational and financial levels.

An important achievement in protecting the
interests of children was the General Assembly's
adoption on 25 May 2000 of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. That
document is intended to offer real help to children in
war, but we need not stop at that. The Russian
Federation calls on all States to raise the army
recruitment age to 18 years. This issue was thoroughly
discussed at the International Conference on War-
Affected Children, held last September in Winnipeg, in
which the Russian delegation participated. We believe
that the exchange of views there was extremely useful
and should be pursued.

We are deeply convinced that the problems of
children are not confined to armed conflict alone. The
protection of children should be approached from a
somewhat broader angle. Neglect, childhood drug
abuse, the traffic in children and even in their organs
and tissues, the sexual exploitation of children - this
is far from being a complete list of the bitter problems
that threaten children in the world today and thus the
future of the entire human race.

An altogether different issue is the problem of
terrorism, which is becoming increasingly conspicuous
and spares neither adults not children. It is our common
duty effectively to prevent the proliferation of these
universal evils.

We greatly appreciate the Secretary-General's
report prepared for this meeting of the Security
Council. We are pleased that many of its
recommendations have been taken into account in the
Council's draft resolution and will thereby form the
basis of a further intensification of our joint efforts in
this very important area.

Children will be the custodians of this new
century. By protecting them from war today, we will be
taking an important step in building a world without
violence or conflict, a world of democracy and
prosperity.

