Mr. De Soto: In the early hours of 12 September,
Israel withdrew the last of its military personnel and
installations from the Gaza Strip, the first such
withdrawal from occupied Palestinian territory since
4June 1967. Furthermore, as of 20 September, and
following the completion of the evacuation of civilian
army infrastructure from four settlements in the
northern West Bank, Israeli forces put an end to their
permanent presence in the area of the evacuated
settlements.

On 20 September the Quartet, meeting in New
York, welcomed that development, paid tribute to the
political courage of Prime Minister Sharon,
commended the Israeli Government, its armed forces
and its police for the smooth and professional
execution of the operation and expressed its
appreciation for the responsible behaviour of the
Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian people for
helping to maintain a peaceful environment during the
evacuation.

Facing vociferous opposition, the Israeli
Government has proved its ability to carry out
democratic decisions in the general interest while
knowing that they would cause pain and disruption to a
significant number of its citizens. The exemplary
consideration shown by the Israeli armed forces
towards those affected, on some of whom carefully
measured force had to be employed, shows that they
can be held to the highest standards in dealing with
civilians.

In his statement last week at the High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly, Prime
Minister Sharon said to the gathered leaders that the
Palestinians "are also entitled to freedom and to a
national, sovereign existence in a State of their own"
(A/60/PV.5). By withdrawing from the Gaza Strip and
ending military law there, he said, "[T]he State of
Israel proved that it is ready to make painful
concessions in order to resolve the conflict with the
Palestinians". Looking ahead, the Prime Minister
added,

"Successful implementation of the
disengagement plan opens a window of
opportunity for advancing towards peace, in
accordance with the sequence of the road map.
The State of Israel is committed to the road map
and to the implementation of the Sharm el-Sheikh
understandings. And I hope that it will be
possible, through them, to renew the political
process". (Ibid.)

The timing of Israel's disengagement was not the
result of an agreement with the Palestinian side, but of
a unilateral Israeli decision. However, all relevant
sectors of the Palestinian Authority worked diligently
and constructively to coordinate with their Israeli
counterparts, with the good offices and assistance of
James Wolfensohn, the Quartet's Special Envoy for
Disengagement; General William Ward, the United
States Security Coordinator; and other international
actors, the Egyptian Government prominent among
them. Early fears that the operation might have to be
conducted under fire were dissipated. Palestinian
armed groups by and large held back from violent
action against settlers. The Israeli settlers, armed forces
and police withdrew in peace. The habit of
coordination developed among Palestinians and Israelis
in the last few months is a valuable asset on which to
continue building in the coming period.

With regard to Quartet engagement and activities,
the Quartet met at the United Nations on 20 September
to discuss the Israeli withdrawal and the prospects for
movement towards peace in the Middle East. A
statement was issued following the meeting, and the
principals held a press conference. I can therefore
spare members of the Security Council a detailed
exegesis. However, I should like to highlight a few
issues that were discussed.

One was how to take advantage of the momentum
gathered and move ahead. It was essential to bring
about an early improvement in the daily lives of
Palestinians. Quick-impact, employment-generating
projects are envisaged for that purpose, but it is also
urgent that the parties should come to resolution on the
four issues related to movement of persons and goods,
out of the six issues identified by James Wolfensohn.
The Quartet also focused on the need for renewed
action in parallel by both parties on their obligations,
in accordance with the sequence of the road map.
Elections are foreseen soon in occupied Palestinian
territory, and possibly in Israel down the road. Bold
initiatives will have to await the propitious moment.

Another issue discussed by the Quartet was that
of armed groups and the political process in the
Palestinian territories. The Quartet noted that the
Palestinian Authority leadership has condemned
violence and has sought to encourage Palestinian
groups who have engaged in terrorism to abandon that
course and engage in the democratic process.
"Ultimately", said the Secretary-General speaking on
behalf of the Quartet at the subsequent press
conference,

"those who want to be part of the political
process should not engage in armed group or
militia activities, for there is a fundamental
contradiction between such activities and the
building of a democratic State". (Press release SG/SM/JOIJS)

In response to questions, Quartet members made
clear, against that background, that they viewed the
forthcoming legislative elections as part of a transition
towards a democratic system. That must be a
Palestinian process, on which Palestinians must be in
the lead. They should be able to count on the necessary
cooperation of all concerned so that the transition
proceeds successfully.

Beyond disengagement, the Quartet urged the
parties to return to the cooperative agenda agreed upon
at Sharm el-Sheikh and to avoid unilateral actions that
prejudice final status issues. The Quartet reaffirmed
that any final agreement must be reached through
negotiations between the parties and that the new
Palestinian State must be truly viable, with contiguity
in the West Bank and connectivity to Gaza.
While noting that in Gaza and the northern West
Bank Israel had in fact acted beyond its obligations as
provided in the first phase of the road map, the Quartet
expressed its concern that settlement expansion
elsewhere must stop and urged Israel to remove all
unauthorized outposts. The Quartet continued to note
with concern the route of the Israeli separation barrier,
particularly as it results in the confiscation of
Palestinian land, cuts off the movement of people and
goods and undermines Palestinians' trust in the road
map process, as it appears to prejudge the final borders
of a Palestinian State.

With regard to disengagement, I do not need to
dwell on the details of the withdrawal referred to in
last month's briefing and earlier in this presentation. It
was executed with surprising speed and well in
advance of the scheduled dates. There are no longer
any Israeli military personnel or installations, and what
has been left behind is being dealt with in accordance
with understandings reached between the parties.
United Nations agencies and programmes are working
in support of the goals laid down by the Quartet. The
success of those activities will depend, to a great
degree, on swift and efficacious access and on an
adequate security environment, particularly in the Gaza
Strip, so that United Nations agencies can operate
safely and effectively.

With regard to security and violence, in last
month's briefing we referred to the worsening in the
Palestinian internal security situation during the run-up
to the withdrawal and immediately afterward. The
killing, apparently an extrajudicial execution, of former
security chief Musa Arafat, and the chaos of
spontaneous Palestinian celebrations in the wake of
Israeli withdrawal, particularly at the Egyptian border,
underscore the need for credible action by the
Palestinian Authority to bring the perpetrators of past
violent actions to justice.

It was reported by the Palestinian Authority that,
amid the Palestinian celebrations at Rafah following
Israel's withdrawal, some light arms had been
smuggled into the Gaza Strip. Palestinian Authority
President Mahmoud Abbas pledged to prevent further
border infiltrations. On 15 September, as the Egyptian
border police force was completing its deployment
along the Philadelphi route, the border with the Gaza
Strip was closed, ending four days of large-scale free
passage in both directions. The border remains closed.

Violence continued elsewhere during the past
month. This morning Israeli special units killed three
Palestinians in Tulkarem, and rockets were fired from
Beit Hanoun into Israel. Earlier in the month a
Palestinian stabbed two yeshiva students, one British
and one American, in the Old City of Jerusalem, killing
one and injuring the other; the Israeli Defense Forces
(IDF) killed five Palestinians in Tulkarem, and a
Palestinian suicide bomber blew himself up in Beer Sheva
in Israel. Home-made rockets, mortar shells and anti-tank
missiles were also fired from different locations inside the
Gaza Strip towards Israeli-controlled areas and nearby
Israeli towns, though at a significantly decreased level.
During the reporting period, a total of 15 Palestinians,
in addition to one foreigner, were killed.

On barrier construction and settlement activities,
the construction of Israel's West Bank barrier is
progressing rapidly in those parts of the route which
have not been contested in court and for which judicial
orders to suspend construction have not been issued.
As of 1 July 2005, approximately 215 kilometres had
been completed and 176 kilometres are under
construction, or about 58 per cent of the barrier's total
length.

When my colleague, Ibrahim Gambari, head of
the Department of Political Affairs, briefed the
Security Council a month ago (see S/PV.5250), he
mentioned land requisition orders to allow the
extension of the barrier around Jerusalem eastward so
as to envelop the settlement of Ma'ale Adumim, which
has elicited great concern, as it could have the practical
effect of bisecting the West Bank. Construction of this
segment of the barrier has not begun. As concerns the
controversial El plan for settlement construction in the
area between Jerusalem and Ma'ale Adumim, the
Deputy Prime Minister recently reiterated Israel's
commitment to keep it frozen, while reiterating Israel's
intention to build it in due course.

I turn now to the question of closures and
movement restrictions. In a June 2004 report entitled
"Disengagement, the Palestinian Economy and the
Settlements", the World Bank stated that

"Palestinian economic recovery depends on a
radical easing of internal closures throughout the
West Bank, the opening of Palestinian external
borders to commodity trade, and sustaining a
reasonable flow of Palestinian labour into Israel".

In James Wolfensohn's words, based on the
Bank's findings, "without the re-establishment of free
movement inside the West Bank, a viable Palestinian
economy is not possible".

Since the beginning of 2005, there has been a 37
per cent reduction in the number of internal obstacles
on roads in the West Bank, including checkpoints.
These obstacles now number 376, according to the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Much of the reduction
has been in the northern West Bank, where movement
has been freed up in line with disengagement from four
northern West Bank settlements. Obstacles have also
been removed in the western area of the West Bank,
where the barrier is under construction, making many
of those obstacles redundant.

The biggest impact of this easing is to improve
Palestinian access to health and education services,
particularly from villages to main towns. It is unlikely,
however, that this will result in a significant
improvement in the economic situation, as delays still
occur as a result of random vehicle checking and
restrictions on movement entering and exiting from
main cities, especially Jerusalem.

Through a series of discussions, OCHA and the
IDF have reached a common understanding on the
number and location of checkpoints and other
obstacles, albeit with minor differences in definition.
Further dialogue with the Palestinian Authority and the
Israel Defense Forces, with the aim of easing
restrictions on Palestinian movement, combined with a
more in-depth examination of the impact of physical
obstacles, is being conducted by OCHA.

The withdrawal of Israeli soldiers resulted in the
removal of internal movement restrictions imposed by
Israel in the Gaza Strip. Tight restrictions continue on
issuance of permits for Gaza Strip workers in Israel
and the Erez industrial estate at the north of the Strip.
On 1 September, Palestinian merchants from the West
Bank were allowed to enter Israel for the first time
since a general closure was imposed on 12 July 2005.
Only a limited number of Palestinian workers with
permits are allowed entry to Israel and East Jerusalem.

I now turn to the situation in Lebanon. On
19 September, Prime Minister Siniora presented his
Government's plans for political, economic and
institutional reforms to the core group ministerial
meeting on Lebanon in New York. The Secretary-
General and other members reaffirmed their intention
to assist the Government of Lebanon in its efforts to
institute reforms and achieve lasting stability. Another
major challenge for the new Government is to
implement effective reforms in the security apparatus.
We were reminded of the importance of this last Friday
when a new bomb went off in a densely populated area
in eastern Beirut, killing one person and injuring more
than 20. The Secretary-General strongly condemns this
act of terrorism. He expresses the resolve of the United
Nations, and indeed the international community, to
assist the Government of Lebanon in its efforts to
improve the security situation in the country and to
bring to justice the perpetrators of this and other
similar acts of terror.

While it appears that these acts have been
designed to create panic and perhaps provoke reactions
amongst the Lebanese public, our impression is that
there has been a mature and calm approach in the face
of these provocations. It is clear that the majority of
Lebanese are determined not to have their progress
towards a united, sovereign and democratic Lebanon
derailed. We must continue to work to help the
Lebanese achieve this.

Over this past month, the Blue Line also
remained relatively calm, despite the firing of two
missiles from Lebanese territory on 25 August. One
landed close to the Lebanese village of Meis el Jabal,
the other across the Blue Line close to a residential
area of Kibbutz Margilot in northern Israel.
Fortunately, there were no casualties. Hizbullah denied
any involvement, and there was a claim of
responsibility from Palestinian Islamic Jihad. However,
it has not been possible to definitely establish who was
responsible. It is nonetheless clear that this again
underlines the need for the Government of Lebanon to
exert its full authority in the south and prevent such
violations from taking place.

Over this past month, there were seven Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace observed by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the latest
on 22 September. On 8 September the Israeli
authorities handed over the body of a Hizbullah fighter
who had been killed in the Shab'a farms area on
29 June. The arrangements for this transfer were made
through the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Tension increased on 16 September when two
Lebanese shepherds who had crossed the Blue Line in
the Shab'a farms area were apprehended by the IDF.
UNIFIL liaison with both sides worked in the first
instance to handle the issue in a calm, non-escalatory
manner. This facilitated a resolution, with the IDF
releasing the shepherds the next day through UNIFIL.

Allow me to close with a few personal comments.
The objective benefits of the recently concluded
disengagement from Gaza and the northern West Bank
are obvious and fairly easy to itemize. The Palestinians
have experienced the joy of the departure of the
occupier; the Israelis are no longer saddled with the
unrewarding, Sisyphus-like grind of securing a piece of
land in which, to paraphrase Prime Minister Sharon's
15 August speech, squalor and resentment are
untenably juxtaposed with prosperity. Israel has
demonstrated that it can make the sacrifices that are
required to make peace; the Palestinians have shown
self-restraint in the face of unilateral decisions and
tight time frames. Forces of moderation have prevailed
over those of extremism to mingle again - dare I say
it? - in a shared mainstream of moderation and
willingness to compromise. A mechanism for
coordination at all levels is in place and is working. A
basis has been laid for a true partnership, which should
encourage each party to understand and address the
other's legitimate needs and concerns.

The Israeli need for security has led them to
install, encroaching on Palestinian occupied territory, a
barrier - a generic term encompassing a combination
of grid fences, barbed wire, trenches, electronic
devices, watch towers and, in some places, most
prominently around Jerusalem, a dauntingly high and
very forbidding-looking wall. In addition, Israel runs a
system of roadblocks and checkpoints - some stable,
some intermittent - to control the movement of
persons and goods into and throughout much of the
West Bank.

Apart from impeding economic revival, to many
Palestinians - and I speak here of the millions who
have no connection with, or sympathy for, those who
resort to violence, and who merely wish to move about
to earn their living or visit their separated loved ones,
attend school or seek medical care - the barrier and
the closures, and the travails of traversing them, are a
source of humiliation and a constant check on their
aspiration to one day run their own affairs. The
expense incurred in the building of the barrier raises
doubts in some minds as to its stated provisionality.
Questions have also been posed as to whether the
purpose is only to ensure security.

Beyond the relief of recovered land and freedom
of internal movement, the Palestinians who live in
Gaza will wonder what has changed if this is not
followed by their ability to link up with their brethren
in the West Bank and in the outside world.

While Israelis should understand those
considerations and recognize that it is ultimately in
their interest to address them, Palestinians for their part
must understand, accept and address Israel's need to be
assured of the safety and security of its citizens. Countless
innocent Israelis have fallen victim to terrorist acts, and
Israelis have a right to demand that this should cease.
Palestinians - not just the leadership and not just the
mainstream - must accept that there can be a solution
to the conflict between Israel and Palestine only in the
framework of two States living alongside each other
and sorting out their differences peacefully and
respectfully. They must renounce the resort to violence
as a means to achieve their ends, however legitimate
these may be. Those who have carried out acts of terror
or instigated them should understand that this has
rendered the achievement of the goal of a State in
which Palestinians live in freedom and dignity more
distant rather than the contrary.

It is often overlooked that security, broadly writ,
is not just an Israeli requirement. The Palestinian
people at large demand that law and order be
established in the streets, which means not only an
efficient police but also a reliable court system and an
end to impunity and to corruption. The Palestinian
Authority is the underpinning for a still incipient State-
to-be; the Palestinians understandably expect it to
discharge the responsibilities which normally fall to the
Government in a State. As members of the Quartet said
on Tuesday, 20 September, at their press conference,
the Palestinian Authority is in transition to democracy. It
must be seen by the Palestinians that it is indeed pointed
in that direction and moving toward it. The political
will of the Palestinian Authority must be unequivocal.

Development of a State run by the rule of law, in
which the Government holds the monopoly over the
instruments of violence - clearly a Palestinian
interest - goes hand in hand with the strengthening of
Israel's sense of security. A State at peace with itself
generates security in its neighbours.

Let me conclude with this thought. It is
unfortunately difficult to circumvent the classic
chicken-and-egg conundrum: Israeli leaders demand an
end to violence before addressing further Palestinian
concerns; Palestinian leaders find it difficult, for their
part, to persuade extremists to restrain themselves and
accept to work toward a democracy if they are unable
to point to a visible prospect of satisfaction of their
legitimate goals on the horizon.

Beyond disengagement, it is difficult to see how
this conundrum can be resolved, and the process
moved forward, other than by the discharge, in parallel,
of the parties' respective obligations, which is the
approach of the Quartet in the road map, which has
been endorsed by the Council. In the light of the mix of
facts created on the ground and declarations of intent
by Israel, many Palestinians wonder about the
prospects for a viable Palestinian State down the road.
Only Israel can persuade them that this is still
achievable and thus encourage them to work
cooperatively toward that goal. For their part, the
Israelis have reason to query whether the State that is
emerging next door will be a good neighbour. To renew
the Israelis' faith, the Palestinians would have to show
that they indeed will be such a neighbour, by making
concrete and convincing efforts to end violence. Thus,
understanding each other's needs and concerns, the
parties would advance on parallel, mutually reinforcing
tracks.

