Mr. Annen (Germany): I would like to warmly
thank our Russian friends, the Secretary-General and
today's briefers. It has become painstakingly obvious
over the past two decades that international, regional
and subregional cooperation are key to a successful
fight against terrorism and violent extremism. A
transnational threat can be overcome only by joint and
comprehensive international action, close partnerships
and the exchange of information among regional
organizations, the United Nations and Member States.
We therefore salute the successful efforts of the
organizations represented here today by the briefers.

Allow me also to make some remarks about
organizations that have not been invited today. In
addition to my French colleague, I also wish to make
some comments about the European Union, which, as
all those present know, cooperates closely with various
United Nations bodies. We have signed a framework
on counter-terrorism. We work very closely with the
joint United Nations Liaison Office for Peace and
Security in Brussels and with the Office of Counter-
Terrorism's Brussels presence. That also holds true
for other organizations, such as the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe and NATO, which
has already been by one of our briefers, with successful
collaboration with all relevant bodies, including United
Nations entities. I think that that is very important.

We cherish such cooperation, including in
different and less known forums. Within the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF), Germany puts
particular emphasis both on issue-driven, such as the
use of drones by terrorists, for example, that being one
of the urgent issues we must tackle, and on regional
cooperation. Just this week, we are assuming the
co-chairmanship of the GCTF Capacity-building in
the West Africa Region Working Group, together with
our friends from Algeria. The objective is to support
West African countries in their fight against terrorism.
The speed and scope of that particular effort are
being defined by our partners from the region. Africa
therefore truly has an important role to play.

Allow me to make some short remarks about core
principles in the work that all of us here must do. If
we want to successfully counter terrorism and violent
extremism, we must not forget the glue that keeps us
together, as well as the important role of the Security
Council. I refer to our common set of universal human
values. We need to strictly adhere to the human
rights standards and principles on which we all have
agreed within the United Nations framework. Only by
upholding those values will we remain credible and be
able to defeat terrorist ideologies.

I think that it is very important to mention recent
reports that show that negative encounters with armed
forces, even if they are in a legitimate fight against
terrorism, are a major factor for young men and women
to join terrorist groups. Human rights, international
humanitarian law and the rule of law must therefore be
respected, including in the fight against terrorism and,
I stress, without exceptions. Trust in the functioning
of the State, its institutions and the rule of law are
central elements for preventing Violent extremism. My
point is that disrespecting such values is a factor that
can lead marginalized groups or individuals to violent
extremism and into terrorist networks.

I also want to flag another aspect that, in our view,
is very significant, since we in Germany are convinced
that including a gender perspective in preventing and
combating terrorist threats is also highly important and
a factor in prevention. As Victims, women are impacted
in different ways when a terrorist attack occurs and
are often more vulnerable than other parts of society.
Furthermore, it is important to analyse the root causes
of terrorism and to understand that such causes are often
also gender specific. The reasons for the recruitment of
male and female terrorists, for example, often differ.
Finally, women are important agents of change and need
to be part of the strategy that we are discussing today.

Again, the in-depth experience of regional and
subregional bodies can be highly useful. That is why
we thank the Russian Federation for convening this
meeting. I would like to provide just one example
of what we are doing. We support the reintegration
of female Al-Shabaab defectors in Somalia through
psychological counselling and gender-appropriate
vocational training. We believe that that could be a
model approach and are more than willing to share our
experience with the Council and Member States.

Let me end with something that has been mentioned
by our colleagues from France, Belgium, South Africa
and other members. We need to look at the root
causes. I think that that is very important. We need to
understand that we cannot limit our focus to a single
issue. Suppression and prevention are two sides of the
same coin.

To conclude, let me be very clear: we need to be
morally and ethically superior to the terrorists by
strictly following the rule of law and fully respecting
human rights. In that regard, Germany is more than
willing and prepared to continue working with Member
States and the United Nations in that endeavour.

