Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Russian
delegation and wish you a successful presidency of the
Security Council during this month.

At the outset, with regard to the issue of Yemen,
1 would like to underscore the aspects that Egypt, the
Arab member of the Council, considers red lines, which
must not be crossed or breached under any condition
and for any reason.

First, Egypt believes that the Government of
the Yemeni President, Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, is the only legitimate Government in Yemen.
It is the only Government recognized by Egypt and
by other members of the international community.
Egypt cannot acknowledge the existence of any entity
that seeks to hijack the authority of the Government,
whether it calls itself a revolutionary council or a
supreme political council or any other name. We support
any form of settlement agreed on by the Yemeni parties
that would ensure comprehensive and wide-scale
participation of all factions of Yemeni society.

Secondly, Egypt cannot accept under any condition
any threats to the freedom of navigation in Bab-el-
Mandeb Strait and the Red Sea. The protection of the
freedom of navigation is a lifeline for Egypt and for
international trade and transportation. It is at the heart
of our Egyptian and Arab national security.

Thirdly, Egypt cannot accept under any pretext
the continued attacks on the security of Saudi Arabia,
including the launching of ballistic missiles against
civilian centres in Saudi Arabia and the violating of
its border security. The security of Gulf States and
the security of the Arab world is part and parcel of
the security of Egypt. In that regard, we vigorously
condemn the Houthis' attack on Mecca in an
unacceptable precedent. We cannot stay silent in the
face of this violation of the sanctity of holy sites and
this disregard for innocent civilians and the sentiments
of Muslims around the world.

Having reaffirmed these principles. I would like to
address the future of the crisis and its settlement.

First, Egypt believes that there is no alternative
to a political settlement to the Yemini crisis. Further
delay in reaching such a settlement will only lead to
more killing, humanitarian suffering and destruction.
In this regard, Egypt commends and appreciates the
efforts of the United Nations over the past month. We
encourage all parties to engage seriously in all efforts
aimed at reaching a settlement in Yemen based on
relevant Security Council resolutions and statements.
These statements call for the return of the legitimate
Government; the withdrawal of the Houthis from cities
and the handing over of their heavy and medium-sized
weapons; and ensuring the return of inclusive the
political institutions.

Secondly, agreeing on a cessation of hostilities as
part of the political settlement is of vital importance,
given the continued suffering of Yemenis, regardless
of their political affiliations, and the dire humanitarian
needs and the need to ensure access to humanitarian
assistance in all parts of Yemen. This is a priority for
Egypt and the international community.
In conclusion, Egypt will continue to fully support
the efforts of the United Nations and the Special Envoy
to reach a settlement to the tragedy in Yemen.

