Ms. Willson (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the assessments of the
Prosecutors and Presidents of both Tribunals and their
progress to date on the completion strategy
implementation. The United States notes with
appreciation the efforts of Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte
and her team, particularly Deputy Prosecutor David
Tolbert, in forcefully championing accountability and
effectively managing an efficient and successful Office
of the Prosecutor. The arrival of incoming Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz will ensure that this tradition of
excellence continues. We also applaud the judges as
well as the hundreds of staff members who, on a daily
basis, dedicate their energy and skills to the lasting
success and legacy of both of these Tribunals.

As the Tribunals move towards closure, they must
maintain their current levels of efficiency. The United
States is encouraged by the current pace of trials and
by the determination of all Tribunal organs to complete
trials as soon after 2008 as is feasible by expediting
proceedings, as outlined in their assessments.

The work of the Tribunals in countering impunity
will not be complete, however, without the resolution of
the fate of the remaining filgitives and the consolidation
of each Tribunal's legacy. Nearly 20 fugitives from the
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda
remain at large. The United States calls on all States to
fulfil their legal obligations to cooperate fully with the
Tribunals.

With regard to the Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, Serbia, in particular, must take further
steps to fulfil its obligations, especially through the
apprehension and transfer of all fugitives who may be
on Serbian territory, including Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic. We welcome the improved
cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's federal and
entity authorities with the Tribunal. We are also
encouraged by ongoing efforts of the Governments of
the western Balkans to share information and evidence
to further domestic prosecutions of war crimes cases.
We call on those countries to enhance their cooperation
in the future. As Prosecutor Del Ponte reports, regional
cooperation remains crucial in apprehending and
bringing to justice the remaining fugitives.

Concrete action is also needed from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Kenya to
apprehend and transfer all Rwanda Tribunal fugitives
within their borders. Evidence continues to mount that
top fugitive and alleged genocide financier Felicien
Kabuga remains in Kenya. As Security Council
pressure mounts for the Rwanda Tribunal's successful
completion, Kenya must fully cooperate with the
Tribunal in apprehending Kabuga.

The United States welcomes the 9 November
agreement between the Congolese and Rwandan
Governments for dismantling the former Rwandan
Armed Forces and Interahamwe forces still active in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
have every confidence that any Rwanda Tribunal
fugitive captured during this campaign will be turned
over for prosecution.

Mladic, Karadzic, Kabuga and others are charged
with horrific crimes, and it is unthinkable that they
would escape international justice. They must be
immediately captured and prosecuted.

The United States commends the ongoing work
of the Tribunals to ensure a lasting positive legacy.
Their promotion of domestic capacity within the
countries of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda is
central to that legacy. With four Rwanda Tribunal cases
currently pending possible transfer to Rwanda, it is
imperative that Rwanda's work to improve its justice
system be supported. An enduring legacy also requires
that each Tribunal's residual issues be addressed
meticulously and pragmatically. The United States will
work diligently to ensure that those efforts are
successful.

We again thank the Presidents, Prosecutors and
Registrars for their service to the Tribunals, to justice
and accountability and to the people who gave rise and
purpose to these institutions: the victims.

