Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to express my gratitude to Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast for the information that he
provided at the beginning of this debate.

The delegation of Argentina welcomes the initiative
of addressing the Afghan crisis in an orientation debate
open to all delegations. We believe that the renewed
military escalation that began at the end of last month, as
is the case every summer, is sufficient proof of the
repetitive pattern of chronic fighting that is prolonging the
political uncertainty and deepening the misery of the
Afghan people by causing many casualties among the
innocent population.

We deeply regret that this fresh military offensive on
the part of the Taliban should be taking place in the wake
of the high-level meeting in Tashkent, held under United
Nations auspices in the framework of the "six plus two"
group. The Tashkent Conference was an important event,
because it marked the first time that the parties,
represented at a high level, have come to the negotiating
table in a context in which it was clear to all that the
Afghan question has no military solution. This is a step
in the right direction which should be emphasized.

It is important also to note that in Tashkent the
members of the "six plus two" group undertook not to
render military assistance to the parties to the conflict and
to prevent the use of their territories for military purposes.

 

Unfortunately, all indications are that this latest offensive
received external support, which is hard to overlook.

Tashkent was a necessary step that taught us that we
should be wary of expecting overly encouraging results and
that perhaps the time has come to try other kinds of
strategies.

The Argentine delegation has never ceased, and will
not cease, to urge the parties involved to return to
diplomatic channels and to desist from seeking a military
solution which, after many years of fighting and many
innocent victims, has proved to be futile. Likewise, we have
requested that priority attention be given to respect for the
human rights of the civilian population, in particular those
of women and children, and that the security of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel should be safeguarded.
The Argentine delegation would voice its recognition of
those men and women who are doing humanitarian work
and making tremendous sacrifices to extend their solidarity
to people in need. We wish once again to emphasize these
points in the light of what we heard from Under-Secretary-
General Prendergast today.

We condemn the fresh military escalation and the fact
that shelter has been given to international terrorism. We
deplore the external interference that is merely protracting
the conflict, adding to the humanitarian disaster and causing
even greater suffering.

We are grateful for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, and of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan. It is our hope that today's debate will help us
to formulate an appropriate strategy for the resolution of
this crisis. It is high time to send the international
community a clear signal that the Security Council is ready
to consider suitable options so as to help to resolve the
Afghan crisis.

