Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for having agreed
so promptly to the request of the Arab Group to hold
this open meeting to consider an event of extreme
gravity that has imperiled international peace and
security just a few days after many world leaders came
to the United Nations to reaffirm their adherence to
international law, the principles and objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations and the system of
collective security embodied by the Security Council. I
should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of your duties
as President of the Council for the month of October. I
also wish to congratulate the representative of the
United Kingdom for his outstanding performance as
President of the Council last month.

An exceptionally grave Israeli act of aggression
has taken place today against a sovereign State and
member of the Organization, the Syrian Arab Republic.
This is a prime example of a violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, international law, the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the
disengagement agreement that has linked two countries
since 1974. This act of aggression is particularly
serious given that it is taking place in an atmosphere of
extreme tension that is affecting a region made fragile
by the policy of terror and repression practised by
Israel in occupied Arab territories.

This flagrant violation of the territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic is a new stage in the
policy of escalation and flight pursued by the Israeli
regime, which is designed to end the peace process that
the Quartet is working hard to relaunch and to ruin any
opportunities for peace in the region.

Given that risky policy, which could send the
entire region into a spiral of violence whose
consequences are unpredictable, it is very important
that the international community adopt a firm and
vigilance attitude and condemn in the strongest terms
this new Israeli challenge to the Security Council and
international law. Complacency of any kind would only
encourage Israel to practice its irredentist policy and to
continue to trample Security Council resolutions and
norms of international law.

Algeria, which today condemned through the
spokesman of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs this act
of military aggression wishes to reiterate its full
solidarity with the fraternal Syrian people and
emphasizes that only a just comprehensive settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, based on the principle of
land for peace and the exercise of the legitimate rights
of all peoples of the region, including those of the
Palestinians to establish an independent State, will
enable this part of the world to regain peace, stability
and prosperity.

Given this aggression against a sovereign State,
in violation of international law, my delegation expects
that the Security Council will adopt the firmest
position, condemn unreservedly this aggression and
force Israel to abide by international law and to respect
Security Council resolutions.

