Ms. Rodriguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November 2007. We would also like to thank the
Chairmen of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
for the information that they have provided.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates its total condemnation of any act
of terrorism as a criminal and unjustifiable act and
reaffirms its commitment to combating terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, in strict accordance with
international law, international norms for the protection
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
That commitment has been reiterated by our country at
all of the relevant international forums. The
fundamental expression of that policy was the
strengthening of the legal framework designed to
prevent terrorist acts and the adoption of measures to
intensify regional and global cooperation in order to
fight this scourge. In that fight, our country also
reaffirms its commitment to the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted in September
2006 by the General Assembly through its resolution
60/288.

The measures and rules adopted to strengthen our
national legislation for fighting terrorism in accordance
with the international legal framework, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions, are reflected in
the reports that we have provided to the relevant
Security Council committees.

Resolution 1373 (2001), in paragraphs 2 (c) and
3 (g), bars States from offering safe haven to those who
commit terrorist acts and prohibits States from
recognizing claims of political motivation as grounds
for refusing requests for the extradition of terrorists. It
is therefore crucial that those who commit terrorist acts
not enjoy impunity. In the fight against terrorism, all
States must fully cooperate, in accordance with
international law, in order to find, capture, deny refuge
and bring to justice, on the basis of the principle of
prosecution or extradition and of States' own national
legislation, those who support or facilitate the
financing, planning, preparation or commission of
terrorist acts and those who provide safe haven to such
persons or participate or attempt to participate in such
acts.

In this context, our delegation would like to recall
once again before this Council the extradition request
that the Venezuelan Government has submitted to the
United States Government in relation to the notorious
international criminal and terrorist, Luis Posada
Carriles. This terrorist, a refugee from Venezuelan
justice since the 1960s, is responsible for carrying out
many terrorist plans. The most famous of his crimes is
the blowing up of a Cubana de Aviacion jetliner, which
occurred in Barbados in 1976 and in which 73 innocent
civilians perished.

Despite the fact that the United States delegation
has affirmed on several occasions in this Council that
they are reviewing the extradition request submitted by
our country, the reality is that they have simply ignored
this request, which the Venezuelan Government
submitted more than two years ago, complying with all
the relevant requirements.

Currently, Luis Posada Carriles is free in United
States territory because, instead of arresting him as a
terrorist and proceeding to his extradition in
accordance with the request made by the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and in compliance with the
bilateral extradition treaty signed by both countries in
1922, the Government of the United States simply tried
him for immigration fraud. Although United States
authorities recently appealed the legal decision that
released him in total freedom and rejected the charges
against him, that action is simply another technical
manoeuvre to prolong the immigration charges while
they overlook the extradition request submitted by
Venezuela.

The United States is also obliged - through the
provisions of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, which entered into
force on 23 May 2001, and through the Convention for
the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation, which entered into force on 26 January
1973 and to which it is a State party - to extradite
Luis Posada Carriles or, failing that, to submit the case
to its competent authorities for indictment, without any
exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence
was committed in its territory.

Venezuela's extradition request regarding the
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles has been supported in
different forums, including in the statement by the
Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries dated 20 April 2007, the declaration by
heads of State or Government of the countries that are
members of the Bolivarian Alternative for the People
of Our America dated 29 April 2007, and the
communique of the States members of the Common
Market of the South dated 22 May 2007. More
recently, the heads of State and Government of the
Ibero-American countries, who met in Santiago, Chile
for the twenty-seventh Ibero-American Summit,
adopted a special communique in support of the fight
against terrorism which rejected the fact that the person
responsible for the terrorist attack on a Cubana de
Aviacion jetliner in October 1976, which caused the
deaths of 73 innocent civilians, has not been
prosecuted for terrorism and which supported steps to
bring about his extradition or to bring him to justice.

The case of terrorist Luis Posada Carriles is an
example that proves the double standard of a
Government that says it is fighting terrorism and
endorses terrorist methods through its conduct.
Regrettably, terrorism will not be defeated if we
continue to act selectively and apply a double standard,
as the current United States Administration has been
doing.

We reiterate once again our request that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee examine and verify
compliance by the United States with its obligations in
the fight against terrorism, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) and the aforementioned
legal instruments in the specific case of our extradition
request concerning the terrorist Luis Posada Carriles.

