Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for the Republic of Korea's leadership in convening this
debate today and for Foreign Minister Kim Sung-hwan's
presence with us today as well. I also welcome the
participation ofthe Foreign Ministers of Azerbaij an and
Rwanda, as well as the Foreign Minister of Brazil and
the Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. I also thank the Secretary-General, of
course, for his consistent leadership on protection
in all its dimensions and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, for their indefatigable and
irreplaceable efforts.

As a member of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians, Australia associates itself
with the statement to be delivered later today by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group.

As the Secretary-General has said, the situation
with regard to the protection of civilians is, and I
use his word, "abysmal". The situation of the most
vulnerable - women and children - violates our
humanity. There is what should be seen as an irresistible
case for the Council and the United Nations system
to focus sharply on strengthening efforts to meet the
five core challenges that the Secretary-General has
identified in his latest report (S/2012/376). My country
supports the report's analysis and recommendations,
and we will work assiduously with others on the
Council, Member States generally, troop- and
police-contributing countries and humanitarian actors
to take forward those recommendations as a priority.

In shouldering the responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council must do all it can to prevent and respond to
threats of violence against civilians, particularly
the most vulnerable, namely, women and children.
Protection is not just at the core of the Council's
responsibility, it should also be, it must be, the
Council's moral compass. More than any other issue,
we will be judged by our actions and by our failures to
act in response to protection challenges. We are already
judged by our failure in Syria, and we are failing in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.

So what should we do? I will mention five areas.
First, we should bring humanitarian access to the
fore and do all we can to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law. Around the world,
tens of millions of civilians continue to suffer every
day. Although international humanitarian law requires
parties to conflict to respect and protect humanitarian
personnel whose work is vital to help those victims, we
know that those obligations are not being implemented.
We have to do better.

Australia is particularly concerned about ongoing
attacks against medical workers and facilities, notably
today in Syria. More than half of all hospitals there
have been damaged or destroyed, and a third of the
medical services are not operating. We strongly support
the call by the Secretary-General and today's draft
presidential statement for the immediate cessation of
attacks against medical personnel and facilities. Their
deliberate targeting is not only morally abhorrent, it is
an unquestioned Violation of international humanitarian
law, and my country will continue to work with others
to improve the protection of medical personnel and
facilities and access to them in Syria. Equally, our
draft presidential statement necessarily highlights the
imperatives to protect schools, teachers and journalists.

Secondly, we should confront the challenge of
unregulated small arms and the indiscriminate use of
weapons. All too often, as we know, we see explosive
weapons being used in densely populated areas. Again,
Syria is a particularly egregious example. Parties
to conflict must abide by international law, and we
support the Secretary-General's recommendation and
further action on those issues.

Similarly, some 2,000 people, mostly civilians,
many women and children, are killed every day as a
result of the illicit and irresponsible trade in weapons.
We can fix that. We have a historical opportunity with
the negotiations in March to achieve a legally binding
arms trade treaty. We must not fail in that opportunity.

Thirdly, we should enforce the protection of
civilians mandates within peacekeeping missions. The
Council must lead the way in ensuring that peacekeepers
are able to protect civilians. We should be pressing for
mission-wide protection strategies, including strategies
on early warning and prevention. We have seen such
mechanisms in place in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, through the work of provincial
senior management groups on protection, which plan
the deployment of joint protection teams and provide an
essential link with local communities, who, we know,
are often best placed to anticipate and communicate
protection risks. We must continue to encourage
improvements in and sharing of best practices.

Peacekeepers in vastly different peacekeeping
operations confront very different obstacles. The
threat of conflict-related sexual violence in the Kivus
requires a very different response from the response to
gang activities in Port-au-Prince or to cattle raiding in
Jonglei. The development of mission-specific training
is therefore a further crucial step, and we must maintain
our focus on operationalizing effective guidance and
training materials.

Fourthly, we should foster accountability.
Accountability is first and foremost a national
responsibility, but the Council has a critical role to play
in ensuring accountability. It must exercise its authority,
for instance, through referrals to the International
Criminal Court and necessary follow-up, and through
other mechanisms, including commissions of inquiry
and fact-fording missions. And it should, where it needs
to, mandate peacekeeping missions to help implement
its decisions on accountability.

While the responsibility to protect is a different
principle from broader efforts to protect civilians,
Australia firmly supports the Council's efforts to
uphold it. All our leaders have pledged to support the
responsibility to protect, and we welcome the Council's
acknowledgement of this commitment in the draft
presidential statement to be adopted today.

Fifthly and finally, we believe that we should
reform the Council's working methods on the protection
of civilians. The time has come to work together on a
more regular and formalized mechanism of input to the
Council that brings together analysis and trends across
the whole protection of civilians agenda. We also
believe that an annual report of the Secretary-General
is needed.

In conclusion, I should like to commend the
personnel involved in peacekeeping and political
missions, as well as other humanitarian actors and civil
society groups, for their enormous service. They are
the front line of protection, and they are all too often
inadequately resourced for the challenges they face.
The Council must not fail them. We should do all we
can to better enable them to perform their essential
roles.

