Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I join our
colleagues and you, Mr. President, in welcoming Prime
Minister Ali Khalif Galaydh to the Chamber. We find
his presence here very reassuring. It is a sign that
things are on track. We also thank Mr. Stephen for his
briefing.

I have a text, Mr. President, but I hope you will
allow me to divert from it from time to time to respond
to other points that have emerged.

The Council will recall that we suggested here a
few months ago that it might be helpful to have a
brainstorming session on Somalia. Indeed, we are very
pleased that, two days ago in the informal consultations
room, we had a very rich discussion on Somalia. It was
not the usual exchange of written statements; there was
a real, candid discussion. As I said at the end of the
discussion, we hope that some of it will feed into the
United Nations policy. We hope that today's discussion
will build on it by also focusing on how the
international community can play a useful role in
forging a lasting peace in Somalia.

Certainly, the establishment of the Transitional
National Government (TNG), more than a year ago,
marked a significant milestone in the search for peace
and stability in Somalia. Indeed, one point that we
made in the informal consultations was that we should
try to imagine what Somalia would be like if we did
not have a Transitional National Government. Clearly,
this is an asset that we have. We are therefore pleased
that, when the Security Council last met the Prime
Minister, in January, the Council sent a strong signal of
support and, indeed, welcomed the outcome of the Arta
peace process. Now it is time to take stock to see what
more can be done to encourage the budding peace
process. There have been some improvements, and,
indeed, in our text we quote from the report of the
Secretary-General, which points out that

"The TNG inherited no personnel, buildings,
archives, forces of law and order or tax-collecting
capacity."

Despite this, the report continues,

"Ministries are beginning to function and a
number of buildings have been rehabilitated for
their use. A judiciary is gradually coming into
place, with Sharia courts and their militia being
absorbed by the TNG. Personnel are gradually
being put in place to take charge of a police
system in the capital and police have returned to
all 14 district police stations in Mogadishu under
a command structure." (S/2001/963, para. 8)

However, the report goes on to highlight that the
TNG has found it impossible, for the time being, to
introduce similar law and order arrangements in other
parts of Somalia due to a lack of resources. While the
TNG has been able to gradually establish key State
institutions, in addition to a functioning administration
in and around Mogadishu, more assistance is clearly
required. The report has concluded that

"the completion of the Arta process remains the
most viable option for lasting peace in Somalia."
(ibid., para. 57).

I hope that we will again endorse the Arta process
when we come up with a presidential statement.

The Secretary-General's report also states that
"there was broad agreement that the Somali
situation required urgent attention and that the
TNG could be the basis for completing the
Djibouti peace process." (ibid., para. 38)

One of the more encouraging things that Mr. Stephen
told us two days ago that the people of Somalia are
indeed war-weary and increasingly supportive of a
national political solution that is no longer based on
clan or factional affinities. As I told Mr. Stephen two
days ago, we should try to build on this desire that the
Somali people now have to move away from the clan-
based system to a restoration of the nation and the
national structure. If this is, indeed, the feeling of the
Somali people, then we in the Council should send a
strong signal of encouragement to the TNG and to the
Somali people. As I said earlier, we hope that we will
do so with the presidential statement to be adopted
later. In this respect, I would like to thank Ambassador
Kolby, of Norway, for agreeing to circulate a draft for
our consideration.

We would like to make a few brief points with
regard to the subject of today's discussion.

First, we stress that there is a need to adopt what
we call a "comprehensive" approach for Somalia. We
cannot simply drift along; nor can we focus only on the
provision of humanitarian assistance and neglect the
other critical aspects of peace-building and the
establishment of a stable Government. Members of the
Council may recall that we advocated similar
comprehensive solutions to other problems facing the
Security Council, including the situation in
Afghanistan.

That brings me to my second, related point, that
we really should take a fresh look at the situation in
Somalia in the light of the events of 11 September. It is
now clearly in the interests of the entire international
community to encourage the establishment of stable
Governments all around the world. Otherwise, as has
already been shown, terrorists and other extremist
elements can easily exploit pockets of instability to set
up their operations. If I heard the Prime Minister
accurately, he mentioned that a vacuum in Somalia
could, indeed, provide the sort of pockets that the
terrorists are looking for. I hope that the Council will
bear that in mind.

We note that comparisons have been drawn, both
publicly and privately, between Afghanistan and
Somalia. Robert Orr, a National Security Council
official in the Clinton Administration, was recently
quoted in The New York Times as referring to the
present Afghanistan situation as "Somalia-plus". By
the same token, we in the Council should be mindful to
ensure that Somalia does not become an "Afghanistan-
minus" for the international community. Unfortunately,
the parallels are compelling. Like Afghanistan,
Somalia did not function as a State throughout the
1990s and, as the Ambassador of China said, it remains
awash with arms. Indeed, earlier this week, when
members of the Security Council met in private
consultations to discuss the situation in Afghanistan,
they cautioned against allowing Afghanistan to become
a "Somalia 1993". By extension, we should ensure that
Somalia does not become an "Afghanistan 2001".

Thirdly, we see the restoration of a United
Nations peace-building presence as being crucial to
Somalia's recovery. We note that the Secretary-
General's report concludes that conditions are not
suitable for the deployment of a peace-building office
in Somalia. Certainly, we agree that the safety and
security of United Nations personnel should be a
fundamental principle in our considerations. There was
also a long discussion of this issue in the informal
consultations. While, as everyone agreed, we should
emphasize the safety and security of United Nations
personnel, we should also ensure that the deployment
of a United Nations office is not held hostage by a
warlord or two. We must find the right balance to
ensure that the United Nations is able to be effectively
supportive of the TNG. Here, I am pleased that
Ambassador Levitte, speaking earlier, called for regular
assessments of the security situation to enable us to
decide how quickly we can move forward with the
establishment of a peace-building office, because there
seems to be a general recognition that such an office
could, indeed, play a helpful role in Somalia.

Fourthly, we reaffirm our belief that a solution to
the situation in Somalia must be based on respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia. Unfortunately,
because these words are repeated so often, people
sometimes forget that they are actually very important.
Indeed, the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia must always be
respected. We therefore urge all States to refrain from
any military intervention in the internal situation in
Somalia; Somali territory should not be used to
undermine the stability of the region. Any violation of
the arms embargo imposed under resolution 733 (1992)
should be reported to the sanctions Committee for the
appropriate follow-up.

In conclusion, Somalia has clearly been one the
biggest failures of the United Nations - that is a
matter of public record. As we said in January, to this
day Somalia remains a stain on the conscience of the
United Nations. Today, we may finally have the
opportunity to turn a new page in Somalia's history and
perhaps put it on the right road. We hope that today's
discussion will help to establish that. We look forward
to hearing the views of other delegations, both
members and non-members of the Council, and we
hope that our collective wisdom today will prevail over
the ghosts of the past.

