Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegations of France and Nigeria for having
submitted resolution 1975 (2011).

Gabon has always sought a peaceful solution to
the crisis in C6te d'Ivoire. I recall that, following the
elections of 28 November 2010, Gabon aligned itself
with the position of the international community, the
United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States recognizing
Mr. Alassane Ouattara as President of Cote d'Ivoire.
During the post-electoral crisis, Gabon has supported
all initiatives to promote dialogue towards achieving a
lasting, peaceful solution to the crisis.

The heightened violence and attacks on the
civilian population remain of great concern to us. We
firmly condemn all such violence, and in particular the
use of heavy weaponry against civilians. My delegation
recalls that, when resolution 1962 (2010) was adopted
in December 2010, Gabon expressed its readiness to
endorse firmer measures, including targeted sanctions
against those who threatened the peace and national
reconciliation process, called the results of the
presidential election into question, hindered the work
of the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, and
committed serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.

It was largely with a view to protecting the
civilian population that we voted today in favour of
resolution 1975 (2011). Gabon is convinced that all the
measures contained in the resolution adopted by
consensus by the Security Council today will help to
better protect civilians and establish conditions
conducive to improving the humanitarian situation,
which has already created hardships for the countries
of the region and threatened their stability.

Lastly, while we welcome the consensus in the
Security Council, my delegation would also like to
point out that the measures contained in the resolution
should bring about a comprehensive political outcome
that safeguards peace and democracy, drives the
country's reconstruction and promotes reconciliation
among all Ivorians.

