Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
I, too, want to welcome Special Representative
Ngongi's introduction of the Secretary-General's
report, which we also commend. We also welcome the
presentation by Foreign Minister She Okitundu and we
are glad to see him back here. We hope that we will be
able to meet with the Minister's colleagues from the
Lusaka signatory States during Jamaica's presidency of
the Security Council in November.

The presidential statement that we will adopt at
the conclusion of today's meeting reflects our broad
policy objectives in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We will use the hoped-for meeting in
November to outline the various areas in which we
hope to see progress, areas that a number of my
colleagues have already addressed. In today's meeting,
however, I would like to focus on a specific problem -
a problem not of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government's creation, and one that has resisted
solution for the last seven years.

We know that the Congolese people are the
victims, and not the creators, of groups such as the
former Forces armees rwandaises (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe and the Burundian Front pour la defense
de la de'mocratie. Nor were the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo complicit in the
Rwandan genocide or in the events that led to armed
rebellion in Burundi. But the fact that the problem was
not created by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo does not diminish its
responsibility now in helping to find a solution.

In January, the Council met separately with
Presidents Kabila and Kagame. In those meetings, my
delegation said that neither country could hope to
provide for its security needs if it adopted a policy of
confrontation towards its neighbours. We also said that
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo had a right under international law to demand
the withdrawal of all foreign forces from its territory,
and that its neighbours had a similar right to demand
that the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo not be used to launch attacks against them.
Through the good will of the parties, the
disengagement line is holding and fighting has been
confined to a relatively small area. However, within the
area of current fighting, all the forces that threaten the
welfare of the Congolese people remain intact. This is
the time for the parties to address the most difficult
issue in this process: the disarmament and
demobilization of the armed groups.

The time has come for transparency from all the
parties.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo took the first step in inviting the United
Nations to Kamina to meet with a group of people
presented to the world as Rwandan guerrillas ready for
a disarmament process. This very positive gesture was
undermined by the manner in which it was carried out.
The United Nations has to be able to screen each
individual and ascertain his or her background and
wishes, but contact between the United Nations and
those in the camp was very limited. We cannot even
say if the individuals presented were in fact Rwandans.

Still, Kamina was a start. One of the problems we
have always faced is that none of us knows how many
such individuals exist. The Government of Rwanda
places the number in the tens of thousands; the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
says that the people the United Nations saw in Kamina
represent all of the Rwandan guerrillas on Government
territory. We are fairly confident that the reality lies
somewhere in the middle.

We appeal to Minister She Okitundu to allow the
United Nations to do its job in Kamina. If we succeed
in demobilizing a small group, more may follow. We
hope that when the United Nations returns, it will do so
with the full cooperation and assistance of the
Government. I welcome that the Minister addresses this
in his comments today. The United Nations should be
allowed to speak to everyone individually, and it
should be allowed to ascertain who these people are,
where they come from and where they would like to
go. An unambiguous Government commitment to allow
Kamina follow-through will constitute a positive signal
to the international community and the region.

I want to briefly mention another point. Through
you, Mr. President, the Council recently issued a call to
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and all other parties to cease any form of
support for the armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My Government believes that
the cessation of arming is the necessary precondition
for disarming negative forces. Although the Mayi-Mayi
are not listed in the annex of the Lusaka Agreement,
and although they are an indigenous Congolese
resistance movement, arming them is still potentially
fatal to the peace process. Rather than supplying them
with arms, all parties should focus on bringing them
into the inter-Congolese dialogue.

In calling on the heads of State of Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to meet, we
were in fact calling on them to embark on a process
designed to transform mutual hostility into mutual
security. We know that the Council will continue to
support their efforts to work for a region where
security rests on mutual interest and cooperation.

