Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): The briefing
and report of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2015/300, annex) today are frank
in noting areas of concern, but also show that some
important and positive developments took place over
the reporting period.

New Zealand welcomes the formation of a new
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina subsequent to
the elections in October 2014. Electoral arrangements
are complex, making the holding of peaceful elections
and an orderly installation of the duly-elected
Government a significant achievement. We wish the
Government well as it confronts the many challenges
ahead. Navigating these challenges will require strong
political will and determination.

The commitment of representatives from across the
political spectrum to social and economic reforms, with
a view to closer engagement with the European Union
through the Stabilization and Association Agreement,
is a positive step. The socioeconomic and good
governance reforms that are part of this process will
benefit all the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The strengthening of institutions and the rule of law
will support lasting stability and prosperity within a
well-functioning State. We encourage the international
community, especially neighbours in the region and the
European Union, to support Bosnia and Herzegovina as
it undertakes the necessary but difficult reforms ahead.

While healthy debate stimulates a healthy
democracy, unlocking a country's full potential
requires all parties to share a common aspiration for a
united and prosperous future. The divisive rhetoric once
again identified in the High Representative's report is
therefore concerning. Attempts to undermine the unity
of the country, such as through calling for a referendum
on secession, distract from the important reform agenda
Bosnia and Herzegovina has ahead of it. As the High
Representative pointed out, they also directly challenge
the basic tenets of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace. We hope that such rhetoric can be left behind
and for all of Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward
together in the spirit of reconciliation.

In the twentieth year of the Dayton Peace
Accords, progress is clearly evident, yet still much
remains to be achieved. The five objectives and two
conditions set by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, which are prerequisites for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
have not yet been accomplished. While the future
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is, as it should be, in the
hands of its citizens, the international community has
a responsibility to encourage and support Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To that end, New Zealand reiterates its
commitment to the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and wishes it well on its
path to unity, stability and lasting peace.

