Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Buyoya, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Deputy-Secretary-General Pedro Serrano for their
very enlightening briefings. I particularly welcome
the presence around this table of Permanent Secretary
Maman Sidikou, whose constant engagement we
appreciate.

The fragility of the security situation in the Sahel
and the recent extension of the terrorist threat to eastern
Burkina Faso must alarm us all. The G-5 Sahel States
have shouldered their responsibilities by establishing
the Joint Force and by developing of common priority
investment programme, which demonstrate their
commitment to security and development on the
ground. In that context, it is the responsibility of
the international community to support the States
concerned in their efforts to respond to a threat to
international peace and security that concerns us all.

The establishment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
at the initiative of the States concerned, represents
a historic initiative without any true precedent or
equivalent. Given the magnitude of the task and the
related challenges, we must duly assess and take stock
of the significant progress made in barely more than
a year.

Of course, since it is precisely a key tool in the
fight against terrorism in the Sahel, everyone would
have liked the process to have moved forward more
quickly and for the G-5 Joint Force already to be fully
operational. We all are aware of the considerable
progress that remains to be made.

However, the achievements demonstrate that the
process is well under way. It must be pursued with unity
and determination.

I am thinking first of the fact that the Joint
Force is now an operational reality, with 4,000 men
deployed, functional command structures and several
operations across the sectors. I am also thinking of the
establishment of a human rights compliance framework
unparalleled on the continent and the progress made in
setting up a police component, which makes it a noble
model of an African operation. The steps taken by the
Malian Government following the abuses committed in
Boule'ke'ssi last May are part of that positive dynamic.
Lastly, I think of the fact that the Joint Force is intended
as an essential link in the security architecture deployed
in the Sahel alongside the national armies, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, Operation Barkhane and the European
missions. The enemies of peace understood that when
targeting its headquarters in Sevare during the tragic
attack last June.

For all those reasons, it is absolutely crucial that the
G-5 Sahel States continue their mobilization in order to
ensure that the Joint Force becomes fully operational as
soon as possible. That is the priority. And the biggest
priority of all is that new operations be conducted in the
next few weeks. The decision of the Heads of State of
the G-5 Sahel to relocate the headquarters of the Joint
Force to Bamako must also be implemented as soon as
possible.

Given this unprecedented mobilization by the
G-5 Sahel States, it is now the responsibility of the
international community and the Council to provide
them with effective support that corresponds to the level
of their challenges. That includes, first and foremost,
ensuring that the pledged financial contributions
materialize without delay. Many have already disbursed
their pledged funds or are drawing up contracts to do
so, thanks to the central role played by the European
Union in that regard. It is essential that countries that
have not yet made their contributions do so as soon
as possible. It is also critical that additional resources
be provided to finance the technical support that will
enable the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to provide logistical and
operational support on the ground, which is not the job
of bilateral contributions.

The difficulties of generating and extracting
international support, however, demonstrate that the
mechanisms in place are not fully effective or capable
of generating predictable, sustainable resources, which
is crucial to scaling up the Joint Force in the short
and medium term. We therefore fully support the
Secretary-General's recommendations for enhancing
multilateral support for the Joint Force by providing a
robust mandate and implementing a logistics package.
We are ready to bring them to the Security Council
as soon as the Joint Force is fully operational and we
see the first results on the ground on the basis of the
support that has already been provided. We will do it
in the spirit of the quest for consensus that has always
driven our efforts on this issue, but also because it is
crucial that we provide the Joint Force with all of the
support it needs.
France firmly believes that this exceptional
security commitment to stabilizing the Sahel should
be accompanied by an equivalent level of mobilization
on the political and development fronts. First, on
the political front the priority is the eagerly awaited
full implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. The Council has put in
place a robust framework in support of the Malian
stakeholders. The international community must make
use all of these mechanisms from now until the March
deadline established in resolution 2423 (2018). We are
also counting on the G-5 Sahel States to participate in
the work of persuading all the Malian parties to come
on board.

On the development front, the priority is creating
sustainable prospects for the people of the Sahel,
especially its young people. With 500 projects
identified and totalling more than €7.5 billion by
2020, the Alliance for the Sahel is aiming to mobilize
donors and promote good practices to ensure that the
assistance reaches the most vulnerable populations
quickly, particularly in cross-border areas. The United
Nations Development Programme in particular has a
key role to play in terms of governance. The signing of
a partnership agreement between the Alliance and the
G-5 Sahel is also an important step that should make
it possible to implement rapid-impact projects by the
end of the year in vulnerable areas identified by the
G-5 Sahel, in order to prevent them from plunging
into instability. We also fully support the G-5 Sahel
priority investment plan and call on donors to be
ready for the donor coordination conference to be held
in Nouakchott on 6 December. All of those projects
should be based on the broader framework established
by the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
which is intended to serve as a guidepost for avoiding
any diffusion or duplication of effort. Lastly, we
encourage the Peacebuilding Commission to maintain
its strong commitment to the Sahel issue. It represents
an important setting conducive to encouraging balance
and coordination between the political, security and
development efforts.

The situation in the Sahel today demands our
full attention and effort. All the parties must do their
part - the G-5 Sahel, by conducting the Joint Force's
new operations in the next few weeks; donors, by
ensuring that they make their financial contributions
without delay; and the Council, by committing to
revisiting its multilateral support for the Joint Force
once it is fully operational. France will issue a press
statement to that effect at the end of this meeting.
