Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): The protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is among the priorities of
the Human Security Network, and I would like to thank
the Turkish presidency for the organization of this
important debate. In recent years, the international
community has kept the issue firmly on its agenda.

The delegation of Georgia fully associates itself
with the statement made by the Czech presidency of
the European Union.

Last year, the citizens of my country suffered a
massive foreign military invasion, followed by the
occupation of up to 20 per cent of our territory. This
war took the lives of 600 citizens of Georgia, most of
them civilians. Over 130,000 were forced from their
homes in a move that was branded as ethnic cleansing
by a major European intergovernmental body. Satellite
images obtained by the Operational Satellite
Applications Programme of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research confirm the
deliberate and targeted destruction of dozens of
villages inside the territory occupied by regular
Russian forces and proxy militia.

For many of my displaced compatriots, the horror
of ethnic cleansing continues as we speak. As a matter
of policy, tens of thousands of them are being
prevented from returning to their homes or what is left
of their homes in the occupied territories. As
Mr. Walter Kal'in, the Representative of the Secretary-
General on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, puts it in his report: "An estimated 37,600
will not be able to return in the foreseeable future"
(A/HRC/10/13/Add.2, para. 58). This policy represents
a third wave of ethnic cleansing, with the first two
carried out in another occupied Georgian province,
Abkhazia, where 400,000 citizens of the pre-war
population of 550,000 were either killed or expelled -
including, most recently, 3,000 men and women in the
past year.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General on the issue. Here, I would like to draw the
Council's attention to the issue of the humanitarian
blockade of the occupied territories, and to provide an
update on the situation on the ground. It is a fact that
the Russian occupying forces have been completely
blocking access of humanitarian aid to the occupied
territories, requiring humanitarian missions to enter the
Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia exclusively Via
Russian territory. This policy represents yet another
breach of the principles of international humanitarian
law, as well as of paragraph 3 of the European Union-
brokered ceasefire agreement. A number of
international organizations have protested against that
policy. The blockade turns the occupied territories into
a black hole where people are deprived of their basic
rights and humanitarian aid is simply not allowed.

No one will be surprised to learn that it is with
the same lack of constructiveness that Russia has
refused even to consider a compromise solution to the
problem that envisaged allowing double and
simultaneous access to the territories from both the
northern and southern directions. It should be reiterated
that the Government of Georgia, as well as the entire
international community, regrets the termination of the
activities of the United Nations Observation Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG), due to the single - I emphasize
single - Russian vote cast against it. This constitutes a
clear violation of paragraph 4 of resolution 1866
(2009), which calls for "facilitating, and refraining
from placing any impediment to, humanitarian
assistance".

The termination of UNOMIG's mandate was
meant to reduce the level of protection for human
rights in occupied Abkhazia. It is also aimed at creating
yet another obstacle to the safe and dignified return of
internally displaced persons and refugees to their
homes, in contravention of a number of resolutions of
this Council and the General Assembly. We are
convinced that to better address these needs, we have
to substantially enhance the presence of the relevant
United Nations agencies - such as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Development Programme, among others -
inside the occupied territories of Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia.

My Government joins the call to take this
opportunity to reinvigorate our joint commitment to
making the protection of civilians a reality for all those
caught up in conflict.

