Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): It is a pleasure to see you in the Council,
Madam President. We thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
and the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), Mr. Pierre Krahenbtihl, for their
informative reports.

Exactly two weeks from now, on 4 June, it will be
52 years since Israel occupied the Palestinian territories
of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. This date is an
important milestone in the Middle East conflict and
has a sensitive symbolic meaning for Israelis and
Palestinians and for Arabs in general. For example,
for the Syrians, it marks the loss of the Golan, which,
despite everything, remains occupied Syrian territory.
Unfortunately, that day was not the last tragic date in
the calendar of the Middle East. Others have followed.

As a result of various internal causes and brazen
external intervention in the region, several other
hotbeds of crisis have emerged, in particular in
Yemen, Libya, Syria and Iraq. While the situation in
the Republic of Iraq is steadily returning to normal,
and most of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic
has been stabilized, resolving the Yemen and Libya
conflicts will still require a great deal of effort on the
part of the international community.

Recently, new tensions have appeared around
Iran. This artificial escalation of tensions could have
the most negative consequences for the entire Middle
and Near East and beyond. There must be urgent
de-escalation and a search for negotiated solutions to
existing disagreements. Confrontation must give way
to dialogue. We recall the relevant mandate of the
Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 598
(1987).
It is necessary to recognize the interconnectedness
of everything taking place in the region. This is not
surprising, since the region has a common history
of development and a common civilizational space.
Encouraging and strengthening close, friendly and
mutually beneficial relations among the States of the
region would help to improve the overall situation there.
Based on that logic, the settlement of one conflict would
have a positive impact on the reconciliation processes
in other hotbeds of crisis.

In this regard, we believe it necessary to redouble
efforts on the Palestinian-Israeli track of the Middle
East peace process. A just solution to the Palestinian
problem would be key to improving the situation
throughout the region. Should the conflict between
Israel and the Palestinians persist, by contrast, it would
continue to constantly poison the overall international
atmosphere, adversely affect efforts to resolve other
regional crises and fuel terrorism.

At the same time, there is no need to reinvent the
wheel. There are agreed, internationally recognized
parameters, including the Security Council's resolutions,
the Madrid principles - including the principle of land
for peace - and the Arab Peace Initiative. Some may say
that this basis has not resolved the Palestinian question
and is therefore irrelevant. However, the problem is
not with the basis, because its final details must in any
case be discussed by Palestinians and Israelis in direct
negotiations. The problem is in factors preventing the
resumption of the negotiation process. Those factors
can be eliminated through the implementation of the
recommendations indicated in the 2016 report of the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators.

First of all, Israeli settlement activity on the West
Bank of the Jordan river and the policy of demolishing
Palestinian property must be ended. Palestinians and
Israelis should refrain from aggressive and provocative
rhetoric and eschew violence. We need to jointly put
an end to terrorist attacks. It remains necessary to
restore unity within the Palestinian ranks. Palestinians
and Israelis should be helped to take the first steps to
implement these recommendations. That would open
up the prospects for reaching a comprehensive, just
and lasting Palestinian-Israeli settlement. That should
lead to an end to the Israeli occupation of Arab lands
that began in 1967 and the creation of an independent,
viable, contiguous Palestinian State existing side by side
and in peace with Israel within secure and recognized
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and of course
West Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Israel.

We see no alternative to a two-State formula. We
believe that it is the only realistic way to put an end to
the Palestinian-Israeli confrontation and resolve their
mutual claims. Other concepts are only misleading
and make it difficult to resume the political process.
We do not believe that the Palestinians will renounce
their legitimate aspirations to statehood, whatever they
are promised in exchange. Imposing a ready-made
solution on the parties will not work. We believe that
now more than ever it has become essential to take
practical measures to help the peace process emerge
from its dangerous impasse. Russia will continue its
efforts bilaterally and in other formats to bring about a
resumption of direct dialogue between Palestinians and
Israelis. Our proposal for holding a meeting between
Mahmoud Abbas and Benjamin Netanyahu in Moscow
is still on the table.

As long as the Palestinian question remains
unresolved, we believe it is important to continue to
provide support, including financial assistance, to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The Agency's
activities have a political as well as a humanitarian
dimension, providing an important stabilizing effect
in the Palestinian territories and the countries of the
Middle East. We made our latest financial contribution
to UNRWA's budget for 2019 only the other day.

Israel and Palestine have major religious
significance for hundreds of thousands of followers
of the monotheistic religions. The establishment of a
lasting peace in those lands as soon as possible is in the
interests of all Christians, Muslims and Jews. However,
the destabilization of the situation in the Middle East
and North Africa has hit Christians and other religious
and ethnic minorities in the region extremely hard.
Extremists exploit ethnic and religious factors to
foment discord and enlarge their ranks. It is important
to take immediate measures to spread a culture of
peace among religious and ethnic groups, which will
help to prevent new upheavals based on ethnicity or
religion. Russia's experience with coexisting ethnicities
and religions is unique. On that basis, we support the
Inter-Parliamentary Union's proposal for organizing
a world conference on interreligious and inter-ethnic
dialogue together with the United Nations, in which
Heads of State and Government, parliamentarians and
representatives of world religions would take part. We
are willing to host that conference in Russia in 2022.

We call for intensifying the joint work on the
Middle East as a whole, including in the Security
Council. We believe that sending missions to areas of
conflict can strengthen the Council's unity. Russia is
ready to work on all of those and other aspects together
with interested partners on an open and impartial basis,
without threats or negative pressure.

