The President: The Security Council will now

continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with

the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

to

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the implementation of its
resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and
welcomes the efforts by the United Nations system,
Member States, civil society organizations and other
relevant actors in promoting the equal
participation and full involvement of women in
the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security and in implementing the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000).

"The Council further reaffirms its strong
support for increasing the role of women in
decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution and renews its call on
States to include women in the negotiation and
implementation of peace accords, constitutions
and strategies for resettlement and rebuilding and
to take measures to support local women's groups
and indigenous processes for conflict resolution.
In this regard it recognizes the efforts of the Mano
River Women's Peace Network in facilitating peace
and dialogue in the Mano River Union region. It is
also encouraged by the inclusion of women in the
political decision-making bodies in Burundi,
Somalia and in East Timor.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of promoting an active and visible
policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective in all
policies and programmes while addressing armed
conflicts, in particular peacekeeping operations in
keeping with the statement of the President of the
Security Council on 8 March 2000.

"The Council therefore reiterates its request
the Secretary-General to include, where

appropriate, in his reporting to the Security
Council, progress in gender mainstreaming
throughout United Nations peacekeeping
missions and on other aspects relating to women
and girls. It expresses its intention to give full
consideration to these reports and to take
appropriate action. The Council also reaffirms its
call for the inclusion of gender components, as
appropriate, in peacekeeping operations.

"The Security Council renews its support
for gender-sensitive training guidelines and
material on the protection, rights and the
particular needs of women, as well as on the
importance of involving women in all
peacekeeping and peace-building measures. The
Council calls upon all troop-contributing
countries to include these elements in their
national training programmes for peacekeepers.

"The Council welcomes the specific
proposals made by the Secretary-General aimed
at strengthening the Best Practices Unit of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations with the
appointment of gender advisers at sufficiently
senior levels.

"It also welcomes the practical efforts,
including the preparation of complementary
reports, already made by the United Nations and
its agencies, funds, programmes and regional
bodies, in particular those participating in the
Administrative Committee on Coordination
(ACC) Inter-agency Task Force on Women, Peace
and Security to implement all aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the timely
issuance of the publication 'Gender Perspective
in Disarmament', which gives a clear indication
of ways in which women can be fully involved
and the benefits to the parties concerned.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction that the Secretary-General's study
requested under paragraph 16 of its resolution
1325 (2000) on the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls, the role of women in peace-
building and the gender dimensions of peace
processes and conflict resolution is under way
and welcomes the coordinated comprehensive
input of the United Nations and all the relevant

agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system and looks forward to its review.

"The Security Council is concerned that
there are still no women appointed as Special
Representatives or Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General to peace missions, and urges
Member States to redouble their efforts to
nominate women candidates to the Secretary-
General. The Council also urges the Secretary-
General to appoint women as Special
Representatives and Envoys to pursue good
offices on his behalf in accordance with his
strategic plan of action (A/49/587, para. 2).

"The Security Council recognizes the need
to implement fully international humanitarian and
human rights law that protects the rights of
civilians, including women and girls, during and

after conflicts and calls on all parties to
armed conflicts to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based
violence and all other forms of violence.

"The Security Council remains actively
seized of the matter and expresses its willingness
to consider, as appropriate, the gender dimensions
of armed conflict in carrying out its responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security
under the Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2001/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.
