Ms. Coleman (United States): Last month, the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, warned the Security Council that
there was a strong risk of violence escalating along
ethnic lines, with a potential to spiral into genocide.
Just this week, the head of a team of United Nations
human rights investigators in South Sudan echoed
Dieng's message, saying that South Sudan is on the
brink of an all-out civil war, which could destabilize
the entire region.

The horrors facing the South Sudanese people are
extraordinary. We know that 7.5 million people - 75 per
cent of the population - are in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance. That is not the only appalling
condition in South Sudan. Rape has also been an element
of an apparently intentional strategy for terrorizing
and punishing the population. What all that tells us is
that the status quo in South Sudan is unbearable and
cannot persist.

Today, the Security Council has taken a necessary
and important step in helping address that bleak
situation. Today's resolution 2327 (2016), unanimously
adopted, urges parties to return to the peace process
as the primary means of ending the conflict. The
resolution also ensures, in the face of the heightened
tensions I have described, that the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has the necessary
tools to carry out its core mandate - the protection
of civilians.

The resolution decides to continue the deployment
and full operationalization of the 4,000-strong Regional
Protection Force, which we first mandated four months
ago, and it responds to the Secretary-General's request
to increase the number of police assigned to UNMISS.
Both of those steps are intended to strengthen the
Mission's ability to protect civilians. The resolution
also retains the other key responsibilities of UNMISS,
including the monitoring and investigating of human
rights abuses and violations and creating the security
conditions for humanitarian assistance to reach all
those who need it.

Furthermore, the resolution calls on peacekeepers
to do more to prevent and respond to sexual violence
and urges the United Nations to incorporate lessons
learned from the attacks on the protection of civilians
sites in Malakal and Juba. In that regard, we note our
expectation that the United Nations will implement
reforms to better enable the Mission to protect civilians
and will report to the Council on its progress.

The resolution is a reflection ofthe briefings we have
heard over the past few months from high-level United
Nations officials on the deteriorating situation in South
Sudan and is focused on ensuring that UNMISS has the
right mandate and has the tools it needs to implement it.
The resolution expresses our continued commitment to
considering the use of sanctions and an arms embargo
as tools to reduce the ability and incentives of those
who attack civilians and derail the peace process.

While some have argued that those measures would be
counterproductive or irrelevant, we cannot think of a
more appropriate measure than an arms embargo that
would impede the flow of arms, particularly heavy
weapons, to a Government intent on pursuing violence
at the expense of its people and to rebel factions that
aim to disrupt the peace agreement.

Similarly, we believe that targeted sanctions can be
an effective tool in sending a message from the Council
about our disapproval of leaders, on both sides, who
are responsible for inciting violence in South Sudan.
We are prepared to support imposing such measures
in response to the worsening violence that includes
Government offences, the Government's ongoing
obstruction of UNMISS and the regional protection
force - despite pledges to the contrary - and the role
played by individual actors in perpetuating the cycle of
violence in South Sudan.

South Sudan is on a precipice. The country can
return to the peace process towards greater stability or
allow further violence to devolve into outright ethnic
war. We have already seen a glimpse of what the high
cost of the latter would be, with reports of thousands
of women and girls having been raped and gang-raped,
people fleeing their homes en masse and the spectre
of widespread hunger following a disruption of normal
agricultural production due to continued conflict.

With resolution 2327 (2016), the Council recognizes
those high stakes and commits to trying to return the
country to peace and stability.

