Mr. Oshima (Japan): Japan is pleased that the
Security Council continues to give close attention, as it
should, to the plight of civilians in armed conflict. We
therefore welcome today's open debate and thank
Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his briefing
on the progress that has been made. We commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for playing the leading role in this area.

Indeed, real and concrete progress has in fact
been made towards the goal of protecting innocent
civilians. The Security Council has adopted a number
of normative instruments, including resolution 1674
(2006). With regard to the issue of the protection of
journalists in conflict, which was raised in the open
debate last December (see S/PV.5577), we welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1738 (2006).

For Japan, the protection of civilians is a high
priority, as we believe it is essential to human security.
The United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security,
which is administered by OCHA and to which my
Government has made substantial contributions, has
accordingly taken great interest in projects that address
issues such as conflict prevention, post-conflict
peacebuilding, landmines, internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees, giving support to more than 50
projects over the years. For example, the Trust Fund
has assisted in promoting recovery and sustainable
livelihoods for that part of the Sri Lankan population
which has been affected by internal conflict. Most
recently, on 29 May, the Government of Japan and the
United Nations decided to extend assistance through
the Trust Fund for Human Security to a project that
aims at the protection, reintegration and resettlement of
IDPs in Somalia. The Central Emergency Response
Fund has also helped to ensure a predictable flow of
financing for efforts to protect civilians in neglected
crises; we all welcome these efforts.

Today I would like to touch upon four aspects of
the subject of protection of civilians. Allow me to start
with the Security Council, which we commend for the
significant progress it has made in this area.
Specifically, the Working Group on children and armed
conflict has effected improvements in the situation of
children in armed conflict through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism which the Council established in
resolution 1612 (2005).

At the same time, we are deeply troubled by the
large number of civilians affected by conflict - in
Iraq, Afghanistan, Darfur, Somalia and other embattled
parts of the world - who continue to be in desperate
need of protection and assistance. We deplore the fact
that civilians have with increasing frequency become
the primary targets of violence, even as we have
witnessed a steady decline in the number of conflicts
over the past few years. We also condemn the
harassment, intimidation and murder of humanitarian
workers operating in crises and emergencies around the
world.

But condemnation is not enough. World leaders
formally acknowledged the responsibility to protect
populations at the 2005 World Summit, and it was
reaffirmed by the Security Council in its resolution
1674 (2006). Yet, these words have not adequately
been translated into action. We need to discuss in this
body what other concrete measures the United Nations
and the Security Council can take.

One such measure is the aide-memoire adopted
by the Council in 2002 (S/PRST/2002/6, annex) as a
tool to bridge the normative instruments this Council
develops and concrete action on the ground. In
particular, it has proven useful in the process of
formulating a peacekeeping mandate. This useful tool
should not be shelved; rather, it should continue to be
put to good use. And to be useful, it should be
reviewed and updated from time to time.
Proper monitoring in order to provide early
warning is another mechanism in place that contributes
to the protection of civilians. Also, timely briefings
from the officials responsible, including the Emergency
Relief Coordinator and the United Nations High
Commissioners for Refugees and for Human Rights,
should, therefore, be provided.

Secondly, we need to strengthen our efforts to
protect IDPs. We support the recommendation of the
High-level Panel on System-wide Coherence that the
humanitarian agencies should clarify their mandates
and enhance cooperation in this area. We also welcome
the start of informal consultations on humanitarian
issues this week. Japan for its part intends to
participate constructively in the discussion on this
subject in whichever forums it takes place, including
OCHA and the Executive Committee of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Third is the question of ending impunity. The
question of how to strike the proper balance between
national reconciliation and punishment of those who
have done wrong, and also between peace and justice,
needs to be considered further. There can be no doubt,
however, that establishing the rule of law contributes
greatly to durable peace and to stability. Accordingly,
Japan has been taking initiatives in this field. It has
actively supported the Khmer Rouge Tribunal in
Cambodia, for example, and it welcomes the recent
important progress made that brings the
commencement of the trial closer. Japan hopes that the
trial will proceed smoothly and with all due speed. To
that end, it is vital that the United Nations and Member
States continue to support Cambodia.

With regard to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Japan has completed the necessary legislative
procedures so that it may participate in the ICC, and
my country plans to join the Court formally by the fall
of this year. In doing so, our hope will be that we can
contribute further to the prevention and even
eradication of many serious crimes and to
strengthening the rule of law and the maintenance of
peace and security.

Fourthly and lastly, I would like to underline the
importance of regional initiatives to ensure the
implementation of normative frameworks and
principles relating to the protection of civilians. It is
clear that the involvement of relevant regional
organizations is desirable and beneficial.
Accordingly, we welcome the regional conference
organized by OCHA in April in Dakar. We hope to be
able to work with OCHA to hold a similar conference
in Asia at an appropriate time.

In conclusion, all of the efforts of the
international community for the protection of civilian
must ultimately be judged by the number of people
actually protected and saved. Any concrete action that
contributes to that ultimate objective should be
pursued, including removing anti-personnel mines,
ensuring the timely and sufficient delivery of food and
medical support to people in distress, exercising
maximum care to avoid civilian casualties in counter-
insurgency operations and making political efforts to
end or contain conflicts. We are also concerned about
the humanitarian toll that can result from unexploded
cluster munitions. According priority to the framework
of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons,
Japan will continue to constructively participate in the
discussion on this problem in various international
forums.

The protection of civilians must be the concern of
all Member States, and the Security Council should
therefore continue to act to provide the necessary
leadership and to monitor developments closely. I
assure you, Mr. President, that Japan will do its part.

