Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, Deputy Secretary-
General Frechette and High Commissioner Robinson
for their statements.

My Government has long believed that the
safeguarding of civilians from the devastating effects
of armed conflict is at the very heart of the United
Nations Charter. In examining this complex and
difficult issue, we look at an array of instruments to
deal with the challenge before the Council. Regrettably,
the goal of protecting civilians caught between warring
parties often eludes us, and a number of speakers have
illuminated why that is so. I think that it is helpful to
look at several specific situations, such as the tragic
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
Ambassador Levitte did a good job of outlining the
complications there. We see that Congolese civilians
need protection from foreign groups such as the former
Rwandan armed forces members (ex-FAR),
Interhamwe, UNITA and the Front pour la defense de
la democratie (FDD). They also need protection from
indigenous Congolese militias such as the Mai-Mai.
Congolese civilians also, unfortunately, need protection
from some of the signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. This means that they need protection from
some of our very partners in the peace process.

United Nations peacekeeping cannot substitute
for the protection of the rule of law, which is the
essential element for real protection. At most, it can
provide a protective temporary umbrella for some
civilians for some of the time a conflict rages. For
example, the Government and people of Sierra Leone
are looking to the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL). But UNAMSIL cannot protect the
people of Sierra Leone against the depredations of a
murderous insurgency. It will, however, help extend the
authority of an elected Government to all parts of its
territory.

Countries such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Sierra Leone need, above all, the restoration
of legitimate and effective national authority. Our
fondest wish would be that this Council could protect
all those who are subject to insurgencies and - yes -
Governments that prey on their own people. While it
cannot, there is much more than we can do to help
achieve that goal. The Secretary-General has made a
number of recommendations, and they are already
affecting our work and the work of the United Nations.
I also note that resolution 1296 (2000) is also
contributing to change. While none of these
recommendations or the resolution can simply be
implemented in and of themselves, the
recommendations and sentiments that we have adopted
are helping, and specific elements, for instance, have
been applied to the situation on the border of Sierra
Leone and Guinea.
Resolution 1296 (2000) also invited the
Secretary-General to share with the Council
information about possible threats to civilians, denials
of humanitarian access and violations of the civilian
nature of refugee camps. Indeed, the Council is now
hearing and gathering more of this type of information.
We encourage the Secretary-General regularly to
include this information in his periodic written reports
to the Council and to make more information available
through briefings from the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs or the High Commissioner for
Refugees, through the briefings we also receive from
officials recently returned from trips to conflict areas,
and in the oral updates we regularly receive from the
Secretariat.

Additionally, it should be a priority, in the event
of a Security Council mission, to see firsthand the
impact of a conflict on the civilian population, with an
eye to gaining wide access to, and promoting safety
for, vulnerable civilian groups. The more the concept
of protection of civilians is mainstreamed into the work
of the Secretariat and the Council, the more a "culture
of protection" will be fostered, and the more frequently
that case-specific action may be possible.

The Secretary-General quite rightly focused on
the promotion of a "culture of protection" in his report
of 30 March. We strongly applaud the report's support
for continuing efforts to prosecute those accused of
crimes against humanity or other serious violations of
international law. We are pleased that in the past year
there has been enormous progress in this area,
including the Council's decision to create a pool of ad
litem judges for the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, to increase the number of
judges for the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, and to establish a special independent court
for Sierra Leone. We hope to see continued
nominations of talented jurists for vacancies at the
international Tribunals and urge moral and financial
backing for the special Sierra Leone court.

The United States also supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that armed groups be
pressured to comply with fundamental rules related to
the protection of civilians during armed conflict, and to
ensure access of humanitarian assistance to civilians.
This is a key element which is growing in relevance to
the conflicts that we are dealing with. The international
community, through the United Nations, through
bilateral channels and through the International
Committee of the Red Cross, can assist in building
local capacity to integrate international humanitarian
law into the national legal frameworks that are being
developed.

The United States is ready to add the Council's
weight to the efforts of the Secretary-General, the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Special
Representatives and the United Nations humanitarian
coordinators with local leaders to ensure safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to civilians. We count
on each Special Representative to consult with the
United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator and
humanitarian agencies and to raise issues of
responsibility to protect civilians.

The Secretary-General correctly points out that
the identification and separation of armed elements
from displaced civilian populations are difficult and
delicate tasks. We encourage the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to work closely with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to develop clear criteria and
procedures to accomplish this critical task.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation that every peacekeeping mission
include a mechanism to monitor local media for hate-
mongering. Any threat to civilian populations created
by such activity must be expeditiously addressed by the
peacekeeping mission and humanitarian actors.

In closing, the United States reiterates its support
for the Secretary-General's efforts to protect civilians
in armed conflict and renews its support for resolution
1296 (2000). We encourage the Secretary-General and
other key actors in the United Nations system to
continue the dialogue on how United Nations organs
can better work together to promote protection and to
present country-specific recommendations for the
Council's consideration.

