Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
of course first like to very warmly commend the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon, who held the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September, for the enormously effective and
courageous manner in which he carried out his duties. I
would also like to congratulate you, Madame
President, on having assumed your duties as President
of the Council.

More than 2,700 civilian victims and tens of
thousands of protesters held in Syrian prisons, more
than 10,000 Syrian refugees in Turkey, Lebanon and
Jordan - that is the terrible toll on which the Syrian
authorities can pride themselves since the beginning of
the demonstrations, early in March. That is the terrible
toll that some around this table today have still refused
to condemn.

Since May, we have worked unrelentingly to
bring about a response from the Security Council. Our
objective was simple and remains so: to stop the brutal
crackdown by the Syrian regime against its own
people, who are legitimately demanding to exercise
their most fundamental rights. This would create an
atmosphere free of violence and intimidation and thus
allow for the emergence of an inclusive political
process led by and for the Syrian people.

To that end, France has assumed its
responsibilities at the national and European levels.
The European Union has adopted numerous series of
sanctions against those responsible for the Violence and
the measures that have allowed the repression to
continue. At the same time, diplomatic efforts
continued against the Damascus regime. Those efforts
were extensive and included those made by members
of the Security Council. The Syrian authorities have
remained deaf to those efforts. Faced with the extreme
violence being brought against a population demanding
to exercise their rights; faced with the deafness of the
Syrian authorities; and confronted with the risk of
regional instability, a united response from the
international community was, and continues to be,
necessary. The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility of maintaining peace and security, is
11-52974
therefore the natural spokesperson for the international
community.

Since May, we have worked tirelessly to ensure
that the Council can send a clear and united message to
the Syrian authorities. After the massacre in Hama, the
Council adopted, on 3 August, a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/16) condemning the Syrian authorities
and calling for an immediate end to all violence. On
that basis, we prepared a draft resolution. Every effort
has been made to understand the concerns of some
members of the Council and to prepare a unanimous
response. Each of us knows that we agreed to modify
our text on many occasions. In particular, we agreed to
withdraw the proposed sanctions, which we thought
were necessary. Each of us knows that we made
numerous concessions. The text that we submitted
today is, in many ways, very similar to the presidential
statement that we adopted on 3 August. It was to have
updated that statement in the light of recent events.

Thus, we cannot doubt the meaning of the veto
against this text today. This is not a matter of language,
it is a political choice. It is a veto on principle, which
means that it is a refusal of all Council resolutions
against Syria. It shows disdain for the legitimate
aspirations that have been so bravely expressed in
Syria for the past five months. It is a rejection of this
tremendous movement for freedom and democracy that
is the Arab Spring.

Let there be no mistake. This veto will not stop
us. No veto can give carte blanche to the Syrian
authorities, who have lost all legitimacy by murdering
their own people. The appeals of the Arab League to
put an end to this blood-letting, the statements from
neighbouring countries and the suffering of the Syrian
people clearly show that this veto runs counter to the
path of the historic events occurring in Syria and
throughout the region.

In the Security Council and within the European
Union, France, along with all its partners, will not
cease its efforts to ensure that the rights of the Syrian
people are recognized and respected, so that those
responsible for the violence can one day be brought to
justice - and they will - and to promote an inclusive,
credible political process that can fulfil the aspirations
that are being expressed daily in Syria.

In conclusion, I should like to pay tribute to the
courage of all those women and men who continue,
after months of bloody repression, to call for freedom
11-52974

in Syria. Only an effective response to those
aspirations can restore stability to that country, on
which depends the stability of a fragile region. The
international community and the Council in particular,
given its mandate, cannot escape its obligation to
ensure that this happens, and we regret that that was
not the case tonight.

