Ms. Shalev (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important debate and for your
leadership of the Security Council during this month.

As some may know, we are celebrating today the
sixty-first anniversary of the independence of the
modern State of Israel, the homeland of the Jewish
people. Nevertheless, in the light of the importance of
this debate and the issue at hand, I have decided to
participate.
Let me thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her great
help and for her introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/158). Also, I would like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman, for their
briefings. I am also very grateful for the moving
testimony given this morning by Ms. Grace Akallo, as
well as for her courage in surviving the horrors she
faced and her willingness to share her experience with
us. We wish to commend the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for its vital work in
raising the profile of this issue and for working to
protect children living in difficult circumstances
caused by armed conflict.

There can be no doubt that, since the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1612 (2005),
establishing the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, the increased international focus on this
issue has resulted in improved protection for many of
the estimated 300,000 child soldiers around the world.
Among the notable achievements is the pressure
exerted on armed groups to desist from child
recruitment and to release youths who have already
been conscripted into armed groups. Indeed, several
armed groups have been de-listed from the annexes of
the Secretary-General's reports, and the first trial
initiated by the International Criminal Court earlier this
year in The Hague is a milestone in the issue of child
soldiers. In addition to encouraging the release of child
soldiers, placing the spotlight on these violations and
on those who commit them has the significant effect of
discouraging future abuse by others.

Another area that warrants greater attention is
rape and other grave forms of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict - in this case, violence of
the most despicable kind: violence perpetrated against
children. There is a growing consensus in favour of
adding this violation as a trigger for the listing of
specific groups that warrant the attention and
monitoring of the Working Group. These acts are
deliberate and are often carried out as tools of war and
terror. Israel adds its voice to those of States calling for
the addition of grave sexual violence to the list of
violations that trigger the listing of a party in the
Secretary-General's annexes.

Terrorism deliberately targeting civilians,
including children, continues to plague many regions
in the world. Only a few weeks ago, an Israeli child
was murdered and another seriously wounded by an
axe-wielding terrorist. In the recent armed conflict
between Israel and the Hamas terrorist entity in Gaza,
Hamas terrorists displayed the same callous disregard
for the lives of both Israeli and Palestinian civilians,
including children. They initiated the conflict by their
years-long barrage of rockets and mortars launched
from Gaza into Israel, killing, wounding and
terrorizing civilians across the southern part of my
country. These rockets and mortars were often
launched from heavily populated civilian areas, very
often in close proximity to schools and hospitals.
During the recent conflict, Hamas terrorists hid among
Gaza's civilian population, using and abusing them as
human shields. While civilians have been too
intimidated to denounce the terrorists for this abhorrent
practice, the evidence for its widespread use is
overwhelming and incontrovertible. And while children
were trained, indoctrinated and used by Hamas in the
hostilities, the Secretary-General's report states only
that "community members are reluctant to provide
information on cases of children used by armed forces
or armed groups for fear of reprisals" (S/2009/J58, para. 86).

We should also remember that childhood
indoctrination into prejudice, hatred and the ways of
terrorism has devastating effects. Indoctrination and
incitement to violence is, regrettably, all too common
in some areas in my region. More attention should be
paid to this practice in the Special Representative's
reports, and they should clearly and unequivocally
condemn all such exploitation.

Israel follows with interest the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
is a tireless advocate for children. Certain aspects of
her work, however, deserve to be examined more
carefully, especially those aspects in the reports which
rely heavily on unsubstantiated allegations and which
lack supporting detail. The practice is so extensive as
to cast a shadow over these reports, and it does a
general disservice to the cause of children and armed
conflict. We urge the Office of the Special
Representative to give greater attention to the
invaluable process of carefully documenting and
vetting the various sources of the information it
receives.

Israel believes that more intensive work should
be done to ensure the long-term effectiveness of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. After intensive investment of resources to
help stabilize a post-conflict situation, viable
alternatives to violence need to be put in place as
quickly as possible. These efforts must also be
sustained until reintegration has been achieved. The
longer children languish in camps or, worse, continue
to be compelled to take part in violence, the dimmer
the prospects are for their effective reintegration, and
formal education may never resume. Time is of the
essence for preventing armed conflicts, but also for
protecting individual children. To this end, a candid
assessment of the Working Group's impact on various
situations should be carried out in order to arrive at
best practices.

Israel recognizes the work of all individuals and
organizations dedicated to protecting children. Often,
their work is carried out under very difficult
circumstances, and their efforts deserve our
unwavering support. We should seize this opportunity
to reach international consensus on the issues of
concern and together improve the situation for children
in armed conflict around the globe.

