Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
appreciates the convening of this meeting. We would
like to reiterate our gratitude and appreciation to the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
represented here today by Mr. Thomas Markram,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs. Unsurprisingly, he has provided us a grim
picture of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

In 2013, in this very Chamber the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2118 (2013), which
urges the warring parties in Syria to destroy all
chemical-weapons stockpiles in the country. Almost
five years have passed, and the debate around this issue
is still as old as the conflict itself, which has been going
on for eight years.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, a State party
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and, like all the members of the
Security Council, a signatory to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, urges the parties involved to be honest
in declaring their chemical arsenals. We understand
that in the context of prolonged confrontations, the
manufacture and use of chemical weapons end up
serving a tactical objective, a plan of provocations in
which each party's aim is to blame the others. Thus
the Syrian opposition and the Islamist groups claim
that the Syrian Government is trying to use poisonous
gases to suffocate the last rebel bastions, while the
Government forces claim that their opponents still have
small chemical-weapon workshops that they are using
to prepare chemical attacks in the regions we have
discussed in order to blame the Government.

The Security Council must put an end to this
political game. The use of chemical weapons in Syria
clearly poses a threat to international peace and
security. We must therefore prevent chemical war in
Syria from changing the way we approach conflicts in
future. What should the Security Council's coordinated
response to the continued use of chemical weapons
in Syria be? The confrontational positions among
Council members with the capacity to influence the
parties to the conflict show that ending the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and the world as a whole
depends on reaching an inclusive political agreement.
Without a clear international consensus, we run the
risk of extending the conflict, with all its direct and
collateral consequences.

We know that the Council no longer has an
investigative mechanism that can hold violators of the
Chemical Weapons Convention in Syria accountable.
Nonetheless, my Government continues to insist on the
urgent need for the most influential organ of the United
Nations to speed up the implementation of a truly
independent, professional and impartial investigative
instrument. That is the only way to reunite the Council
on the issue of chemical weapons in Syria. It is a
challenge that goes far beyond Syria. It is about our
collective responsibility and moral obligation to the
victims of this long conflict.

I would like to conclude by calling on the members
of the Security Council to reflect on Article 26 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which reminds us that
one of the powers of the Security Council is

"to promote the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security with the least
diversion for armaments of the world's human and
economic resources",

and on the words of Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres in Geneva on 24 October 2017, when he said,

"Disarmament can play an important role in ending
existing conflicts and preventing the outbreak of
new strife. Disarmament and arms control processes
provide the breathing space for confidence to be
built [and] stability to be strengthened... This was
true during the Cold War and it is true now."

With that, I would like to end by solemnly
reaffirming the official position of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, which is to condemn and reject
the manufacture, stockpiling, use, distribution and
improvement of chemical weapons and other related
weapons, whose use can cause only desolation in
human lives, and to advocate for their total elimination.
We saw the consequences of that use a year ago in Khan
Shaykhun, and we therefore take this opportunity to
reiterate our unreserved condemnation of that attack.

