The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/ 178, which contains the note dated 6 March 1995
by the Secretary-General concerning the date of an election
to fill a vacancy in the International Court of Justice. That
note explains the need for the item on our agenda.

The recent death, on 24 February 1995, of Judge
Roberto Ago has created a vacancy in the International
Court of Justice which has to be filled. Judge Ago, a
member of the International Court of Justice, had a long
and distinguished career in the service of the Court and of
his country in the field of international law and diplomacy.
He was President of various arbitration tribunals, in
particular the Franco-German Tribunal on the Saar, the
Arbitration Tribunal between France and the United States
on the Interpretation of the Air Transport Agreement, and
the Arbitration Tribunal on the question of the Grands
Moulins de Dakar.

He represented Italy in numerous United Nations
bodies. He was head of the Italian delegation to United
Nations Conferences on the Law of the Sea in 1958 and
1960, to the Conference on Diplomatic Relations in 1961,
and to the Conferences on the Law of Treaties in 1968 and
1969. From 1957 to 1959 he was a member of the
International Law Commission, and he was also a member
of the Permanent Court of Arbitration from 1957. From
1959 to 1960 Judge Ago was an ad hoc judge in the
International Court of Justice. An eminent Italian university
professor of international law, Judge Ago was a member of
the Commission for drafting the European Constitution.

 

He was the recipient of the Grand Cross and the
Order of Merit of Italy and of the Order of Merit of
Germany, as well as Ofi'icier of the Legion d 'h0nnear of
Nice, Paris and Toulouse in France.
Judge Roberto Ago was the author of several legal
publications as well as Director and Co-Director of
various Italian law reviews. He was indeed a most
distinguished scholar, international lawyer and jurist and
an eminent judge. His loss has been deeply felt by the
Government and the people of Italy, by the International
Court of Justice and by the international community as a
whole.

I am sure that I am expressing the sentiments of
all the members of the Council in extending sincere
condolences to the President of the Court, to the
Government of Italy and to the bereaved family of Judge
Roberto Ago.

Judge Roberto Ago was elected a member of the
International Court of Justice on 6 February 1979. He was
re-elected as from 6 February 1988 for a further period of
nine years. His term of office would have expired on 6
February 1997.

Under Article 14 of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, the Security Council is to fix the date
for the election to fill the vacancy in the Court. As agreed
during our prior consultations on this matter, the election
could take place on 21 June 1995 at a meeting of the
Security Council and at a meeting of the General
Assembly at its forty-ninth session.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1995/ 186, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

May I take it that the Council is ready to proceed
to a decision on the draft resolution?

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In the light of the consultations which I have held,
it is my understanding that the Council is ready to adopt
the draft resolution contained in document S/1995/186
without a vote.
 

There being no objection, it is so decided. The Seetnity Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on the agenda.
The draft resolution has been adopted as resolution
979 (1995). The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
