Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for responding so
quickly to the request by South Africa, in its capacity
as the country currently chairing the Non-Aligned
Movement, to convene this important debate on an
issue of great concern to all Members of the United
Nations. I also believe that by doing so, you are
keeping the members of the Council more attuned to
the groundswell of opinion of non-Council members,
which in turn may help in the consultations of the
Council members on the much-discussed draft
resolution.

The issue of the looming confrontation with
regard to Iraq is being inflated to such an extent that it
could erupt any day now with a military attack against
that country. Iraq is being depicted as an outcast that
has developed and stockpiled weapons of mass
destruction and has relations with the hated Al Qaeda.
But is there any concrete evidence to prove that beyond
any reasonable doubt?

I believe that in this case the devil is not so black
as it is being painted. While that second allegation
seems to be groundless - as a recent Central
Intelligence Agency report found - the first is simply
based on the argument that if Iraq refuses to go along
with a United Nations resolution, it must have
something to hide. Only experts can say whether or not
Iraq has developed and stockpiled weapons of mass
destruction. Now that the Iraqi Government has
accepted, without any conditions, the return of
international weapons inspectors to Iraq, a hurdle has
been removed. So let the inspectors come back and do
what they are mandated to do; pre-emption and
prejudgement will not help their task. A political, not a
military, approach is the only way to resolve the
deadlock. We are convinced that diplomatic efforts
towards this end will bring more credit to the Council.

The gist of the question is this: if the political
will is for war, peace will not have a chance; but if it is
for peace, then we Member States should stick to the
Charter of the United Nations, giving peace at least the
last chance. Article 51 and Article 2 of the Charter are
very clear about this issue. I am not going to waste the
Council's time by quoting from them here. But in this
connection, my delegation fully agrees with the
statement made by the Secretary-General in the 2nd
meeting of the General Assembly, on 12 September
2002, when he said:

"Any State, if attacked, retains the inherent right
of self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter.
But beyond that, when States decide to use force
to deal with broader threats to international peace
and security, there is no substitute for the unique
legitimacy provided by the United Nations."

In this connection, my delegation wishes to make
it clear that any attempt to change the political system
of a sovereign State by sheer force of arms is
unacceptable, as it constitutes a blatant Violation of the
Charter and of international law, and creates a very
dangerous precedent in international relations. I believe
that nobody wants to turn this world into "Apocalypse

Now .

In recent history we have witnessed the full-scale
escalation of a war due to merely a decision under a
similar circumstances. We therefore call on the
international community to do whatever it can to avoid
any flexing of military muscle, which will surely
endanger peace and stability in this region and the
world over.

