Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Chinese presidency for organizing today's debate and
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU), and
I will now make a statement in my national capacity.

The recent terrorist attacks across the globe
have shown once again that no country is immune to
the threat of terrorism. Turkey is also being targeted
by terrorist organizations, notably Da'esh and the
Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) and People's
Protection Units (YPG). The most recent bomb attacks
in Ankara and Istanbul took the lives of 184 innocent
people and left hundreds wounded, but they have only
intensified the Turkish Government's determination to
fight the scourge of terrorism and underlined the need
for international cooperation and solidarity in our fight
against it.

Terrorism is a multifaceted and transnational
phenomenon and dealing with it demands effective
bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation.
International cooperation is key, particularly in efforts to
defeat Da'esh or the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), which Turkey views as a direct national security
threat. Halting the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
joining the ranks of Da'esh/ISIL is an indispensable
part of our individual and collective efforts. In that
regard, Turkey has taken necessary administrative,
physical and technological measures, such as starting
a no-entry list, which now includes more than 37,700
names; establishing a risk-analysis unit at airports and
transport hubs that has so far checked 9,000 people and
denied entry to more than 2,000. Since 2011 Turkey has
deported more than 3,000 people.

In fact, since the beginning of the crisis in Syria,
and long before the adoption of resolution 2178 (2015),
of which we were a sponsor, Turkey has appealed
numerous times for greater international cooperation
and information-sharing with regard to foreign
terrorist fighters. I would like to take this opportunity
to emphasize once again that in accordance with that
resolution, foreign terrorist fighters should be prevented
from travelling from their countries of departure in the
first place. Ifthat fails, timely and actionable sharing of
intelligence is essential.

Turkey is fighting Da'esh/ISIL on multiple fronts,
and curbing its finances is another priority. In that
context, Turkey collaborated in 2015 with the United
States Financial Action Task Force typology project
on Da'esh's methods and scope of financing. In
addition, Turkey's financial intelligence unit, MASAK,
cooperates with other such units. Even before the issue
of curbing the finances of Da'esh/ISIL was on the
international agenda - not to mention its capture of
major airfields in Syria - Turkey had been enhancing
its efforts to counter smuggling networks and other
activities out of Syria. In accordance with resolution
2199 (2015), of which we were a sponsor, Turkey
regularly provides information to the relevant Security
Council Committee, and our efforts are ongoing. Today,
we are in the process of establishing a Syrian border
physical security system. Here, too, it is important to
do more in terms of denying Da'esh/ISIL access to
the international financial system, particularly at the
front end of transactions - that is to say, the source
countries. It is worth mentioning here that under the
coalition against Da'esh/ISIL, Turkey is a co-leader of
the working group on foreign terrorist fighters and also
takes part in the working group on countering financing.

We have also reinforced our existing measures for
preventing the illegal transfer of historical artifacts
from their country of origin and have mobilized all the
relevant institutions and agencies in accordance with
our obligations under international instruments. The
Turkish authorities are maintaining constant vigilance
in this regard and have been handling the issue with
all possible care and diligence. Turkey deplores and
firmly condemns attacks resulting in the destruction of
cultural property that is part of the common heritage
of humankind. In sum, Turkey is at the forefront of
the Da'esh threat, and our priority is making every
possible effort to counter it. We are therefore extremely
dismayed by recent speculation questioning Turkey's
determination to combat Da'esh/ISIL and other terrorist
groups in Syria and Iraq.

The allegations made about Turkey today by the
Russian Federation are baseless, and we reject them.
Anyone making such ill-intentioned allegations should
take into consideration the fact that Turkey has been
attacked by Da'esh terrorists three times in less than a
year. Through such allegations, the Russian Federation
is trying to distract public attention from the enormous

harm that its air operations have done to civilians in
Syria, as well as from its involvement with individuals
and companies linked to financing for Da'esh in Syria.
It is certainly regrettable that Russia has tried to abuse
today's meeting in order to advance its ill-intentioned
political agenda against Turkey. Deliberations in
the Security Council should abide by principles of
responsibility and political maturity.

We agree that there is an imperative need to
avoid double standards in the fight against terrorism.
There can be no room for moral relativism in that
fight. Whether the organization in question is the
Al-Nusra Front, Da'esh, Boko Haram, the PKK, the
YPG or Turkey's Revolution People's Liberation Party-
Front, we must be united in stance against terrorism's
threat. Our counter-terrorism efforts are directed at
all groups that resort to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. At the same time, terrorism cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or ethnic group.

As thousands of young people are radicalized by
the extremist narratives of Da'esh and other groups,
leaving their home countries to travel to conflict regions
to fight along such terrorist organizations, we fully
support the view of the Secretary-General, in his Plan
of Action for Preventing Violent Extremism, that the
international community should adopt a comprehensive
approach that encompasses not only security-based
counter-terrorism measures but also those that address
the drivers of violent extremism at the local, regional
and global levels.

In the Global Counterterrorism Forum, which
Turkey co-chaired from 2011 until yesterday, when the
chairship passed to Morocco, the issue of radicalization
has been our primary focus from the very beginning,
and the Forum has developed a number of documents
on good practices, some of which were referred to
in the statement delivered on behalf of the EU. In
doing so, we have tried to formulate and put in place
durable solutions to the problems in our region. We
cannot eradicate Da'esh or the Al-Nusra Front without
addressing all the grievances and factors that have led
to the emergence of those groups.

In that regard, we should not forget that the regime's
suppression of the democratic aspirations of the Syrian
people, its divisive sectarian policies and its perpetration
of war crimes and massive violations of human rights
have created fertile ground for radicalization, extremism
and Da'esh's recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters.
It is regrettable that the representative of the regime,
which long ago lost all its legitimacy, has once again
chosen to misuse this platform to distort the facts. The
international community should bear in mind that the
ongoing atrocities and humanitarian disasters in Syria
can be addressed only by tackling the root cause of the
problem, which is the violent repression of Syrians'
democratic aspirations.

Turkey perceives the United Nations as the primary
platform for promoting a united stance against terrorism.
As we approach the ten-year review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, I reiterate
that Turkey is determined to maintain a decisive and
consistent approach to combatting terrorism of any
kind in cooperation with its partners and allies.

