Mr. Morejdn (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to acknowledge the
presence in this important debate of the Secretary-
General, the President of Nauru, my friend Mr. Achim
Steiner and Ms. Juanita Castafio.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Argentine Republic
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, as well as with
the statement of the representative of Egypt in his
capacity as Chair of the Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Ecuador would like to join the majority of
countries in asserting that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change is the body
mandated with steering issues stemming from climate
change. We believe that the Kyoto Protocol should be
respected and that the commitments made under Annex
1 should carried out. The General Assembly, as a
universal democratic body, is the ideal forum for
making recommendations to address climate change's
repercussions at the global level. We are aware that
climate change constitutes one of the major problems
facing the international community. In that regard, my
country has taken specific action to combat climate
change and reduce emissions through a process that has
been widely discussed at the United Nations; I am
referring to the Yasuni-ITT initiative, with which many
here are familiar.

 

Climate change will continue to have various
effects on the planet's humans and ecosystems.
Developing countries are of course vulnerable, which
is why we need a cohesive response to the issue that
includes technology transfer and the undertaking of
appropriate financial commitments. In that regard, we
stress the importance of fulfilling the Kyoto Protocol
commitments according to the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities, by which developed
countries maintain their historical responsibility, in line
with their ecological footprint, to reduce their
emissions, and support developing countries through
efforts aimed at adapting to and mitigating climate
change. We also feel it is essential to seek political
support for the second Kyoto Protocol commitment
period. For these reasons, my delegation reiterates its
belief in the need to work to achieve agreements based
on the instruments we have. We encourage all countries
to do likewise and to strengthen the agreements
adopted under the Convention.

