Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We join others in
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tom Koenigs, for his
valuable presentation of the Secretary-General's latest
report on the situation in Afghanistan.

There has been timid progress in such areas as the
rule of law, the disbanding of illegal armed groups, and
counter-narcotics in Afghanistan. The Secretary-
General's report makes it clear that increased insurgent
activities, the escalating cultivation of opium poppies,
and slow progress in economic and social development
persist in Afghanistan. Promoting security and stability
in Afghanistan remains the vital challenge currently
facing that country. The security problem is clearly the
main challenge because it poses a serious threat to
nation-building in the country. We support the efforts
of the Afghan security forces, in cooperation with the
International Security Assistance Force, to maintain
security in Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General's report described the state
of affairs in Afghanistan in all its complexities. Its
paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 may well be the synthesis of the
present situation. The Government is making
commendable progress in areas such as the economy,
reconstruction, development and in strengthening
democratic institutions. For this reason, we reiterate
our support for the role played by the Joint
Coordinating and Monitoring Board and the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy.

The report also draws a bleak picture of the
narcotics issue in Afghanistan. Despite the efforts by
the Government to adopt counter-narcotics measures,
the report makes it clear that opium poppy cultivation
and production experienced an unprecedented increase
in 2007. This increase in poppy cultivation is very
alarming and constitutes a growing threat to national
security, social stability and governmental
effectiveness.

The Secretary-General's report sadly notes once
again that civilians continue to bear the consequences
of the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan.
Nonetheless, we are encouraged by the fact that United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has started
to closely monitor the situation of civilians in armed
conflict.

We call on the Government to put additional
efforts into the implementation of the National Drug
Control Strategy. In addition, we recognize the link
between narcotics and development. In this context, we
have also encouraged the Government of Afghanistan
to provide alternative livelihoods to farmers. We
encourage the Government of Afghanistan to improve
its institutional capacity for service, delivery and
development in support of viable alternatives to poppy
cultivation.

We also call on the international community to
continue rallying behind Afghan-led efforts to curb the
drug problem through development. We welcome the
improved relations between Afghanistan and its
neighbours. The Secretary-General's report notes in
paragraph 26 that "Tensions in the crucial relationship
between Afghanistan and Pakistan eased during the
reporting period". We commend this improvement in
the relations between the two countries, as it is critical
to foster the trust required to improve security in the
border areas and to achieve peace and stability in the
region. We would like to stress the importance of
regional cooperation in the success of Afghanistan.

On the political front, South Africa supports
political dialogue and peaceful efforts aimed at
achieving reconciliation and resolving challenges
facing the country.

Finally, we believe that the best way to break the
cycle of challenges in Afghanistan is to continue
sustained international efforts in support of the
Government of Afghanistan.

