Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too welcome Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone. We
listened very carefully to her assessment of the
situation in her country. We are grateful also to
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL), which he heads. We also thank
Ambassador John McNee, Chair of the Sierra Leone
country configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for his statement.

We are pleased to note that Sierra Leone is
making steady process on peacebuilding,
notwithstanding the political crisis that arose in March,
triggering a wave of violence. The leadership of the
country has succeeded in returning the situation to the
path towards political stability. We highly commend
the actions of the Government of Sierra Leone in that
regard and note the constructive approach of
opposition leaders, as well as UNIPSIL's mediating
role in facilitating a resolution of the crisis. We call on
all political actors in Sierra Leone to maintain a spirit
of dialogue and consensus as they work to overcome
their differences in the interest of addressing the
complex tasks they face in post-conflict reconstruction.

The parties must fulfil their obligations as set out
in the 2 April 2009 joint communique. In our View,
among the most important tasks are to strengthen the
country's State institutions, first and foremost in the
security sector, and to resolve problems relating to the
reintegration of former combatants. The international
community must support the parties as they work to
implement these agreements along with other
programmes in the area of enhancing stability.

At the same time, we must not forget that the
primary responsibility for Sierra Leone's future lies

with the people of the country themselves. We
welcome the completion of the work of UNIPSIL and
the Sierra Leone country configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on a Joint Vision for
peacebuilding. The Joint Vision's priorities for building
peace in Sierra Leone are clear-cut, tried and tested
goals, and achieving them must be the focus of
UNIPSIL's future activities. We highly commend the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission on Sierra
Leone and hope that the Commission's forthcoming
special session will be productive.

We note the generally satisfactory results
achieved in implementing the 14 projects using
Peacebuilding Fund resources. We also note the Sierra
Leone Government's progress in addressing key
challenges to stability in the country, in particular
corruption, illicit drug trafficking and youth
unemployment. We expect these endeavours to
continue.

Tackling well-known cross-border threats to
security is of continuing major significance for the
long-term stability of the situation in Sierra Leone and
in the region as a whole. In order to resolve those
problems, it is important to continue close coordination
between UNIPSIL and United Nations peacekeeping
missions in neighbouring countries through the West
and Central Africa Regional Office. Russia is prepared
to take an active part in the peacebuilding effort in the
country. We will continue to make every effort
necessary to contribute to successful results in
consolidating peace and stability in Sierra Leone.

