Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Prosecutor for his very important
and very informative briefing.

In resolution 1970 (2011), this Council
unanimously decided to refer the situation in Libya to
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). By doing so, the Council reflected the
importance that the international community attaches
to ensuring that those responsible for the widespread
and systematic attacks against the Libyan people are
held accountable.

The Prosecutor has highlighted the deeply
troubling actions of the Libyan Government and its
security forces, including incidents in which
Al-Qadhafi forces fired on civilians, reports of torture,
rape, deportations, enforced disappearances, the use of
cluster munitions and heavy weaponry against targets
in crowded urban areas, and the blocking of
humanitarian supplies. All of that underscores the
gravity of what we are witnessing in Libya today.

New reports make clear that the Al-Qadhafl
regime continues to directly target civilians, so the
need for justice and accountability persists. Those
reports further underscore the message, which we have
repeated in our statements and in our diplomatic
efforts, that Al-Qadhafi has lost any and all legitimacy
to lead Libya.

As the ICC process continues, it is important that
the international community remain united in its
commitment to protecting civilians and civilian-
populated areas under the threat of attack, to ending
violence against the Libyan people, and to defending
the universal rights that all of us share.

My Government welcomes the swift and
thorough work of the Prosecutor. He has said that he
plans to submit an application for an arrest warrant in
the coming weeks. The spectre of ICC prosecution is
serious and imminent, and should serve as a warning to
those around Al-Qadhafi of the perils of continuing to
tie their fate to his. The Prosecutor has also indicated
that further cases may be opened, as would be
appropriate against individuals involved in further
crimes that may be committed in the days ahead.

Tomorrow, members of the international
community will gather in Rome to examine ways of
supporting a political process that will advance the
rights and aspirations of the Libyan people. Several
proposals have been put forward to resolve the crisis.
We continue to discuss those and other potential
solutions with our allies and partners, including United
Nations Special Envoy Al-Khatib.

We believe in the potential of the Libyan people.
We believe that they deserve leaders who share and
support their aspirations to freedom, democracy and
dignity. Through his brutal oppression, Al-Qadhafl has
demonstrated time and again that he is not interested in
a Libya that honours his people's hopes and rights.

