Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of this important body of
the United Nations. We also congratulate the delegation
of Germany for its outstanding work as President of the
Council last month.

Multilateralism is experiencing a difficult test.
The trustworthiness and the credibility of the system
that we have built with such effort - precisely to
safeguard international peace and security - will
depend on our collective response.

The Government of Nicaragua has examined the
most recent reports submitted to the Security Council
by Mr. Hans Blix, head of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), and by Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), both of
whom are worthy of our greatest appreciation for their
tireless work.

As one of his conclusions, Mr. Blix stated that,

while the initiatives now being taken by the Iraqi side
"can be seen as active or even proactive, these
initiatives, three to four months into the new
resolution, cannot be said to constitute immediate
cooperation, nor do they necessarily cover all
areas of relevance". (S/PV.4714, p. 5)

The reports reveal that the Iraqi regime is
continuing to omit important information related to
weapons of mass destruction. In meetings of the
Security Council, no Member State has been able to
find reliable proof that Iraq is cooperating fully with its
obligations under that resolution and those preceding
it.

To Nicaragua, as a peace-loving country, those
reports are worrisome. That is why we believe that
world security hinges on strict compliance with the
resolutions of the Security Council - in this case,
specifically resolution 1441 (2002). It is not a question
of partial compliance or halfhearted or evasive
cooperation; it is a question of faithful and rigorous
compliance with multilateral mandates that embody the
will of the United Nations, which we fervently aspire
to strengthen and consolidate.

Nicaragua reiterates that it is not a question of a
process of inspectors and inspections for an indefinite
time, but rather of a process of immediate and
unconditional disarmament. In that connection, we
support the Council's action to determine, through a
resolution, the conditions for full Iraqi compliance,
without omissions, with what has been stipulated by
this United Nations body.

Nicaragua believes that the Council must
immediately require compliance with its various
resolutions, in conformity with the San Francisco
Charter, in order to achieve the disarmament of Iraq
demanded by the international community, which has
placed its faith in us, the United Nations, to guarantee
the maintenance of international peace and security.

