Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.

Germany welcomes and supports the Quartet
statement of 11 April (see SG/2182) in all its aspects.
The statement expresses important expectations, and
we call on both sides to heed the Quartet's calls. There
must be an effective follow-up on the issues mentioned
in the statement - first and foremost by the parties but
of course also by the Quartet itself.

The Arab Spring has fundamentally changed the
Arab world, with deep implications on how the rest of
the world interacts with the peoples of the region. It is
the result of a yearning for individual freedom,
political participation and personal well-being. Those
ambitions can be fulfilled only in peace and security.
Progress in solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
therefore key. Israel and Palestine are both an integral
part of the region. Both Israelis and Palestinians want
to live in freedom, dignity and security.

We understand the difficult and complex security
situation in which Israel finds itself. We strongly
condemn rocket attacks on Israel from Gaza and
elsewhere. Germany recognizes Israel's right to protect
its citizens against attacks. At the same time, we look
to Israel to exercise that right judiciously.

We firmly believe that lasting security and
prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians, as well as for
the wider region, can be achieved only by taking bold
steps towards peace. In that vein, it is time to return to
direct negotiations now. We call on both sides to make
their actions meet their declared readiness to achieve
peace. Instead of looking for pretexts or excuses to
evade negotiations, both parties should look for what is
needed to bring about the right context of mutual trust
for a resumption of direct talks. The recently initiated

exchange of letters should be used in a constructive
way by both sides as an opportunity to return to
meaningful talks.

However, we are increasingly concerned about
the physical viability of a two-State solution.
Continued settlement activity threatens to undermine
the fundamental conditions of a future contiguous
Palestinian State by creating facts on the ground that
will make final status negotiations ever more difficult.
A two-State solution is the best way to achieve lasting
security for Israel. We therefore took positive note of
the fact that no new settlement announcements or
tenders were published during the Amman talks.

However, we deplore the recent publication of
tenders for more than 1,000 housing units in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank, plans to establish a new
settlement in East Jerusalem and recent plans to
retroactively approve outposts that were erected in
contravention of Israeli law. Such approval would
amount to the establishment of new settlements in the
West Bank.

Our position has not changed. All settlements are
illegal under international law and constitute an
obstacle to peace. We call on the Israeli Government to
cease all settlement activities in order to preserve the
possibility of a two-State solution. The Israeli
Government should leave no room for doubt as to its
full commitment to negotiations and to reaching a just
and fair solution to the conflict.

As pointed out by the Quartet, the social and
economic development of Area C is of critical
importance for the viability of a future Palestinian
State. We call on both sides to cooperate in order to
ensure overall progress and development in Area C,
including transparent procedures for planning and
building, consistent with Israel's obligations under
humanitarian law.

Finally, Germany welcomes efforts by the parties
to resolve outstanding issues related to tax and customs
revenue collection and urges their conclusion as soon
as possible. Stabilizing the fiscal situation of the
Palestinian Authority is key to preserving an important
achievement of Palestinian State-building, including in
the area of security. As a major donor, Germany fully
expects Israel to live up to its obligations.
Allow me now to say a few words on Syria.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012), establishing the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria, was an important, far-reaching step.
The deployment of observers under the right conditions
could positively influence dynamics on the ground. At
the same time, we must be aware of the risks that the
Mission faces. It is important that the observers have
the necessary security and that they can operate freely
and in the right conditions to effectively implement
their mandate.

Meanwhile, the authorities in Damascus continue
their attacks on the population, they continue to shell
population centres with artillery and they have not
withdrawn their troops and tanks to their barracks.
Today, new reports about attacks in Hama are coming
in. Other forms of violence continue unabated. Until
now, humanitarian assistance has not reached the areas
affected by the fighting. The freedom of association
and the right to demonstrate peacefully are not
guaranteed. Trials before military courts against
civilians for having exercised their right of expression
are continuing.

Germany insists on the full implementation of
Mr. Kofi Annan's six points without delay. We will
evaluate carefully the situation on the ground. We look
forward to the assessments to be provided by the
Secretary-General and the Joint Special Envoy.

