Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): For
the sake of brevity, I will read a shortened version
of my statement. I would like to thank the Russian
presidency for organizing today's debate and inviting
my delegation to participate in it. I would also like
to warmly welcome Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
and to applaud his important role in the Astana process,
one of the most effective processes in the establishment
of peace and security in the Syrian Arab Republic, with
the participation of the Russian Federation, Turkey and
my own country.

A comprehensive review of the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa requires, above all,
consideration of its root causes. That analysis should
also consider the actions of the Security Council in
maintaining peace and security in the region. In-depth
analysis of all the causes of conflict and war in the
region over the past few decades shows that in most
cases, a common denominator emerges - foreign
intervention, foreign interference, foreign occupation
or a combination of the three. Even in the rare cases
where a conflict has internal causes, it is manipulated,
escalated and prolonged by the illicit interference of
Powers in the region or various countries outside it.

The Israeli occupation of Palestine is at the centre
of all the conflicts in the Middle East. That injustice
has continued for more than 70 years and has been
intensified by Israel's aggressive expansionist and
apartheid policies towards the Palestinians and the
region generally. The Israeli regime and its incremental,
aggressive and expansionist policies, along with its
behaviour towards its neighbours, continues to be the
main threat to regional peace and security. While the
Palestinian territories and the Syrian Golan Heights
have remained under illegal occupation by Israel, the
regime has launched more than 100 strikes in Syria
and Lebanon. Israel's recent mass killings of unarmed
civilians in Gaza are the most recent expression of an
old pattern that the Israeli regime has followed for the
past 70 years.

The illegal announcement regarding Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the transfer of the United States Embassy
to that city is another example of a policy that serves
only to exacerbate the problems in the Middle East and
North Africa and throughout the Islamic world. The
impunity that the regime there has enjoyed for so long
would not have been possible without the support of the
United States.

There are other major contributing factors. All of
these foreign interventions and occupations, and all the
efforts to manipulate the people of the Middle East and
North Africa, have resulted in a climate of instability
that is a breeding ground for terrorists and extremists.
Groups that initially received support from certain
States and parties within and outside the region to fight
for them eventually turned into monsters, threatening
their supporters and creators. As a result, terrorism
and extremism are much stronger and more widespread
in the Middle East and North Africa region today
following the many invasions by the United States and
its allies.

Other crises in the region, such as those in Libya,
Iraq, Syria and Yemen, are all examples of crises being
stoked through invasion, illegal foreign intervention,
terror, extremism and violence. Such problems have
persisted and deepened due to the failure of the
international community to carry out its responsibilities
by addressing the root causes and the erroneous actions
of outsiders.

The situation in Yemen represents a very serious
threat to regional and international security and is
another breeding ground for terrorist groups. The war
of aggression of the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen and
the numerous war crimes committed by it directly
threaten peace and security. Acts such as deliberate
attacks on residential areas and civilian targets,
imposing a humanitarian blockade, using famine as a
war tactic and denying access to international relief
agencies are all war crimes and are punishable under
international humanitarian law. The international
community and the Security Council should hold the
Saudi regime accountable for those criminal acts.
It should intervene effectively to end the senseless
military operation, including the ongoing attack against
Al-Hudaydah - the lifeline of basic humanitarian aid
to millions of needy people in Yemen - establish a
ceasefire, ensure the delivery of humanitarian and
medical assistance and restore peace and stability in the
country through an intra-Yemeni dialogue on national
reconciliation without preconditions.

Since the beginning of the ongoing tragedy in
the Syrian Arab Republic, Iran has always called for
a peaceful solution to the conflict based on respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria,
as well as the right of the Syrian people to determine
their own political future. Time and again, Iran has
reiterated that there can be no military solution to the
situation in Syria. As such, we have always adhered to a
genuine Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process in order
to achieve peace and national reconciliation. While the
United States and its regional allies continue to pursue
their narrow and short-sighted goals in the region, Iran
and Russia have made great sacrifices to combat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist
groups throughout the region.

As our participation in the Astana and International
Syria Support Group meetings shows, we support
any initiative that can help to achieve an end to that
conflict. The Astana format, of which Russia, Turkey
and Iran are guarantors, has developed into an effective
instrument for a joint platform to fight terrorism and to
contribute to peace and stability in Syria. The hostile
statements of certain States that we hear these days,
including today, are actively perpetuated by those that
desperately need to create an imaginary enemy in order
to sell their arms and embark on an arms race in the
region. They have nothing to do with peace and security
in the Middle East.

The Islamic Republic of Iran views the establishment
of a regional dialogue forum in the Persian Gulf as
the best way to resolve regional crises and to create
a stronger region. The objective of a strong region, as
opposed to the quest for hegemony and the exclusion
of other actors, is rooted in recognizing the need to
respect the interests of all stakeholders. Any dominant
effort by one country is not only inappropriate but also
essentially impossible. Indeed, those that insist on
following such a path create instability.

As inheritors of the richest civilizations, the
countries in the Middle East and North Africa region
should stand tall. We can solve our own problems
among ourselves and secure a better future for all our
children without outside interference and patronage,
both of which come at a heavy price to our collective
dignity, as well as our future development.

