Mr. Mitri: On 8 June, Benghazi witnessed a tragic
event that caused a considerable loss oflife, the greatest
loss of life in eastern Libya since the revolution. What
started as a peaceful demonstration outside the barracks
of an armed brigade in the city deteriorated into an
exchange of fire that left many dead and wounded,
mostly demonstrators. The protesters were calling for
the Libya Shield Brigades, which mainly comprise
revolutionary formations under the operational control
of the Chief of General Staff of the Libyan Army, to be
dismantled and for the army and police to be entrusted
with the role of exclusive security forces.

The Libyan authorities took swift action in the
wake of that incident and transfered control of several
brigade barracks in Benghazi to the Libyan Army.
The General National Congress issued its Decision
No. 53, which charges the Government with the task
of dealing with armed groups that remain outside the
control of the State and with immediately presenting
a proposal for the integration of armed brigades. The
Government responded promptly with a decision to
proceed with the establishment of a national guard
into which armed brigades would be integrated, but
differences on the status of revolutionary brigades and
their relationship with the State remain unresolved.
The security situation in Benghazi deteriorated again
on 15 June. In what appeared to be retaliation for the
events of 8 June, gunmen attacked an army base and
the National Security Directorate. A number of Special
Forces troops were killed. The United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) firmly condemned those
attacks, as well as the previous ones, and called on all
Libyans to rally around their legitimate institutions.

I would like to briefly touch on the unilateral
declaration by the transitional council of Barqa-
Cyrenaica on 1 June of a federal region in eastern Libya.
The leadership of the transitional council of Barqa
have justified this move by what they perceive as the
central Government's failure to address security and
governance issues in their region. While it is difficult
to gauge popular support for federalism in the eastern
and southern regions of Libya, the calls for genuine
decentralization and better distribution of national
resources cannot be ignored. It may not be coincidental,
therefore, that the Prime Minister announced, on 5 June,
the decision to relocate the headquarters of four major
State-owned companies from Tripoli to Benghazi.

When I last briefed the Council in March (see S/PV.6934), I noted a growing polarization on the
Libyan political scene, manifested in divisions over a
proposed law on political isolation, which demanded
the exclusion from public office of persons associated
with the former regime and others who had committed
human rights violations. Commencing on 28 April, a
number of revolutionary groups laid siege to several
Government ministries in an attempt to force through
the adoption of that law. Those actions had been
preceded in March with the storming of the General
National Congress and assaults on some members of
Congress, including a shooting incident that targeted
then-President El-Magariaf. That escalation in the
pressure being exerted set a dangerous precedent of the
resort to the use of military force in order to extract
political concessions.

Be that as it may, the political isolation law was
adopted on 5 May. It will have far-reaching repercussions
on the political process and on public administration.
The law lists a wide range of political, administrative
and other posts and defines types of affiliation and
conduct as a basis for the exclusion of individuals from
public life for 10 years. Proposals that the law include
provisions for exempting persons on the basis of their
support for the revolution were rejected.

Despite his distinguished record in active opposition
to the Al-Qadhafi regime over three decades, Mohamed
El-Magariaf was excluded from office pursuant to that
law. He chose to resign as President of the General
National Congress on 28 May. I would like to take
this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. El-Magariaf's
leadership of the Congress since its inception and to
express my appreciation and gratitude for his support
to the United Nations role in Libya and his confidence
in UNSMIL, and in me personally, since I took up
my duties as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We also owe him a word of praise and respect
for his dignified statesmanship as he distanced himself
from the Libyan political scene.

Written advice was provided to the General
National Congress on international standards, best
practices and potential risks of exclusionary measures.
I must say that the law as approved falls short of those
standards in a number of areas.

In the context of Libya's transition and the legacy
of weak State institutions, the implementation of the
law risks further weakening of those institutions.
On 5 June, the day the law came into force, many
prosecutors and judges went on strike in protest at some
of the provisions of the law that they believed would
affect them.

Those developments demonstrate the urgency of
adopting a transitional justice law anchored in truth-
seeking, accountability and reparations. A draft law
is currently being considered by the General National
Congress and UNSMIL continues to advise on its scope
and implementation.

In addition, UNSMIL stands ready to assist Libyan
authorities in the technical aspects of conducting
investigations and trials as part of the transitional
justice process. That is particularly significant in the
context of the recent decision by the International
Criminal Court Pre-Trial Chamber regarding Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. That decision is the subject of
a Libyan appeal. We shall also continue to affirm the
importance of cooperation by the Libyan authorities
with the International Criminal Court.

Following initial encouragement from the
Government and requests from revolutionaries of
diverse persuasions, I initiated a series of discussions
to facilitate direct talks between the two sides. We
stand ready to continue to provide our good offices.

The political and security challenges that now
face the country may well be the legacy of decades of
authoritarian rule, dysfunctional State institutions and
confusion around political norms. That reality invites a
national political dialogue that seeks consensus on the
priorities for the transitional period - a message that
I have conveyed repeatedly to the Libyan authorities.
UNSMIL has already provided the Government and
the leadership of the General National Congress with
advice on issues and modalities for a national political
dialogue.

In our conversations with various actors, we also
touched on the perceived, as well as the desired, role
of the United Nations in Libya. That was all the more
necessary in the light of the unanticipated controversy
regarding that role following the adoption of resolution
2095 (2013), in March 2013. The controversy surfaced
concomitantly with the national political crisis. There
were voices that cast doubts on the intentions of the
international community and attributed to the United
Nations an interventionist design. The fact that
resolution 2095 (2013) was adopted under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations raised further
misunderstanding, suspicion and even disquiet. On
the other extreme of the political spectrum, there
were voices calling for a more robust United Nations
presence and reminding Libyans, or warning them,
that Chapter VII indicated the gravity of international
concern. In such a context, we had to concentrate our
efforts on dispelling misperceptions, as well as false
expectations that were fueled by a formidable flow of
disinformation.

In preparation for the election of the
constitution-drafting assembly, the United Nations
facilitated discussions between a wide range of Libyan
decision- and opinion-makers on issues such as electoral
systems, voter registration and, most importantly, the
participation of women. Through those discussions,
Libyans of various political hues recognized the
importance of designing a fair, inclusive and credible
process. Offering technical advice and drawing on best
practices, including the July 2012 national elections in
Libya itself, UNSMIL also highlighted the significance
of adopting special measures aimed at enhancing
women's participation in the constitution-drafting
assembly. In the forthcoming period, civic education
and facilitation of debates on constitutional issues will
have to be a priority.
Conflict-related detentions remain mostly
unchanged since I last briefed the Council. An estimated
7,000-8,000 detainees are still waiting to be charged or
released. The process of transferring detainees to the
authority of the State is slow. In Bani Walid, the scene
of armed conflict in October, unanswered questions
continue to surround the cases of bodies handed over
from Misrata in April. In a number of detention centres,
we have observed cases of torture. There is also
evidence of deaths in custody due to torture. UNSMIL
has consistently emphasized that extrajudicial killing
and torture should not be tolerated in Libya, particularly
by those who were victims of injustice and repression
under the Al-Qadhafi regime. The national consensus
on the centrality of promoting human rights should not
allow any justification of such violations.

We continue to work closely with the Ministry of
Justice and various prison authorities to improve the
prison situation. There have been varying degrees of
success, mainly in providing decent medical care to
inmates. Some legislative initiatives taken in April are
commendable. The General National Congress passed
a law criminalizing torture, forced disappearances and
discrimination, and another clarifying the jurisdiction
of the civilian and military justice systems and
abolishing military courts' jurisdiction over civilians.
We also welcome the introduction of a new bill intended
to provide assistance to women who are victims of
sexual violence.

UNSMIL remains concerned about the situation
of migrants in Libya. The conditions inside those
centres remain deplorable. We will continue to offer
humanitarian support to such vulnerable groups and to
urge the Government and local authorities to address
problems effectively and with full respect for the
dignity and rights of immigrants.

The plight of internally displaced persons, some
35,000 Tawergha as well thousands of Mashashiya and
others, continues to be a major concern. The unilateral
announcement by Tawergha community leaders of their
intention to return to their hometown on 25 June is a
move fraught with risks. While in principle UNSMIL
continues to support the Tawergha right of return to
their homes in safety and dignity, it is essential that all
parties concerned create acceptable conditions for the
exercise of that right. To that end, we have intensified
our efforts, emphasizing the need to establish a fact-
finding mechanism integral to transitional justice.

Border security remains a clear priority for Libya,
its neighbours and the wider international community.
Recent developments in the Sahel region underscore
the importance of effective border security and
management. Despite official pronouncements by the
Libyan authorities, severe capacity limitations have led
to little practical progress to date. Government efforts
to address border security require the development of a
comprehensive national strategy, addressing the issues
of integrating revolutionaries, improving inter-agency
coordination, training, operational effectiveness and
infrastructure in the southern border region. Libya
will also need to engage further in dialogue with its
neighbours and international partners. Parallel to that
effort, more is expected from the Government regarding
accelerating the implementation of development proj ects
in the south, a region whose communities have suffered
from marginalization far too long. Prime Minister
Zeidan recently visited the south and made promises to
move forward in reconstruction and development.

The ongoing weak state of security sector
institutions, coupled with a lack of effective national
security coordination, continues to be an issue at a time
when security incidents throughout the country have
grown in number and scale. Progress on Libya's plan
agreed on at the international ministerial conference in
Paris in February this year has stalled, in part because
of the political crisis that has since ensued. In April,
we presented a defence white paper to the Minister
of Defence and the Chief of the General Staff for
their consideration. That joint effort of the Ministry
of Defence, the Libyan Armed Forces and UNSMIL
includes 52 recommendations for a future Libyan
defence strategy and 18 immediate priorities.

The Libyan State's ability to fully assert its authority
over the south continues to be limited. We believe that
the Libyan authorities still have the opportunity to
step up efforts to effectively counter threats emanating
from there. The support and assistance of Libya's
international partners and the cooperation of its
regional neighbours will be crucial to that effort. More
broadly, we have learned from our experience in Libya
over the past 20 months that a piecemeal approach to
State-building is not a way to achieve good results,
particularly in the security sector, where the needs are
huge and immediate.

The risks in Libya should not be underestimated,
and, by the same token, the opportunities should not be
overlooked. Judging by the speed with which last year's
elections to the General National Congress took place,
so soon after the cessation of hostilities, we might
be forgiven for thinking that the road to democracy
was as simple as it appeared then. As important as
those elections may have been in ushering in the
beginnings of a new political process and the building
of legitimate State institutions, for the foreseeable
future the Libyan people will continue to endure the
heavy legacy bequeathed to them over decades of brutal
rule. Managing the transition is therefore bound to be
difficult, perhaps more difficult than we thought a year
ago.

The mood in Libya today may have changed since
I last briefed the Council in March (see S/PV.6934).
Despite the gravity of some of the security and political
developments that have taken place over the course of
the past three months, Libyans have not lost confidence.
Many of them remain unwavering in asserting the
principles that underpinned their revolution and their
desire to build a modern and democratic State based on
the separation of powers, respect for human rights and
the rule of law.

