Mr. Morris: I thank all Council members for
their perceptive, useful, helpful and encouraging
comments and questions. I will do my best to respond.
Members asked lots of questions worthy of longer
responses, and we will try to provide such responses in
writing soon.

The first issue that was raised related to the
Sudan: southern Sudan and the humanitarian issues
there, including the refugee issue. The situation is very
serious. Our estimates suggest, setting Darfur aside,
that there are 3.2 million people who need help in the
part of the Sudan that is affected by the current peace
process. People are returning, but the number of people
who have fled, for example, to Kenya as refugees is
actually exceeding the number of people who are
coming back to southern Sudan.

I think the entire humanitarian community is
woefully underfunded. I have not come here to ask for
money; that is not my purpose in being here this
morning. But Council members have invested billions
of dollars in the peace process - feeding people and
providing shelter and other kinds of humanitarian
assistance - during the 21-year conflict. My concern,
which I think is widely shared, is that, if we are not
able at least to provide food, water and shelter for
people as they come home, much could be at risk.

We are doing better in Darfur. The resourcing is
going pretty well. The security issue in Darfur involves
a great deal of risk. We have now concluded that at the
high point of the peak hunger season in Darfur we
could be required to provide food for 3.5 million
people, and I have even heard it suggested on occasion
that this could go as high as 4 million. There are,
essentially, 1.5 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs); but there has been no crop production in Darfur
this year, and until people feel safe and secure about
going home there will be no crop production next year.
The worst fear is that, if people are not comfortable
going home and beginning life again to start the
agricultural cycle, we could end up with a situation like
the one we have in Algeria, where the Western Sahara
refugees have now been there 27 years, with more
people having been born in the camps than came to the
camps originally.

Thus, restoring order, peace and security is
fundamental to enabling people to go home. But the
fact of the matter is that there would be another 2
million people in Darfur who would depend on
agricultural production from people who are now IDPs.
In order to preserve the peace, we have to be as
focused on the host community as we are on the IDPs
or the refugees. Otherwise chaos could ensue: one
would end up with a situation where the World Food
Programme, UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and various non-
governmental organizations have worked effectively to
reduce malnutrition in the camps, and where suddenly
the nutritional status of people in the camps, especially
children, is substantially better than that of people on
the perimeter.

We have been very lucky that the Government of
Chad and the people of eastern Chad have been very
hospitable in welcoming the refugees that have come
from Darfur into Chad. But that has led to an enormous
responsibility. We see that, with this population coming
in, water resources and food resources have been
overwhelmed; the international community has
responded generously to help the local population. I
suspect that we are providing food support for between
200,000 and 250,000 refugees in Chad and ultimately
probably not quite that many local citizens, though a
substantial number.

So I urge the Council please to remain very
focused on our work and that of the entire
humanitarian community in the Sudan. It is very risky.
I do not want to repeat myself, but I will recall that we
fed 1.8 million people in May. Probably another
700,000 people in the north and in the south should
have been fed, but for security reasons we simply
could not get to them. We had and continue to have the
food available to put into position because of the rainy
season. We have almost 900 trucks under contract, but
three truck drivers from private contractors have been
killed in the past month, and it is easy to imagine what
a disincentive that becomes for people to want to do
that kind of work.

The security issue is the pre-eminent issue in
terms of the humanitarian response and in terms of the
long-term response. We work very closely with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the Sudan.
We support the inter-agency process. We understand
and support the notion of integrated missions. In the
Sudan we work closely with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Pronck, and his Deputy
Special Representatives. We have to be careful not to
confuse, in the public's mind, the role of the
humanitarian community with the role of peacekeepers.
We have to work together, but as soon as the
conflicting population sees the humanitarian
community as an extension of peacekeeping or military
activity they are less likely to respect the humanitarian
space, as has traditionally been the case.

Our job is to feed the hungry at-risk population.
We leave the political issues for others to resolve. We
are just as concerned about those who are starving -
mostly women and children - wherever they find
themselves in the conflict. We have to have the respect
of all sides to a controversy in order to do our work.
We are, clearly, involved in the joint assessment
mission process, and today there is much more
conversation about how we work together than there
was three or four years ago.

The issue of Southern Africa and how the United
Nations family is working together may not be
interesting for front-page news coverage. But what is
happening in Johannesburg, where the regional offices
are located, is that the entire United Nations family has
come together. The World Health Organization,
UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme are
essentially co-located. The regional directors are
functioning as a single team. That is the epitome of
United Nations reform, happening on the ground, in the
field. It is happening because, first, the crisis is so
enormous, but also because people are focused on the
beneficiaries. I tell my colleagues at WFP that, if we
do our work with the beneficiaries, everything else
about WFP will be taken care of; we will not have to
worry about it. The Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) is part of that effort as well. I
think that members would all be extraordinarily
pleased about the way in which the United Nations
family is working in the field at the regional level.

We are working to try to get the United Nations
country teams to reflect that same partnership. That
requires a new sense of leadership, a new calibre of
leadership among the resident coordinators. In places
like Lesotho, Swaziland, Botswana and Namibia -
countries that have populations of less than
2million- if there are suddenly 30 donors and 10
United Nations agencies on the scene, and the
Governments have a dramatically weakened capacity
for all the reasons that we have talked about, the
Governments are simply overwhelmed, and they spend
their time responding to us, instead of focusing on the
substantive agenda. We have got to find a way to bring
the United Nations family almost completely together,
especially in the very small countries. I am sort of
encouraged that places like Botswana are very much
interested in doing that.

Comparing where we are today to where we were
three years ago shows that there has been a remarkable
amount of progress. I always meet with the leaders of
the non-governmental organization (NGO) community
before we start a mission and, truly, without exception,
they have begged the United Nations community to
stay together as a single family, because it serves them
a very well.

The issues in Zimbabwe are challenging and
difficult. It is a place where about 4 million people are
now at risk. At the high point of 2003, we provided
food for 5.5 million people in Zimbabwe; in 2004 it
went down to 4million; and this April we provided
food for 1.1 million. I have to tell the Council that we
started off with four NGO partners. At the high point
we went to 23; today we have 15.

I visited with President Mugabe within the past
month, and we had a very straightforward conversation
about the importance of our being able to go anywhere
in the country to feed the hungriest and the poorest, of
having no interference or political guidance or
influence whatsoever with regard to where we go and
how we do our work. I said that we could not do our
work without our NGO partners, and that they needed
to be respected and supported.

Three years ago, when I made my first visit, I
simply said that if we did not have that freedom and
flexibility, we would simply leave - we would have
zero tolerance for any interference. I have to say that
we have been able to do our work to distribute the food
that the World Food Programme receives because the
Council supports us. We have been able to do out work
and respond to those who need us most. This time I had
the same conversation again, and emphasized the
critical importance of the NGO community.

I can assure the Council, without any
equivocation, that the food that members are providing
for us is getting to those who need it in Zimbabwe.
There are other sources of food that the Government
distributes, and I have had the same conversation with
the President about the Government adhering to the
same kind of internationally accepted policies that we
follow. But I can assure the Council that the food that
members give us is getting to those who need it.

This is a tough situation. You may recall that a
year ago they estimated that their cereal crop
production would be 2.4 million metric tons. They
need 1.8 million metric tons of cereal to feed the
population. The best estimates now of the Zimbabwe
Vulnerability Assessment Committee (ZimVAC) - a
body comprising representatives from the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and the

Government - suggest that crop production will be
between 400,000 and 600,000 metric tons. That is
different from the food assessment survey that the
WFP and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations would do together, but it is
sophisticated enough that we have adequate reliance on
it, and we can represent to you that we have confidence
in it. As I said Zimbabwe needs 1.8 million tons to feed
the population and had represented that crop
production would be 2.4 million metric tons. So now
there is a shortfall of, in the worst case, 1.4 million
tons, and in the best case, 1.2 million tons.

The Government of Zimbabwe has said, "We take
ownership. It is our responsibility to feed our people,
and we have tendered and committed to buy 1.2
million metric tons of food". That is the public
position; that is what they would say if asked that
question. They would also say that they are going to
buy an additional 600,000 tons of food to replenish
their reserves. They have been reluctant to ask the
international community for help, but they have used
words to the effect that if the international community
chooses to help them, such support would be welcome.
We are uncomfortable with that. It is easier in our
tradition to do business if people say what they need
and explain it, and we go about pulling it together.

We have essentially said that we will try to raise
resources and food in the neighbourhood of 300,000
metric tons. Clearly, if their 1.2 million comes in and
the 400,000 to 600,000 is produced, that, together with
the 300,000, would slightly exceed their cereal
requirement. Only time will tell. This is a very tough
issue. They clearly had a bad weather situation, but you
all know the dynamics there as well as or better than I
do. There are a few places in the world that I worried a
lot about last year, including North Korea and the
Sudan, and this is in that category. So we will simply
keep you posted.

I am grateful that Russia talked about the
multilateral approach. There are all sorts of reasons
why one country chooses to help another country. But
if I can just tell you that through multilateral
support - support that goes through institutions like
ours, or through NGOs - 90 per cent of the food that
we distribute gets to the hungriest, the poorest people
in a country. We have no agenda whatsoever, other than
the humanitarian agenda of ensuring that those most at
risk - usually women and children - are fed. We
know that we are very good at assessing need, targeting
the distribution and actually physically doing the
distribution and then measuring, monitoring and
evaluating what we have done, and we are accountable
to you.

So, as you think about what the agendas are -
and I appreciate the fairness of all sorts of
approaches - the humanitarian approach of getting
food to those who are most at risk is best done, more
often than not, through a multilateral institution. We do
not monetize food. We are very respectful of markets.
So I would just like to make that point quickly.

I am grateful that the representative of Brazil
mentioned the notion of forgotten emergencies. We all
get focused on the tsunami, or we get focused on
Darfur; but the fact of the matter is that 92 per cent of
the people who will die today of hunger will die in
places that are not in the headlines, forgotten places
that most people just do not think about. The life lost
in the dusty road in Bolivia or Malawi or Bangladesh is
just as precious as the life lost in a high-profile
situation. We were all generously funded with regard to
the tsunami; we had all the money we needed. But the
fact of the matter is that 25,000 people die every day of
hunger - 18,000 children, a child every five seconds,
all day long. Every 10 days there is a "tsunami" in the
world, in all sorts of places.

Our Romanian colleague asked what the Council
could do. It is the most important decision-making
body in the entire world. The fact that the Security
Council would focus on the issue of hunger, as it has
today and several times earlier, is a powerful message.

I have tried to respond to my colleague from the
United Kingdom, talking about building capacity.

Clearly, climate change is certain, but there is a
difference. We are doing three times as many natural
disaster assessments today as we did in 1960. I am not
a scientist, but I know that things have changed.

Humanitarian access is a basic principle of our
work. We rarely compromise it. We require that we
have complete access to any population in any country
where we work. With regard to the security dimensions
to humanitarian access, in the last year we have
quadrupled our own security coverage. That is having a
huge impact on our budget. It is costing more, making
fewer resources available to feed people. We have 135
duty stations throughout the world that are categorized
as phase III or higher under the standards of the United
Nations Security Coordinator. Several members of the
Council have said nice things about our staff. Their
humanitarian commitment is remarkable. We have a
wall of honour in our building. Sixty-two people from
the World Food Programme (WFP) have been killed in
humanitarian service. We require that we can go
anywhere. North Korea is about the only place in the
world where we do not have complete access. We have
access to about 160 of the 203 counties in North Korea.
That is the only place where we somewhat compromise
our access requirement.

I appreciate the reference by members of the
Council to the Millennium Development Goals and
child hunger. I strongly believe that a concerted
worldwide effort led by the WFP, UNICEF, the World
Bank and the relevant non-governmental organizations,
with support from the business, faith and youth-serving
communities can make a difference. Let us say that
there are probably 115 million people in Africa who
need help: 93 million children and their mothers. There
is no substitute for being born to a healthy mother and
nursed by a healthy mother. Our estimates are that that
constitutes an annual expense of about $5 billion. Forty
to 50 per cent of that can be provided by host
Governments. Kenya supports our work to feed
children in Kenya in an extraordinary way. Malawi
does the same thing: it made a $13 million commitment
to help support WFP's work in Malawi.

My own sense is that we need a movement in the
world that says that it is no longer acceptable for
children to be hungry. If only everyone would just do a
little more. The cost of getting that done is the same
amount of money we spent to feed the people of
Belgium after the First World War. It is the same
amount of money we spent to feed people during the
Berlin airlift. It is the same amount of money we spent
to build Disneyland in Paris. We have got to figure out
how we, as the international community, can eliminate
child hunger in the world. The Council will see
UNICEF, the World Bank, the Red Cross and all sorts
of people mobilizing to take action in that regard.

We now have commercial partners. We could not
have done our work in the tsunami without the help of
Citicorp, the Boston Consulting Group and the Dutch
company T & T. The latter has 175,000 employees.
Every one of them has made the commitment to feed a
school child, and the company has committed itself to
matching their contributions. When we begin to put
enough pieces in place, we can make a difference.

Canada has made a remarkable commitment to
feed children in five countries in Africa. In Mali, as I
may have mentioned earlier, its commitment to girls'
education has increased the enrolment of girls from 34
to 43 per cent in two years. I am hopeful that France
and Belgium will take a special look at francophone
countries in Africa. The child enrolment in schools in
Niger is very low.

We have a chance to build the same kind of
partnership in Central America. In a place like
Guatemala, 50 per cent of the children under the age of
5 are chronically malnourished. The numbers are
smaller in El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua, but
they are large. The Inter-American Development Bank,
the business community and the World Bank are
getting involved.

These are doable things, and clearly very
important things. I am hopeful that we will find a way
to build this extraordinary partnership. If we feed the
300 million hungry children in the world, that would
account for about half of the hungry people there are.
As you feed a child you make an enormous
contribution to infant mortality, maternal health,
gender equity - as hunger disproportionately affects
girls - the issue of HIV/AIDS and universal primary
education. Those coincide with the first six of the
Millennium Development Goals. If we focus on child
hunger, we will be able to make huge progress in that
regard.

I also appreciated the comments made by the
representative of Japan. It is a very moving experience
to be in Japan - or in Germany, for that matter - to
talk with people who benefited from the rebuilding of
their education systems and from the international
community's generosity in providing food, milk and
cereal for distribution through school systems. I had
the former Minister for Agriculture of Japan tell me
that the fact that the United States went in to provide
milk and cereal to the people of Japan after the Second
World War brought Japan's education system alive and
changed his country. I had the same experience with
ministers in Germany. The fact of the matter is that
every child in the world deserves that kind of support.
Such support begins to diminish envy and anger, and
makes a huge contribution to peace and security.

We work very closely with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the World Health Organization (WHO),
UNICEF, the Food and Agricultural Organization of
the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). I will
not take the time to go through them in great detail, but
the partnerships are very good, especially on the
ground in the field.

I appreciated China's commitment. We have
worked in China for 40 years and have fed tens of
millions of people there. China no longer needs us. We
will close our operations in China in December of this
year, and China will become a major donor to the WFP,
which is a wonderful transition. The WFP will always
be available to help China in an emergency, but that
country will become an important stand-by partner to
help us respond to emergencies.

The representative of Greece asked questions
about child hunger. We are a very close partner of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS). The head of UNAIDS would say that
hunger and nutrition are the most important factors in
the fight against HIV. If people are well nourished,
they have a better chance to resist. If they are infected
and well nourished, they can resist opportunistic
diseases. If they are pretty far along and well
nourished, they will have a few more months or years
to live with their children.

Beyond that, the single most important effort that
the world needs to make in the battle against HIV is
educating children aged 5 to 15 about the seriousness
of this pandemic. That is best done in school and best
done when children are fed and nourished, so they can
learn in school. Peter Piot would tell you that, when he
goes to a village with a high HIV prevalence rate, the
first thing they ask for is food and water. Antiretroviral
treatment does not work in a poorly nourished body.
I wish to thank my colleague from Algeria, which
has become a very important donor. We work closely
with the African Union and in the context of New
Partnership for Africa's Development. With respect to
the issue of basic investment in agricultural
infrastructure, at one point 12 per cent of ODA went to
basic investment. That figure is now down to 4 per
cent. With 80 per cent of Africa relying on agriculture,
to cut by two thirds the amount of investment in basic
infrastructure for agriculture just does not make sense.
NEPAD and the African Union have made a
commitment to encouraging African countries to invest
10 per cent in basic agricultural infrastructure. That
will make a profound difference if it comes to fruition.

We do a lot of small food-for-work projects,
where we invest in micro-irrigation systems or in the
rebuilding of roads, but we do not have the capacity to
do the macro stuff. That is an important step in the
right direction that NEPAD and the African Union have
taken.

Clearly we are profoundly grateful to the United
States. Its focus on the Niger gives me a chance to
mention not only the locust infestation, which is
overwhelming, but also the fact that, in the nine Sahel
countries that have among the lowest school enrolment
in the world, we have a chance to work together with
nine ministers of health and education to dramatically
turn that situation around, especially in a place like the
Niger, where maybe 20 per cent of the children go to
school. We know that, when there is a meal at school,
children come, they stay, they learn, and, if they go for
a month in a row, we give them a package of vegetable
oil to take home to sort of compensate the family for
the lost energy of the child's not being home to help.

I would say to the representative of Tanzania that
we work closely with the Southern African
Development Community (SADC). SADC is our very
close partner in terms of regional work, in terms of
food security, in terms of HIV, in terms of early
warning systems - and that is a good thing.

The representative of France asked a question
about access to the population and the security of our
personnel. I hope that I have answered that question.
He also raised the issue of the nutritional concerns of
children. We are very focused on iodine, on iron, on
Vitamin A; we know that, if we can fortify food - it is
very inexpensive to fortify a school biscuit or some
other food commodity that is going to be distributed -
a small investment will provide enormous leverage in
terms of the overall commodities to be distributed.
I hope that you all will help us think through how
we build this movement - this partnership - to
change the issue of child hunger in the world. If you
feed a young girl, and she goes to school for a few
years, everything about her life changes. We can feed a
child in Bangladesh for $16 for a school year. We can
feed a child in North Korea for $24 a year, and,
generally, for about $35 a year, we can provide a meal
for a child every single school day of the year. The
power of the investment is just enormous.

