Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the briefings by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Foreign Minister Joseph Malanji, Ambassador Fatima
Mohammed, Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo and
Monseigneur Utembi.

Peru takes note of the holding of presidential,
legislative and provincial elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which were described by various
bodies as inclusive. We congratulate the Congolese
people and all the institutions that have contributed to
the process on this historic event. We also welcome the
constructive role of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in this complex electoral stage. We were
interested to hear the announcement of the provisional
results by the Commission electorale nationale
independante last Wednesday establishing the winner
of the elections, as well as the valuable information
provided by the observers. Like them, we deplore
the incidents that took place yesterday and hope that
the transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of
Congo will take place in a peaceful, orderly manner
and in accordance with the constitutional mechanisms
and electoral regulations of the country, with the full
participation of Congolese civil society. We believe that
any challenge to the results by participating political
actors or observers should be carried out peacefully
through the competent legal bodies.

We also believe that it is vital that the Council
remain united in support of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in this post-electoral period, which will
help to strengthen democracy in the country and its
institutions and promote a political dialogue that
seeks a genuine national consensus and preserves and
consolidates peace, as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission has indicated, with all of it being
done on a basis of respect for the decision of the
Congolese people, as expressed at the polls.

However, with regard to the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2019/6), we are very concerned about
the continuing precarious situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, exacerbated by the
Ebola outbreak, which according to the World Health
Organization had claimed the lives of 370 people as of
2 January, and which is the reason for the three-month
postponement of the elections in the provinces of North
Kivu and Mai-Ndombe.

Finally, we would like to stress the need for the
international community, particularly the regional and
subregional organizations that played a pivotal role in
the pre-electoral phase, to continue monitoring the post-
electoral process closely, with a view to overcoming
any impasses and supporting an orderly transfer of
power that will enable the new Government to focus
on the major challenge that lies ahead, that of building
sustainable peace.

