Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Speaking
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), I
would like to begin by congratulating Angola on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to praise your initiative, Mr. President, to organize
this important debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General, the African Union Commissioner for Peace
and Security, and the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region for their inputs in
this debate.

The Great Lakes region is one ofthe African regions
that are richly endowed with natural resources and,
above all, industrious and creative people. It is one of
the cradles of human civilization to which many people
in Africa trace their origins, and yet the region is still
going through some of the worst conflicts affecting the
African continent.

NAM. believes that it is in the interests of the
Great Lakes region, Africa and the wider international
community that this area be supported to emerge from
violent conflicts and human suffering to embrace peace
and stability and engage in economic cooperation,
regional integration and development.

Conflicts have impacted heavily across the Great
Lakes region, most notably around the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with proxy
conflicts contested by regional and international
actors, and with the involvement of the largest United
Nations peacekeeping mission. The consequences
of these conflicts have been devastating for the
civilian populations, the infrastructure and services,
undermining the development of the entire region.

The attempts made to end these conflicts and
establish peace have so far been ineffective, mainly
owing to the continued legacy of colonialism and
the failure to understand the complex nature of those
conflicts and to address their driving forces in a
comprehensive manner.

NAM. welcomed the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework in 2013 by 11 countries of
the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) as a positive development. Establishing a link
between peace, security and development is indeed a
crucial element in support of the implementation of
this Framework.

We support the decisions of the extraordinary
Summit of the ICGLR and its recent Joint Summit with
the Southern African Development Community, which
took place in Luanda, Angola, in March 2014, to ensure
durable peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo. NAM. also welcomed the establishment of
the ICGLR Regional Training Facility on 18 February
2014 in Kampala to fight sexual and gender-based
violence in the Great Lakes region.

The implementation of the Framework requires
financial resources to assist the countries of the region
in the provision of social services for the population,
generate more cross-border trade and develop the
hydroelectric potential of a region richly endowed with
water resources. It also requires coordinated efforts and
the sharing of responsibility between different actors
and stakeholders in its implementation, monitoring and
evaluation. National and regional institutions should
be strengthened to help the private sector to increase
its competitiveness.

Lack of economic growth, jobs and opportunities
create a breeding ground for conflict. The international
community and the political leaders of the region need
to focus their efforts on creating an environment that
is conducive to business operations and investments.
To foster an effective strategy for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in the Great Lakes region,
first and foremost we need to strengthen productive
capacities, creating decent jobs and livelihoods,
improving economic governance and fostering inclusive
development and shared responsibility. The region has
the potential to become the engine for economic growth
and development for the whole continent.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
has faced significant challenges in recent years. NAM
hopes that this open debate will provide an opportunity
to reinvigorate national and international commitments
to its implementation, as well as to mobilize resources
and work towards the implementation of the United
Nations Development Programme Great Lakes
regional strategy.

