Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) in my capacity as the Chair of the
OIC group.

At the outset allow me to express to the delegation
of Nigeria, a fellow State member of the OIC, both
congratulations on presiding over the Security Council
and gratitude for holding an open debate on such a timely
and important topic as the role of regional organizations
in meeting the evolving challenges of global security. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

In my statement, I will focus on the challenges
arising from the continuously evolving threat posed
by terrorism and violent extremism, and highlight
the critical role played by the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation towards countering it.

As our world has become more interconnected
and interdependent, so too have the challenges we
face, requiring us to enhance our collective efforts to
tackle these global threats. Having said that, it is not
enough for these security challenges to be tackled at
the country-to-country level; more importantly, they
must be addressed throught the coordination and
cooperation of regional and subregional organizations
in a concerted effort to ensure the collective peace and
security of our peoples. The Security Council is to
encourage the aforementioned, as clearly stipulated in
Article 52 of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Terrorism and violent extremism remain two of
the most serious threats to every society, as well as to
international peace and security as a whole. Regardless
of its ethno-religious identity, geographical location,
socioeconomic conditions or political stance on the
world stage, every nation is more or less susceptible to
the growing threat of terrorism. Therefore, never before
in history has a comprehensive and concerted response
to terrorism been needed as much as it is today.
However, there seems to be fundamental differences
within the international community on how to handle
the issue of terrorism.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is
committed to fighting terrorism and countering violent
extremism. To that end, the OIC works to delegitimize
violent extremist ideology, develop counter narratives
to such extremist ideologies and propaganda, provide
appropriate pathways to vulnerable groups - especially
youth and women - elevate credible and authentic
religious voices that support tolerance and non-violence,
counter the use of cyberspace, including social media,
by extremist groups.

As part of its ongoing efforts, the OIC Ministerial
Executive Committee held an emergency session on
15 February to review and invigorate its actions against
terrorism and violent extremism. Similarly, on 5 May the
General Secretariat organized an expert level workshop
on countering threats of terrorism and extremism in
cyberspace implementing one of its deliverables.

Moreover, on 27 May in Kuwait, the forty-second
session of the Council of OIC Foreign Ministers
had a special brainstorming session on developing
an effective strategy to combat terrorism, violent
extremism and Islamophobia, thereby strengthening
the OIC's commitment to the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism. The OIC member States will
deliberate on and consider a proposal for establishing
an OIC fund to combat terrorism. Additionally, the OIC
General Secretariat will organize an intergovernmental
expert group meeting to finalize the strategy to combat
terrorism and violent extremism in cyberspace.

The United Nations and the OIC continue to work
together in order to counter incitement to terrorism and
violent extremism. In this regard, within the framework
ofthe ongoing United Nations-OIC cooperation, the OIC

held a workshop in Jeddah in May 2013 on countering
incitement to terrorism and enhancing cultural dialogue
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1624 (2005).
Similarly, after the forthcoming session of the General
Assembly, the OIC looks forward, again in close
consultation with the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, to holding a meeting of OIC member
States on national practices in countering incitement to
terrorism and violent extremism pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014).
The OIC remains an important partner of the United
Nations in peace, security and fostering a culture
of peace at the global level. The OIC stands ready to
make meaningful contributions to the aforementioned
initiatives, and reiterates its cooperation to working
with the United Nations in conflict prevention and
resolution, mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
the promotion of good governance at national and
international levels, combating international terrorism,
fighting extremism, countering religious intolerance,
including Islamophobia, promoting and protecting
all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
humanitarian assistance and capacity building.

Regional organizations have a greater role to
prevent, manage and resolve crises and to ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
is imperative and incumbent upon us - States and
regional organizations - to work more closely, more
collectively, in order to contribute to the promotion
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter.

