Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would first like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Foreign
Minister of Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Foreign Minister of Serbia. I would also like
to thank Mr. Zarif for his comprehensive briefing.

The past few months have seen important
political developments in Kosovo. I would like to focus
on four issues, namely, elections, Serbia and Kosovo's
European perspective, the security situation and the
successful work of the Special Investigative Task Force
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).

First, concerning elections, Germany is very
pleased that the Serbian elections, including the voting
in Kosovo, took place in a calm and organized manner.
That is a success for both sides. None of the parties
involved used the elections to escalate tensions. The
United Nations Interim Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) played a crucial part in that positive
outcome. Through their support to Serbian citizens
throughout Kosovo by virtue of supporting the voting
process, they contributed substantially to the peaceful
situation, particularly in northern Kosovo. The
agreements between the OSCE and Kosovo and Serbia
regarding the organizational role of the OSCE in the
elections are clear evidence of the constructive and
flexible approach of all sides involved. The German
Foreign Minister himself was strongly and actively
committed to that process.

The Kosovo authorities have clearly
demonstrated that they take the protection of ethnic
minorities in Kosovo seriously. We welcome the role
played by all international and local actors, in
particular EULEX and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), in
providing security. They have significantly contributed
to maintaining a safe and secure environment in
Kosovo. In early May, for the second time in a year,
the joint German-Austrian reserve force was deployed
in order to be prepared for possible tensions during the
elections. We urge all parties concerned to continue on
that path and to do their utmost to ensure that there are
no incidents during the forthcoming second round of
the Serbian presidential elections.

My second point is on Serbia's and Kosovo's
European perspective. Germany fully supports Serbia's
pro-European stance. In the recent Serbian
parliamentary elections, 75 per cent of the voters
expressed their commitment by voting for parties that
advocate further rapprochement with the European
Union (EU). That is a positive signal for Serbia, the
region and Europe as a whole. We count on any new
Government to continue on that path.

Against that backdrop, it is deplorable that the
implementation record of February's EU-led dialogue
is still lagging behind expectations. The full and
sustainable implementation of agreements already
concluded should be placed very high on the agenda
for the coming months. We welcome the progress made
during the reporting period on the issue of missing
persons, which would not have been possible without
the direct support of UNMIK. However, further
progress is urgently needed.

My third point is on the current security situation.
In spite of the positive developments during the
elections to date, the situation in northern Kosovo is of
great concern to us. Due to the international presence
and the commitment of local and national authorities,
the situation has remained calm. Yet, the underlying
tensions have not been resolved. Members of the
Council have repeatedly condemned the acts of
violence perpetrated by both sides. During the past few
months, deplorable, but, fortunately, isolated, acts of
violence occurred. In particular, we condemn, in the
strongest terms, the attacks on the Embassy of the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in Pristina on
16 March.

Let me recall that, throughout the recent tensions,
both KFOR and EULEX have acted, and continue to
act, in accordance with their mandate in a status-
neutral way that aims to ensure and maintain a safe and
secure environment, including freedom of movement,
and to establish the rule of law.

My fourth point pertains to the allegations raised
in the so-called Marty report. Let me once again stress
that Germany's primary objective is to see a full and
independent investigation of those allegations. We
therefore very much welcome the further progress
made by the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force
in the past month. We look forward to further updates
being provided in the UNMIK reports.

The investigation is on a very good path.
Ambassador Williamson has further strengthened his
ties with relevant actors and States. Pristina, Belgrade
and Tirana continue to fully cooperate with the Task
Force and its investigations. In particular, Germany
very much welcomes last week's adoption by the
Albanian Parliament of a new law on cooperation with
the Task Force. That visibly demonstrates that it can
count on the cooperation of States relevant to the
investigation.

Let me conclude by reiterating our appreciation
for the contributions made by UNMIK and to
commend the dedication and service of its staff.
Germany will continue to pay great attention to the
developments in Kosovo. We will also continue to
promote Serbia's and Kosovo's joint and shared
European future.

