Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic):
It gives us great pleasure, Sir, to see you presiding over
this open Security Council debate on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations. We should also like to extend our thanks and
appreciation to the United Nations humanitarian agencies
for their significant efforts and great sacrifices, made with
a view to alleviating the suffering of millions of refugees
and displaced persons.

The problem of refugees and displaced persons,
which has been exacerbated in recent years, is an open
wound on the conscience of humankind. The international
community, with all its institutions and organizations,
must undertake its role in this regard. The United Nations
certainly also bears a great responsibility in this regard,
not only for delivering humanitarian assistance to refugees
and guaranteeing the security and safety of those
providing it, but also for seeking permanent solutions to
this humanitarian tragedy.

In order to deal with the problem of refugees and
displaced persons thoroughly and appropriately, its social,
economic and political reasons must be explored. An
attempt must be made to solve the problem through a just
and comprehensive approach. The people of Afghanistan
would not have been displaced had it not been for certain
geopolitical conditions that transformed it into an arena
for conflict among major Powers. When the conflict was

 

over, Afghanistan was left to lick its wounds without any
serious assistance in rebuilding its economic and civilian
infrastructures.

The situation of my own country, Iraq, provides
another example. Throughout its history, Iraq has been a
haven for those from neighbouring countries seeking
security, peace and a dignified life. However, the unjust
war that was waged against it under the cover of the
Security Council destroyed the infrastructures of the
economy and ways of life in Iraq. Moreover, the
comprehensive sanctions that have been in effect for seven
years have led to the migration of numerous Iraqis. At the
same time, a major Power - a permanent member of the
Security Council - has for seven years been contributing
to destabilizing Iraq by inciting revolt against the central
authority, arming outlaw forces and imposing no-fly zones,
all of which has resulted in instability and an exacerbation
of the refugee problem. Were that State to halt its
interference in Iraq's affairs, and were sanctions to be lifted
from Iraq tomorrow - for which there is ample legal
justification - the problem of Iraqi refugees would
disappear.

The Eleventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cartagena,
affirmed the need to differentiate between peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian assistance, just as it made clear
its reservations with regard to the trend to convert
peacekeeping operations into military operations. In this
regard, we would like to emphasize the fact that the
emergence of certain situations in which domestic conflicts
influence the flow of humanitarian assistance does not
justify military action by the Security Council; neither does
it justify granting the Security Council additional powers to
intervene in the work of United Nations humanitarian
agencies and organizations or to bypass the role of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
In this regard, we must emphasize the effect of
economic sanctions in exacerbating the problem of refugees
and displaced persons. When imposing such sanctions, it is
necessary to adopt the principles arrived at by the General
Assembly's sub-working group on sanctions, such as the
importance of the conformity of sanctions with the Charter,
the clarity of their aims, the conditions for their lifting, and
the requirement that they not cause massive humanitarian
suffering. This must be accompanied by a clear definition
of the steps that are required of the targeted country for the
sanctions to be lifted, and by the exclusion of all medical,
food, educational and agricultural items from such
sanctions.

The Security Council is facing increasing accusations
of selectivity and double standards. The most recent
manifestation of such selectivity was its total disregard of
the Turkish invasion of northern Iraq. Given that the
working group on Security Council reform has not yet
completed its work, to consider expanding the powers of
the Council to include interfering in the work of United
Nations humanitarian organs seems unduly and
excessively optimistic. The optimal contribution of the
Security Council in this regard would be to play its role
under the Charter: to practise preventive diplomacy, to
settle disputes peacefully, and to stress the mechanisms
provided for under Chapter VI as a means to create a
stable and secure international environment.

Experience has shown that resort to coercive
measures in dealing with humanitarian crises and
overlapping between peacekeeping and humanitarian
assistance operations serves only to exacerbate problems,
rather than solving them. The experience of Somalia is a
case in point.

