Mr. De Mistura: At the outset, let me say how
much I and my entire team appreciate the support we
have been receiving this year in particular. As this
may be the last occasion this year for me to brief the
Security Council - and the end of the Security Council
cycle for some members - I would like to say thanks,
because I have felt that Council members supported us
and understood our challenges. I count on that for next
year as well.

The eighth round of the intra-Syrian talks in
Geneva concluded last Thursday. During my previous
briefing (see S/PV.8113)I indicated why and how I was
planning to try to facilitate some real negotiations and
discussions, not just pre-negotiations. I did so because,
first, we saw developments on the ground, including
de-escalation and major strides being made against
the territorial control of the Islamic State of Iraq and
Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh. That provided logical impetus
for the political track. ISIL is almost gone from the
territory, although Al-Nusra is still there. But now
it is time to talk about a political future. Secondly,
significant international diplomacy had taken place
just before the talks - in Da Nang, where an important
statement was made; in Riyadh, where a second
process was established, which was considered almost
unthinkable a year ago, so that now three different
opposition groups, which had not really been talking to
each other, are now united in one group and have one
voice; and in Sochi, where an important meeting took
place between Presidents Putin and Al-Assad. There
have also been important meetings between Presidents
Putin and Erdogan. Thirdly, both the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition Syrian
High Negotiations Commission had given some public
signals that they were interested in committing to a real
discussion in Geneva.

How would that take place? Through a clear and
realistic work plan focused on the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015) - which, as the only resolution
that is guiding us on a political process and legitimizing
that process, is all we have and all that we have been
able to bring together - and with a particular focus on
the so-called 12 principles, a constitutional process and
United Nations-supervised elections, both presidential
and parliamentary, which in our internal jargon we
refer to as basket 2 and basket 3. The process would
play out while also exploring the very important issues
of governance and counter-terrorism - basket 1 and
basket 4 - and while pushing for confidence-building
measures, such as humanitarian access, which
Mr. Lowcock will talk about, and the issue of detainees,
abductees and missing persons, with the active support
of outside players.

How did the eighth round go? The agenda I just
outlined, which I though was quite ready to start
moving forward, for the reasons I mentioned, did not
in fact move forward. The opportunity to begin real
discussion or negotiation was not taken. A golden
opportunity was missed, for many reasons. One is
psychological, because we are at the end of the year;
another is political, because we are at the end, or want
to believe we are, of a major military operation; and
another is grounded in a human point of View, since
most ordinary Syrians have been asking and waiting
for this because they want to see the situation change
for them.
Let me explain why. I will try to do it as objectively
as possible, although I cannot help showing my feelings,
even in my body language - I am Swedish and Italian,
and am supposed to maintain my Swedish-style calm
and not show my emotional Italian side - but while I am
a United Nations diplomat with 47 years of experience,
and trained to keep my emotions in check, I cannot hide
my disappointment. So I will explain why by quoting
from the perspective of each delegation.

The opposition delegation, which held 11 meetings
with me, came to Geneva almost directly from the
so-called Riyadh II conference, about which I think I
briefed the Council the last time. They were therefore
unable to prepare themselves, but in spite of that they
were able to maintain one line and one voice. They
publicly affirmed their position, as indicated in the
Riyadh II statement, calling for direct negotiations with
the Government, which they emphasized was a position,
not a precondition. They also stated their willingness
to engage in indirect negotiations through me and my
team if direct negotiations were not possible.

The opposition received from us an updated version
of the 12 living intra-Syrian essential principles,
translated into English, which are the principles that
we have been working on for more than a year now,
and which we have discussed with everyone, including
civil society, the Government and the opposition, as the
potential basis for principles for a future constitution.
The opposition gave concrete input in response to our
presentation of the updated version of the essential
principles. For the first time, frankly, they also engaged
on all four baskets in very in-depth and relevant
discussions, sometimes welcoming and sometimes
disagreeing with ideas that the United Nations had
developed or proposed, while also sharing their own
ideas with us.

The Government delegation, which I met seven
times and which was not in Geneva on some of the same
days - or not for exactly the same length of time as the
opposition - considered that the Riyadh II statement
implied "a precondition in its call for President Al-Assad
to depart at the start of any transition period". In all
fairness, the Council should know that both I and the
Saudi authorities in Riyadh - and I think the Special
Envoy of the Russian Federation and many others from
various countries as well - advised the opposition not
to emphasize that aspect, precisely because it would
potentially be considered a precondition. They told us
that it was important for them to do so because it has

been a party line since the beginning and that it was not
a precondition but a position - an opinion.
The Government also regarded the language in the
Riyadh 2 statement on the role of the Islamic Republic
of Iran as unacceptable, and it further questioned
whether the opposition delegation - although now
unified - including the Moscow platform and the
Cairo platform, as well as the old or renewed Riyadh
platform, was not sufficiently representative.

It also stated, through a video on YouTube, that
until full Syrian sovereignty was restored and terrorism
defeated in all parts of the Syrian territory, it would
not be possible to entertain real movement on a
constitutional review process or elections. That, to me,
was a new condition that I had never heard before. It
made me very worried about any other initiative besides
that of Geneva, because if we all have for the whole
country to be in a different geographic and political
environment, with no foreign or terrorist presence
at all, it might mean that any intention of generally
addressing a constitutional review or election would be
set aside for a long period, ifthe Government's position
were confirmed. And it was confirmed to us; I have it
on record.

Then they also started calling for the Riyadh 2
statement to be withdrawn as a precondition. The
Government therefore declined to meet directly with the
opposition or to negotiate indirectly with them through
me until and unless the Riyadh 2 statement were
withdrawn. The Government also further declined to
explore any item of the agenda with the United Nations
other than counter-terrorism, which we call basket 4
and which, frankly, is very important and affects us all,
but is not the only important issue. They also received
an updated version from us of the 12 living intra-Syrian
essential principles, but did not comment on them or
engage with them any further.

As a mediator, I naturally tried to help both
sides to think creatively and overcome any perceived
barriers to negotiation. For instance, I counselled
the Government that the opposition had set out its
own negotiating position in Riyadh and that, as
we all know, any opposition in the world can and
sometimes does call for a change of Government as
an ultimate goal. I further explained that a negotiating
position was not the same as a precondition. I said
that the Government should also test the other side
in negotiation, confront them and talk to them. The
Government found my position unconvincing, arguing
that the mentality of the opposition, as expressed in the
Riyadh 2 statement, revealed that the opposition was
pursuing unattainable demands.

Meanwhile, I also counselled the opposition to
depersonalize and broaden their thinking on governance,
not to constantly refer to that type of personalization
of the political solution, and indeed to publicly clarify
that they had no preconditions. The opposition pointed
out that the Government was setting a precondition to
talking to them. Nevertheless, the opposition responded
to my appeal about its public messaging by making
clear that they are calling for the implementation of
Security Council resolutions and "a tough negotiation
with different goals" but not attempting to actually
persuade the Government to engage with them or me on
anything other than terrorism. The opposition regarded
that as a sign that the Government was avoiding the
negotiating table. In other words, the opposition was
ready for negotiations.

I should add that for the whole time we were in
Geneva, no progress was made on the most urgent
humanitarian issues. I had hoped some progress could
be reached during that period. It was the perfect
moment to give some good news, and I must say I have
to congratulate the entire Council - whatever each
member's position has been - for moving forward on
an important resolution. At this time of year, that gives
me a feeling that the Council can move forward when
people are in need. There was no progress made on the
most urgent humanitarian issues, but Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock will brief the Council on that topic,
so I will not even touch upon that subject.

There was also no progress on the critical issues of
detainees, abductees and missing people, a topic that
had been raised Via the Astana process but had not yet
been delivered, either in Astana nor in Geneva. In view
of the fact that we now have a new Astana opportunity,
I strongly urge Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey,
in their capacity as guarantor States, to address the
issues of the detainees, the abductees and the missing
persons during the next meeting in Astana and not to
miss that opportunity at the end of the year. That will
probably happen towards the end of this week.

Whatever the frustrations - and I recognize that
there are many and on all sides - let us recall that
only a United Nations-brokered process will be seen
by the Syrians as impartial and attract the needed
regional and international legitimacy. That is why the
Council has mandated the United Nations to facilitate
the political process. I appreciate the support extended
by permanent members of the Council when they
assembled in Geneva at the opening and closing of this
round of talks.

Let us also remind ourselves that despite the
failure to negotiate in round 8, the front-loading of
the living essential principles I mentioned for a future
constitution, the identification of details of processes
under the constitution/electoral basket - while
working to build a safe, calm and neutral environment
under the governance and security baskets, which are
two important elements for a constitution/electoral
basket - remain the most feasible approach to the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

The 12 living intra-Syrian essential principles,
published in round 8, which seek to embody end-state
commonalities and offer an enduring perspective on
the vision ofa future that can be shared by all Syrians,
are consistent with and reflect many of the end-state
principles contained in resolution 2254 (2015) and can
serve to inform the parallel discussions of the four
baskets, which remain on the agenda of the talks. Thus,
the principles constitute an important assurance about
the ultimate purpose of any political settlement process
under resolution 2254 (2015).

Let me shift now from the slightly theoretical
to the pragmatic and practical. Since we have been
hearing and talking about the constitutional process
and elections, and we were not able in the intra-Syrian
talks to actually engage both sides on the matter, I will
engage the Council.

I believe that the time has come for the United
Nations to provide some specific elaborations on the
constitution and electoral baskets 2 and 3, and how
they relate to governance, counter-terrorism, security
governance and confidence-building measures, and
develop agreed and clear modalities for the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and thus
stimulate broader consultation.

Let me share our thinking at this stage on
basket 3 - elections. In its paragraph 4, the resolution
expresses the Council's support for

"free and fair elections, pursuant to the new
constitution administered under supervision
of the United Nations and [held] to the highest
international standards of transparency and
accountability, with all Syrians, including members
of the diaspora, eligible to participate".
What do we mean when we say that we should be involved
and that those elections should be internationally
legitimate? The United Nations has provided electoral
assistance to the majority of Member States, including
around one-third of them in the past two years alone, so
we do have experience, often in post-conflict situations
and across the full spectrum of electoral assistance.

There is therefore clearly a need to fully respect
Syria's sovereignty - no question of that - and its
own national electoral process, while at the same time
facilitating United Nations supervision that the Council
has stated it supports. Bearing in mind resolution 2254
(2015) and insights obtained from parties - because
we were able to talk to each side a little bit prior to this
round about elections, as well as with civil society and
the average Syrian people - in order to hold free and fair
elections to the highest international standards, there
must be a clear timeline and sequencing agreed, as per
resolution 2254 (2015), for United Nations-supervised
elections, both presidential and parliamentary.

Provisions would need to be made to ensure equal
opportunity for all to participate in public life, not to
be terrorized or scared to be involved in it. Principles
would need to be agreed for a legal electoral framework
that meets the highest international standards and
ensures independent electoral management. Parametres
would be required on voter eligibility so that all
Syrians, irrespective of their religion, ethnicity or
gender - including members of the diaspora - can
vote with special procedures to ensure the participation
of refugees, internally displaced persons and other
Syrians impacted by the conflict.

Specific provisions would have to be made to
promote women's participation, and United Nations
supervision could include roles in support of the
legal electoral framework, electoral institutions and
operations, including diaspora voting. This would
also involve reporting to the Security Council on the
implementation of the electoral processes, as related
to the highest international standards of inclusivity,
transparency and accountability. Those are issues
surrounding elections. If we want the United Nations
to be involved, that is what United Nations involvement
comes with. Ready to respect sovereignty and ready to
work hard - that is what United Nations-supervised
elections mean.

Basket 2 concerns the constitution. Resolution 2254
(2015) calls for a United Nations-facilitated process
to set the schedule and process for drafting a new
constitution before United Nations-supervised elections
are held. The United Nations has therefore sought at
every turn in our meetings to understand the feelings of
the various parties on that matter. Based on this, let me
offer 11 observations to set some parametres and help
produce further discussion, if we want a constitution
process, as per resolution 2254 (2015), and thus the
blessing of the United Nations.

First, it would appear that both parties have accepted
that Syria requires a review of its constitutional
order, culminating in the popular approval of a new
constitution. We all agree and they all agree that it is
for the people of Syria alone to determine the future
constitution of Syria. It should not be written by any
country or any ofus; we can help, but it should be theirs.

Second, any constitutional review must be Syrian-
owned, Syrian-led and conducted in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), which, as I have indicated,
provides that the setting of a schedule and process
for the drafting of such a new constitution must take
place in the context of United Nations-convened and
facilitated intra-Syrian talks.

Third, such a scheduling process should attempt to
identify and contain guiding principles and a sequenced
timetable, and identify all relevant institutions that
need to be established, including their mandate and
composition and the manner of establishment. To
that end, we believe that such a constitutional review
process could be guided by the principles contained in
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), and be informed by the 12
living essential intra-Syrian principles, which offer
a perspective of a vision of a future Syria that can be
shared by all.

Fourth, as I indicated earlier, those principles give
important assurances to the people Syria as to the
purpose of any constitutional review, which must meet
the legitimate aspirations of the people of Syria.

Fifth, such principles, while not supra-constitutional
unless otherwise agreed by the Syrian people, could be
developed and embodied by a constitutional drafting
body. However, if such a constitutional drafting body
were to be credible, any drafting process would also

likely need to address how power is to be shared,
decentralized and exercised in Syria at the national,
provincial and local levels.

Sixth, the two institutions that have so far emerged
from discussions for the purposes of drafting and
revising a new constitution and instituting a national
dialogue process are a constitutional commission and
a national conference. The constitutional commission
could prepare and refer an initial draft of a new
constitution to a national conference in Syria, which
could oversee a national dialogue and review, revise and
then refer any draft constitution for popular approval,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

Seventh, both institutions should have their
mandate, terms of reference, powers and rules of
procedure agreed in United Nations-facilitated
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva.

Eighth, the United Nations would ensure that any
composition agreed would be consistent with resolution
2254 (2015) and based upon any inclusive and objective
selection criteria determined and agreed in Geneva. At
the very least, both institutions would have to consist of
representatives of the Government, the opposition in the
intra-Syrian talks, and additional components of Syrian
society, including religious, political, intellectual,
economic, union figures, Syrians from the diaspora and
legal experts, with provisions made for including civil
society, independent people and women.

Ninth, such aconstitutional review would have to be
inclusive and contain a national dialogue that is well-
structured, conducted transparently and broadly-based,
ensures opportunities for the dissemination of drafts,
debate and revision, and has full contact and consultation
with civil society, political parties, universities,
academia and the public on the draft constitution.

Tenth, the United Nations stands ready, if
authorized by the Security Council, to provide good-
offices support to any constitutional commission and
national conference as described, and as agreed by the
parties in the intra-Syrian talks, as well as the provision
of international expertise.

Eleventh, if a meaningful and inclusive
constitution-making process is to take place in Syria,
a secure, calm, neutral environment would need to
be established to enable Syrians from all segments
of society to participate safely and freely. That in
turn would require the sides in Geneva to identify
relevant and appropriate counter-terrorist, security,
governance and confidence-building measures, as well
as credible, all inclusive, non-sectarian Government
arrangements that would need to be agreed and put in
place via negotiations.

A tough approach to governance would also help
identify milestones and performance indicators. I
need hardly repeat that the process of establishing a
favourable environment would be greatly enhanced by
tangible progress on unhindered humanitarian access
and confidence-building measures, in particular action
on detainees, abductees and missing persons in a
nationwide sustainable ceasefire.

Forgive me for speaking at great length, but this is
an important moment for actually setting some clear
parametres before us when we talk about important
next steps. These propositions are advanced in good
faith by the United Nations in order to promote fresh
thinking in all quarters, in particular in relation to
the constitution and elections and their relations to
governance and counter-terrorism. They come out
of intense engagement with the parties and Syrians
across the board, far beyond the people we have been
meeting in the official meetings. What I have presented
is designed to show how resolution 2254 (2015) could
be implemented credibly and in full in a way that is
genuinely responsive to the needs of Syrians and the
realities of the moment. We intend to present some of
the ideas and approaches I hjave outlined in a non-paper
or a mediator statement early next year.

I will see the Secretary-General this afternoon, so
I am not at present in a position to update the Security
Council on further developments regarding proposals
to hold an early national dialogue congress in a location
outside Syria. According to the instructions I have
received so far, the Secretary-General will continue
to view this and all other initiatives in the context of
a simple test. Do they support the mandated political
process under United Nations auspices and the full
implementation ofresolution 2254 (2015)? According to
the Secretary-General, the bottom line is, if any entity
relevant to constitutional review were to be established
outside Syria and there were a desire for it to work
under the aegis of the United Nations, either it would
have to emerge directly from the intra-Syrian talks
in Geneva or the United Nations would need to retain
the prerogative to review such a body, in consultation
with the Council. I would be guided by resolution 2254
(2015) in this regard and, obviously, the guidance of the
Secretary-General.

Let me conclude by reminding the Council of
something else - something I have always stressed
and, as the year comes to a close, should perhaps do so
again. These past three weeks, while the negotiations
did not proceed, Syrians made their own voices heard
and their views known to us. The Syrian Women's
Advisory Board provided valuable insights and ideas
on the 12 principles in baskets 2 and 3. We hosted 130
civil society representatives. These included experts on
constitutional legal matters, human rights, grass-roots
dialogue and social cohesion. We held a discussion via
video-teleconference with Syrian refugees - because
sometimes we forget that there are 5 million of them
and they are there and they want to be part of the future,
but they also want to be reassured that, if they decide
to come, there is a future - in Jordan and Lebanon,
as well as with civil society representatives in hard-to-
reach areas across Syria and with those who are present
also in Turkey. They had inputs and thoughts on every
issue on the agenda, and my team and I have learned a
lot from them.

However, most of all they called without any doubt
for a political solution, for dignity, for the protection
of civilians, for maintaining Syrian territorial integrity
and for unconditional access to health care, support
and education, which they reminded us are pillars
of counter-terrorism. They demanded the release of
detainees and abductees and that those who left and
became refugees not be punished upon their return,
because they are afraid of that. They also demanded
information on the missing and for the United Nations
and the international community to create conditions
conducive to the voluntary return of refugees. They
desperately wanted to see the United Nations-Geneva
process move forward.

I think that nobody in this Chamber finds those
requests or pleas unreasonable, but trust, confidence
and political will are the hardest commodities to find
when I hold my intra-Syrian talks. I hope that, by
liberating ideas, the parties and all Syrians can see that
resolution 2254 (2015) can actually be implemented,
even in the context of the realpolitik of 2018, in the
interests of all Syrians. The question is how much we
all will do to help achieve this vision.

I can assure the Council that Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and myself will spare no efforts. We
look forward to an active and, I hope, proactive start to
2018 in that regard.

I thank the Council for its patience. My statement
was longer than average, but we are at the end of
the year.

