Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Nations Charter is crystal clear about our first and
most fundamental objective. It is "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war".

Any success which we, the Member States of the
United Nations, have had in achieving that objective can
only be regarded as partial. Too often Security Council
intervention comes too late to prevent widespread death
and destruction. Modern war and internal conflict remain
a blight on our planet. It is civilians who bear the brunt.

Despite the efforts of this Council, too many
belligerent groups target the innocent and the defenceless.
Massive numbers of refugees are forced to flee for safety,
 

and gross and systematic violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are perpetrated. To stop this
increasingly vicious trend, we have to prevent disputes from
escalating into armed warfare.

The presidential statement which you, Mr. President,
will deliver at the end of this debate, sets out a
comprehensive framework for our own activity. But it also
recognizes the essential role of the Secretary-General. He
must be given the support he needs to work for peace on
his own initiative. That means building the capacity of the
United Nations Secretariat. It must be able to produce
sharper analyses of potential conflicts. We must also
reinforce the ability of Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to deploy rapidly United Nations peacekeepers,
police and civilians if fragile peace agreements are not to
disintegrate.

It also means a greater focus on conflict prevention in
the funds, programmes and agencies of the United Nations
system. The Secretary-General must have the freedom to
work up more creative approaches to preventive diplomacy.
He must be allowed to carry them forward discreetly and
under his own tactical judgement if they are to succeed.

As for the Member States, we too must play a stronger
role, not least in Africa. We must help the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the other regional organizations
take a more proactive role in conflict prevention. The OAU
has recently published a plan for expanding the capacity of
its conflict management centre. The United Kingdom has
committed $1 million to support this, and we hope that
others will contribute soon. In this whole area, the Security
Council must work harder and show more initiative than
others. It is a test of leadership and responsibility for this
Council.

In 1999, we have done our best. We should be proud
of the success of Ambassador Andjaba's mission to Jakarta
and Dili in September. Ambassador Fowler should be
congratulated on his ongoing work to tighten the
enforcement of sanctions against UNITA. We have done
well to address directly the fragile situation in Sierra Leone
and to support the process of reconciliation there.

But apart from addressing each issue on its merits, we
have to think creatively about acting on our best intentions
and about the policy instruments at our disposal. The
Secretary-General has this afternoon given us four practical
points for early consideration. This debate is raising more.
Most pertinent is the Secretary-General's point about the
resources being more cost- effectively employed in
prevention than in surgery.
So, overall, this amounts to an ambitious agenda for
the new millennium. We will not succeed straightaway,
and we will have to face up to the consequences of our
occasional failures.

For a start, when the Security Council fails to
prevent genocide and other massive abuses of human
rights, others are encouraged to believe that they too can
get away with crimes against humanity. The fact that so
many of these conflicts are internal should not bar us
from taking collective steps to resolve them. The
Secretary-General set out this problem in his opening
statement at this year's session of the General Assembly.

We will restore the United Nations to its rightful
role in international peace and security only if we adapt
to a world in which the sovereign State has already, as a
matter of objective reality, been redefined by
globalization, a world in which there is a new recognition
that the State is the servant of the people, not the other
way round.

The British Government firmly shares the Secretary-
General's belief that we have a joint responsibility to act
when confronted by genocide, mass displacement of
people or major breaches of international humanitarian
law. That does not necessarily mean the use of force. It
may mean determined diplomacy, sometimes out of the
glare of publicity when that would be more effective,
sometimes more creative in its ideas and its
implementation than has traditionally been the hallmark
of the Council.

Preventive action can take many forms, and military
action will not always be desirable or feasible. But when
the international community does use force in response to
humanitarian crises, it needs a framework for that
response: a common understanding within the Security
Council and the wider United Nations membership of the
circumstances and conditions of action. Force should be
used as a last resort. It must be limited in scope. It must
be proportionate to the humanitarian objective of
preventing major loss of civilian life.

We shall soon be sharing more detailed United
Kingdom ideas on humanitarian action for discussion with
our partners in the United Nations.

 

The subject we are discussing today goes far beyond
the immediate remit of the Security Council. If the United
Nations is to live up to its goals, the Council must work in
concert with the Secretary-General, with the Funds,
Programmes and Agencies and with the wider membership.
Today's debate should be the event which kick-starts
our work in this whole area. We need to innovate, and we
need to work together. With a shared commitment and a
clear purpose, we will begin to make a difference.

Thank you, Sir, for initiating this useful debate.

