Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): The
United Nations was created for noble purposes, among
which were sparing future generations from the
scourge of war and promoting respect for human rights
so that everyone might leave in freedom and peace.
The primacy of the rule of law, justice and respect for
commitments stemming from treaties and other sources
of international law are the real ways of building a
society in which international justice reigns supreme.

The role of the United Nations, which includes
promoting justice and implementing the primacy of the
rule of law, is both important and crucial. The United
Nations works to quell the conflicts that break out
throughout the world and tries in equal measure to
prevent conflicts. The Organization therefore plays an
important role in the protection of civilians during
armed conflict and in building and safeguarding peace
and providing assistance to countries that want to
maintain their independence in the various regions of
the world. The United Nations has in fact been able to
quickly lend its assistance to countries aspiring to
freedom and independence. In that regard, we would
like to salute the United Nations efforts to safeguard
international peace and security throughout the world.

The fact that the United Nations was able to
emerge from the difficult challenge it confronted prior
to the war in Iraq is a source of satisfaction. It would
be a good idea for all of us to adhere to a single vision,
namely, to help the people of Iraq rebuild what the war
has destroyed. In that connection, we must give the
United Nations a greater and more important role so
that it may prepare the people of Iraq to once again
assume responsibility for full sovereignty of their
country.

The Security Council has met on numerous
occasions to address various issues. It has been able to
act as a fair judge and to make praiseworthy efforts to
promote the principles of justice and to assert the
primacy of the rule of law. The United Nations has
therefore played the role conferred upon it by the
Charter.

At the same time, however, we have noted that
the question of the Middle East has not always
benefited from those efforts, as the principles of justice
have been paralysed. The Security Council is in fact
seized of the Middle East question. In that regard,
however, we note that noble principles are often
sacrificed to double standards. In fact, we often allow
oppression and arrogance to prevail, thereby denying
international justice vis-a-vis the Middle East.

The Government of Israel must implement the
road map. It must permit the establishment of a
Palestinian State that has Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital. The Government of Israel must also implement
Security Council resolutions; otherwise the Palestinian
people will continue to have the right to defend
themselves and to resist Israel's unfair occupation.

We must distinguish between terrorism, on the
one hand, and the right of a people to legitimate self-
defence and to resist occupation by force, on the other.
In the same vein, we hope that all the relevant
international resolutions regarding the Arab-Israeli
conflict will be implemented and that the Security
Council will assume its duties with regard to the
principle of ensuring international peace and security,
which is enshrined in Article 24 of the Charter. We also
hope that the Council will take all necessary measures
under Articles 41 and 42 to guarantee justice for all
mankind.

