Ms. Alnaser (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, for his valuable briefing on
the progress made in the work of the Mechanism. I
would also like to thank Prosecutor Brammertz for his
useful briefing.

The International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, established by the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010), was put in place to
strengthen the principles of justice, the rule of law and
non-impunity. Through the Mechanism, the Council
reaffirms the importance of protecting the rights of
victims of war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing.

We welcome the efforts of the President of the
Mechanism to improve its performance and guarantee
the completion of its residual judicial proceedings in
a timely and efficient manner, while strengthening
cooperation between the two branches of the Mechanism,
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010). We also commend
the speed with which the Mechanism has carried out
procedures for sentencing accused individuals, with an
eye to concluding the work of the tribunals within the set
time frame. We also value the efforts of the Prosecutor
to uncover information that may lead to locating and
arresting the eight outstanding fugitives. We renew
our call to relevant Member States and international
organizations to assist in strengthening the efforts of
the Mechanism.

The Mechanism faces many challenges, which
is why the international community must commit
to providing full assistance to the Mechanism. We
reiterate the need for the Mechanism to take proper
steps towards addressing the concerns of the Member
States set forth in resolution 2422 (2018) in order to
achieve the desired goals in this regard.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Peru for
chairing the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs for its
efforts aimed at implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

