Mr. Kobler: I am grateful for the solidarity
expressed around the table in the Security Council. The
solidarity and cohesion of the Council is an important
message. It is an important signal for those in Libya
who seek procrastination and delay instead of progress
and stability. I also appreciate the messages of support
from my colleagues in particular, who increasingly
work inside Libya on a daily basis in order to make life
better for the Libyans.

I would like to comment briefly on the situation in
the south, which is a matter ofgreat concern for us. Many
here have rightly said that there is a difference between
the fight against terrorism andjust taking an airport and
achieving territorial gains. The humanitarian situation
in the south, in Tamanhint and the town is, to say the
least, very difficult. There are internally displaced
persons, so any fighting aggravates the humanitarian
situation, and people leave the areas where they reside.
That is the case in Tamanhint. We try our best to not
only politically urge interlocutors to stop the fighting
but also to relieve the humanitarian situation. There
is only one hospital left, and it has neither medicine
nor equipment. We have tried to go there to advocate
for allowing relief and humanitarian goods into the
hospitals and the area.

Many have mentioned the situation in the detention
centres, and I cannot but underline the importance of
human security in Libya, which extends far beyond
the detention centres. I bring to the Council's attention
the situation in prisons, which was not mentioned. The
situation for prisoners in Libya is not better than for
those in the detention centres - with overcrowding and
bad health conditions. It is the lack of accountability,
the lack of State structure and the failure to restore
the needed State authority throughout the country. We
should not forget the many thousands who are subject to
torture and arbitrary detention in Libya. The restitution
of State authority is progressing. However, the situation
in detention centres was duly noted. I personally try
to go to those detention centres at least once a month,
and I see the overcrowding, the health situation and the
problems that the detainees face.

The solution is not only in the repressive means of
closing the borders but also in the repatriation of those
who are in the detention centres. The International
Organization for Migration does a great deal to repatriate
between 100 and 200 people every week to their
countries of origin. But, given the thousands that are
there, it is only a drop in the ocean of illegal migration.

I floated the idea with the Chief Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court as to whether it would
be possible to consider human trafficking as a crime
against humanity, given the thousands of people who
have drowned and the irresponsible behaviour and the
lack of accountability of human traffickers operating
in Libya. I think that the relationship between human
security, human rights for everybody and political
security is obvious. I am very glad that the Council is
also addressing that problem.

With respect to the illegal flow of arms, Libya has
20 million weapons. With a population of only 6 million
people, that is really a problem. I always say, and I have
said it to the Security Council in previous consultations:
weapons come from somewhere - they do not just
magically appear - they come by air, they come by
sea, they come by land. Exports of illicit oil and diesel
find their way to other countries through smuggling.
I genuinely appreciate the Council's endeavour to
block the illegal import of weapons and the smuggling
routes, because it is very important to do it in a legal
way via the United Nations Sanctions Committee, with
exemptions if that is desirable, or through the lifting
of the weapons embargo, but it is up to the Sanctions
Committee to make the appropriate recommendation.

Let me conclude by going a bit beyond 2017 and
2018 in strategic terms. In 2050, Africa will have
2.4 billion inhabitants, nearly doubling its population
size from 1.4 billion now to 2.4 billion, so it is easy
to imagine what we can expect in terms of population
movements, not in the short term, but in the medium and
long term. However, Libya, a large country, will have
only 9 million inhabitants in 2050. As a country that is
large and rich, but does not have a sizeable population,
Libya will be strategically facing large immigration
waves early in the years 2030, 2040 and 2050.

I therefore think that we should reflect upon how
we stabilize the country beyond the short term. It is
important not to lose sight of a strategic vision for the
future. Something dramatic has to happen if we are to
be able to cope with the problem of 2.4 billion people
in sub-Saharan Africa, 70 per cent of whom will be
between the ages of 15 and 29. The so-called youth
bulge and the youth problem, combined with enormous
population growth, particularly in the Niger and Chad,
Libya's direct neighbours, which will show enormous
population growth of an order not shared by other
countries, must be kept in mind, as we strategically
think about the future. Human security, the strategic
lines of Libyan population growth and the youth bulge
all over the continent are all topics that are important
to consider.

1 thank the Council members for their great support,
for the solidarity they have been showing and for the
important signal that this meeting has sent today to the
Libyans themselves.

