Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to congratulate
China on its presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also wish to express my appreciation to the
Chairmen of the Committees for their informative
briefings and professional work. I want also like to
take this opportunity to welcome the new Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), Jean-Paul Laborde. We
are happy to have him on board and look forward to
working closely with himin the future. Israel believes
that the United Nations counter-terrorism committees
are essential to the global efforts to isolate terrorists.
We appreciate their dedicated work, along with that of
other relevant United Nations agencies.

Since the inception of the State of Israel in 1948,
not a single day has gone by where we did not face the
threat of terrorism. Out of that persistent need to defend
our citizens, Israel became a specialist in the field of

counter-terrorism with techniques, technologies and
tools unmatched by any other country. Over the years,
terrorists have become increasingly sophisticated,
and Israel's counter-terrorism efforts have evolved
to keep us one step ahead. From aviation security to
border security and from money-laundering to legal
infrastructures, Israel has a well of expertise for
countries to draw on. From the plains of Africa to
the jungles of Central America, Israel is proud to be
sharing its counter-terrorism capabilities and saving
countless lives.

Let me give the Council just one example. The issue
of aviation security is increasingly a focus of concern
for many nations today. Israel has been grappling with
that threat ever since an Air France flight filled with
Israeli passengers was highjacked in 1976 and forced
to land at the airport at Entebbe in Uganda. Since that
time, Israel has become a leader in the field of aviation
security, as we share our innovative techniques with
countless nations, Israel is making the skies a safer
place and airports more secure.

Just as it is with family, we do not get to choose our
neighbours on the map. Israel is not exactly surrounded
by Benelux countries. I do not have to convince anyone
in the Chamber that Israel finds itselfin one of the most
volatile and violent neighbourhoods in the world. Every
day, we use our counter-terrorism expertise to keep our
citizens safe from the threats that surround us on every
side. For years, Israel's southern citizens have been
the targets of rocket fire and terror attacks from Gaza.
Just last month, the Israeli Defence Forces discovered a
2-kilometre-long tunnel originating in Gaza and ending
just outside an Israeli community, not far from homes,
kindergartens and playgrounds. The tunnel was built
by Hamas, using 500 tons of cement that had been
earmarked for construction. Just imagine how many
schools, hospitals and homes could have been built with
all that cement. Instead of using construction materials
to build a better future for the Palestinian people, the
leadership in Gaza is committed to destroying the State
of Israel.

On our northern border, Hizbullah has laid siege
to southern Lebanon and is hiding its arsenal of 60,000
rockets in civilian homes, schools and hospitals. In
doing so, Hizbullah has committed a double war crime,
first, by using the people of Lebanon as human shields,
and secondly, by targeting Israeli civilians.

No Government can be expected to stand by and
allow its citizens to be the targets of terror. Israel will
take every measure necessary to protect its citizens
and will not allow any strategic weapons to reach the
hands of Hizbullah and internationally recognized
terrorist organizations. Israel commends the steps that
have been taken to destroy Syria's chemical arsenal.
That must continue to be a priority for the international
community, which must also ensure that the process
is properly monitored, verified and completed. While
ensuring that the agreed timelines are met, we must
also ensure that chemical weapons never fall into the
hands of terrorist organizations.

As we speak, terrorist groups are taking advantage
of the chaos and instability in Syria to train, recruit and
arm a new generation ofterrorists. Syria has become the
foremost academy for foreign terrorists, who are taught
the philosophy of fundamentalism, the engineering
of explosives and the calculus of chaos. Two of the
terrorists behind the September attack in a shopping
mall in Nairobi that left 67 people dead were found to be
European citizens who had been trained in Syria. The
ongoing slaughter in Syria was made possible through
the financing of fighters that Iran sends to prop up the
dictator in Damascus.

Iran may have a charming new President, but its
real decision-maker is still Khamenei; the Ayatollah
has been an accessory to Al-Assad's slaughter of
120,000 Syrians, while accessorizing terrorists with
suicide belts in Gaza and in Lebanon. Iran remains the
world's primary sponsor of terror. Its proxies include
Hizbullah and Hamas, which have dispatched hundreds
of suicide bombers, planted thousands of bombs and
fired tens of thousands of missiles at civilians. It does
not take the detective skills of Agatha Christie to see
Iran's fingerprints on terror attacks from Argentina to
Bulgaria and from Thailand to India.

Last week, former British Prime Minister Tony
Blair provided a report to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) focusing on
the importance of education in countering terrorism.
Israel strongly supports the assessment that counter-
terrorism efforts must attack the root of the problem,
namely, the fertile soils for incitement. Terrorism
does not begin when a bomb detonates on a bus or
in a cafe'. It begins in classrooms and mosques where
children are being taught prejudice instead of peace,
terror instead of tolerance and martyrdom instead of
mutual understanding. In Gaza, Hamas is poisoning the
hearts and minds of the next generation. They recently
published textbooks for 55,000 high-school students
in which page after page denies Judaism's historical
connection to the land of Israel and describes Zionism
as racism. Textbooks should be for education, but
Hamas uses them for provocation, indoctrination and
escalation. Millions of Palestinians are growing up in
a society that portrays murderers and kidnappers as
heroes. That culture of incitement has led to deadly
consequences. Since the beginning of this year, there
have been 1,163 terror attacks against Israelis and
dozens of attempted kidnappings.

No nation should have to stand alone in the face
of global terrorism. Israel commends the CTED
for its efforts to coordinate actions and monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which
constitutes the centrepiece of United Nations effort to
create a robust counter-terrorism regime. Israel fully
implements resolution 1373 (2001) and has adapted
its legislation to ensure compliance with resolution
1267 (1999), which established the important Office
of the Ombudsperson of the Security Council Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Al-Qaida sanctions list.
Israel also supports resolution 1540 (2004), recognizing
that export-control systems and appropriate national
counter-terrorism legislation are critical for preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
dual-use items.

Finally, Israel supports the 2006 United Nations
Global Terrorism Strategy and reiterates that all four
pillars of that strategy should be treated as a whole.
We look forward to the upcoming fourth review of that
strategy.

Today, millions of Israelis are mourning the
passing of Arik Einstein, an Israeli cultural legend.
Over the course of his career, Einstein's music became
the soundtrack of our nation, comforting us in times of
sorrow and making our hearts soar in times ofjoy. One
ofhis most famous songs is called "Me and You" and its
lyrics are as follows:

(spoke in Hebrew)

"You and I will change the world. You and I,
and others will join us. They have said it before. It
doesn't matter, because you and I will change the
world".

(spoke in English)

As we mourn the passing of one ofIsrael's icons, let
the music that he left behind guide our efforts to make
this world safer, stronger and more secure. Together, all
of us here can change the world.

