The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.

We welcome the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission on its second session (S/2008/4l7) and
thank Ambassador Takasu, Chair of the Commission,
for his briefing.

We take a positive View of the achievements of
the Peacebuilding Commission over the past year. We
also note that the Commission is a new organ created
little more than two years ago. Therefore, there is still
room for the Commission to improve its internal
institution-building, to better coordinate the positions
of various parties and to increase its mobilization of
financial resources for reconstruction. We expect to see
those improvements in its future work.

When the annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission was considered in the General Assembly
on 9 October 2008 (see A/63/PV.23), delegations
commented extensively on how the work of the
Commission could be improved. We hope that the
Commission will be able to benefit from those useful
suggestions.

As one of the parent organs of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Security Council increased its
communications and contacts with the Commission
over the past year. On the one hand, the Council often
listened to briefings by the relevant facilitators of the
Commission when the situations in Burundi, Sierra
Leone and Guinea-Bissau were under consideration
and provided political support by issuing documents at
the close of those meetings. On the other hand, the
Peacebuilding Commission has submitted many
recommendations to the Security Council based on its
active participation in the peacebuilding processes in
the countries concerned, thus filling some of the gaps
in the work of the Council.

As close cooperation between the Council and
Commission is imperative in order to strengthen the
peacebuilding processes in Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic, the
links between the two bodies must be strengthened, not
weakened. We should reflect on how to further enhance
the cooperation between them. In that connection,
China wishes to make the following points.

First, the Security Council should institutionalize
its efforts to enhance its communication with the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Council should
periodically engage in consultations with the Chairman
of the Commission in order to share experiences and
compare priorities for the immediate future. The
Security Council should continue to invite the relevant
facilitators of the Peacebuilding Commission to brief
the Council when it considers the situations in
countries that are also on the Commission's agenda,
such as Burundi, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic. The Council may have
informal informational meetings with the Commission,
as appropriate, in order to further strengthen the links
between the two bodies.

Secondly, the Security Council should take into
account the recommendations of the Peacebuilding
Commission as much as possible. The Commission has
submitted many recommendations to the Council
regarding the situations in Burundi, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau. The Council should attach importance
to those recommendations and take them into account.
In the future, the Commission's mission reports to the
Security Council should, like the reports of the
Secretary-General, inform the consideration of relevant
issues in the Council.

Thirdly, the Security Council should work more
closely with the Peacebuilding Commission when new
countries are to be included on the Commission's
agenda. As the situations in some of the countries on
the Council's agenda improve, they will gradually
embark on the path of peacebuilding and wish to be
moved from the Council's agenda to the Commission's
agenda. The Council should then work more closely
with the Commission and seek its views, as
appropriate, regarding the inclusion of new countries
on its agenda.

I now resume my functions as President of the

Security Council. I call on the representative of Sierra
Leone.

