Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others in
welcoming this opportunity to exchange views on this
important topic. We thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

We align ourselves with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later in the debate.

The people of the Middle East and North Africa
region continue to suffer the dire consequences of
cycles of conflict. That not only affects the countries
in the region individually, but also collectively, as
the conflicts are often intertwined. Moreover, what
happens in the region has a profound and immediate
impact on the rest of the world.

With so much at stake, our collective ambition in
addressing these conflicts should be consistently high.
The focus should not be on extinguishing fires when
they occur, but on preventing the fires before they
ignite. That means looking closely at both the spark and
the combustible elements. It also means addressing the
root causes of conflicts.

In that regard, I will touch upon three aspects: first,
the universality of human rights; secondly, integrated
conflict prevention; and, thirdly, ending impunity.

My first point concerns the universality of human
rights and the importance of inclusive societies. Human
rights are universal for a reason, as is our collective
responsibility to promote and protect them. If human
rights are denied, they affect our individual dignity,
fuelling discontent and conflict. But if human rights
are respected, they ground democratic and inclusive
societies, nurturing harmony and stability. That holds
true for all regions of the world.

The people in the Middle East and North Africa
know what helps to stabilize their societies: the rule of
law, accountable governance and respect for minorities.
Historically many countries in the region are places
where religious and other minorities prospered living
together. The current turbulence is an extra reason to
seek practical ways to re-engage communities and to
promote mutual tolerance. A good example is intra- and
interfaith dialogue.

My second point concerns integrated conflict
prevention by addressing political and socioeconomic
grievances. The conflicts in the region are
interconnected. That is why it is important that the
United Nations and the international community have
an integrated approach to prevention. Regional tensions
should be tackled more structurally through dialogue
and mediation. Within his good-offices mandate the
Secretary-General can play an enhanced role, but the
responsibility to improve relations and strengthen
dialogue lies primarily with the region itself.

Work also needs to continue on addressing a
wide range of political and socioeconomic grievances
in each country, in line with 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Such grievances catalyse
radicalization and conflict, and they are not new.
Since 2002, Arab scholars have challenged the
Governments in their region in successive editions
of the Arab Human Development Report to overcome
three deficits: first, the freedom deficit; secondly, the
deficit in the empowerment of women; and, thirdly,
the knowledge deficit. Governments and international
organizations should pay particular attention to women
and girls, and there should be enough space for civil
society to play its important role. Integrated conflict
prevention also means looking at broader issues, such
as climate change and water scarcity. They too can be
drivers of conflict in the region.

My third point concerns ending impunity by
strengthening accountability. There can be no
sustainable peace without justice. The question is how
to get there, in a region mired in ongoing conflict and
impunity. In countries where there is progress, attention
often shifts quickly to reconstruction, but in our view
transitional justice is just as important, especially in
achieving sustainable peace. We very much welcome
all Government and civil-society initiatives to that
end. Some of the crimes committed in the region
are particularly grave. We need to ensure that those
responsible for atrocity crimes are prosecuted and
brought to justice. That applies to all parties to the
armed conflict, including fighters from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant suspected of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. The perpetrators of
crimes must be held to account, irrespective of which
side they are on in any particular conflict. Fair and
independent investigations and prosecutions are key.
Unfortunately, we have to conclude that at the moment
serious violations of international law in the region,
which include a consistent disregard for international
humanitarian law and the horrific use of chemical
weapons, continue to go unpunished. The Security
Council should not allow that to happen, and we regret
the use of the veto that has blocked the Council's
effective action in that regard.

In conclusion, in addressing the root causes of
conflict in the region, we have to be ambitious. It will
require all of us to make a steadfast and long-term
commitment to protecting human rights, ensuring
stronger conflict prevention and ending impunity. Only
through collective perseverance will sustainable peace
in the region prevail.

