Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for her briefing.

Like others, we continue to be extremely concerned
by the Syrian offensive in north-west Syria. I want to
put on record how much we welcome Turkey's ongoing
efforts to reinstate the ceasefire, de-escalate the
violence and set up a working group on Idlib. As the
French representative said, 3 million lives are at risk,
and we do not want to see another Aleppo.

One of the things that has worried us is that there
was a declaration of a unilateral ceasefire by the pro-
regime forces, but violence went on to increase the very
next day - and has increased further in recent days. I
therefore join others in calling for the ceasefire to be
respected and calling on all parties to adhere to the
Sochi ceasefire, respect international law and protect
civilians and aid workers. The international community
will not let up on the pressure until those stipulations
are met.

There was a report in the press this morning that
doctors at a maternity hospital in Al-Atarib, in the
countryside around Aleppo, have reported multiple
attacks in the area and have started to evacuate the
hospital. I wonder if the representative of Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
could say whether she knows that this report is correct
or not, and if the hospital's location has been included
in the deconfliction mechanism. One of the things we
discussed last time was that deconfliction mechanism
(see S/PV.8527). It is inexcusable that hospitals, schools
and other infrastructure have been attacked despite
OCHA's deconfliction mechanism. I want to join
other colleagues in calling on all parties to distinguish
between civilians and civilian infrastructure, on the
one hand, and military targets, on the other.

In that context, I want to be clear that we condemn
breaches of the ceasefire by the Hayat Tahrir al-Sham
terrorist group. All combatants in a conflict - be
they non-State actors or State actors - are bound by
international humanitarian law. There is therefore no
excuse at all for attacks on hospitals and other civilian
targets. It is very important that we stress that the fight
against terrorists is not carte blanche for conducting
any attacks indiscriminately and that the fight must
take place in a civilian-free zone. I therefore join
others in again calling for the principles of distinction,
proportionality and necessity.

The other thing that has deeply concerned us is the
reports ofjournalists in Idlib being targeted last week.
The latest was a Sky news crew on 23 May. I recall
that in February a United States district court found the
Syrian authorities responsible for killing The Sunday
Times journalist Marie Colvin in 2012. Journalists
are another group of people who urgently requires the
interest and protection of the Security Council.

I want to say a word about humanitarian access in
Rukban and Al-Hol. We need to see United Nations
access to Al-Hol. We are also very concerned that the
situation in Rukban is deteriorating. The humanitarian
conditions are dire and are a direct result of humanitarian
access having been blocked. As the representative of the
United States said, that means that residents are forced
to leave or face continued peril inside the camp. A third
aid convoy must be allowed to reach the camp via the
United Nations in Damascus. This is now becoming a
desperate situation.

Several colleagues and I asked some questions
of the Syrian authorities at the previous meeting. We
did not get any answers. I do not want to repeat those
questions. I want to make it a big easier. I would like
to ask today for four commitments from the Syrian
representative on behalf of his Government. First,
I would like to receive a commitment not to target
journalists. Secondly, I would like to see a commitment
to abide by international humanitarian law. Thirdly, I
would like to see a commitment to abide by Security
Council resolutions on the protection of civilians.
Fourthly, I would like to receive a commitment to let the
third United Nations convoy into the camp in Rukban,
as called for by a number ofus. Those commitments are
not difficult to give. I think any Government that truly
had the safety and interests of its citizens at heart would
be able to give them.
Finally, I would like to conclude by echoing what
the French representative said about the peace process.
It goes much further than just the constitutional
committee - there cannot be any reconstruction
assistance from our side until there is a sustainable and
irreversible political process.

I would also like to end by repeating what the
French and United States representatives said about
chemical weapons. We are ready to respond robustly
if needed. With regard to the issue as to whether there
have been chemical attacks or not, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has fact-finding
missions that can go and ascertain the answer to that
important question.

