Mr. Begec (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on the
challenges in addressing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs), their means of delivery
and related materials.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. I shouldl ike to make
the following remarks in our national capacity.

The security policies built upon WMD capabilities
do not guarantee the safety of any country or region,
but instead increase insecurity and instability. As
a country that has never had an intention to pursue
a WMD programme, Turkey firmly opposes the
development, production, stockpiling and use of
such weapons. We have consistently advocated the
elimination of all WMDs. Furthermore, the presence of
chemical and biological weapons around our borders,
by State and non-State actors alike, constitutes a source
of security concern for us. With that understanding,
Turkey strongly supports the universalization of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention. Turkey cooperates with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), the Sub-Working Group on non-State Actors
of which was recently revitalized.

The current instances of the use of WMDs
serve to reinforce the calls for a resolute and global
approach. No country is immune from the risks of
the proliferation of WMDs in the hands of non-State
actors. Without enhanced international cooperation, we
cannot address those challenges. The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), which is now a central component of the global
security architecture, is one of the greatest tools at our
service in efforts against proliferation. I would like to
reaffirm Turkey's strong commitment to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Turkey has been working with the 1540 Committee
since its inception and contributes to its work. We are
also a member of the recently established Group of
Friends of Resolution 1540 (2004). Turkey has in place
the necessary legislation to implement resolution 1540
(2004) and abides, by and participates in, all the relevant
international legal instruments and the voluntary ad hoc
mechanism on non-proliferation and export controls.
We also attach importance to collaboration between the
1540 Committee and other United Nations bodies, such
as the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
and international organizations and mechanisms, such
as INTERPOL and the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism.

Just as the international security environment
today differs greatly from that of 12 years ago, the
risks flowing from nuclear proliferation to non-State
actors is also greater and calls for more coherent and
robust international cooperation. The comprehensive
review process of resolution 1540 (2004) provides a
valuable opportunity to strengthen the implementation
of the resolution and address the new challenges caused
by the proliferation of WMDs to non-State actors.
Following its tradition of close cooperation with the
1540 Committee, Turkey will actively contribute to the
comprehensive review process of the resolution.

This open debate has been particularly timely
in the sense that the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism is expected to publish its final
report tomorrow, identifying, pursuant to resolution
2235 (2015), those responsible for, or related to, the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. I wish to reiterate
here our expectation that those who committed those
grave crimes, as well as those who were linked to them,
be held accountable for their actions. That, followed
by the measures that the Security Council undertook
in its relevant resolutions, would constitute the right
message to all those concerned, namely, that the use of
chemical weapons will not go unpunished. That would
be the greatest service to the international community's
efforts against the proliferation of WMDs.

Before I conclude, let me say that we categorically
reject the allegations of the representative of the Syrian
regime, which lost its legitimacy long ago. We have
once again observed in this debate attempts to divert
attention from the enormous destruction and human
suffering caused by that regime. My country's track
record complies with the non-proliferation and export
control regimes, and its counter-terrorism efforts are
well established. Turkey will continue to support the
efforts at preventing impunity for the perpetrators
of inhumane practices, including the use chemical
weapons, which are a clear affront to international law.

