Mr. Adamia (Georgia): I would like to express
my delegation's gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council, as it
provides for broad participation of the States from the
regional groups in the discussion of this issue that is
important for the entire international community.

The experience of the United Nations itself is
testimony that in most cases the Organization's role in
post-conflict situations is shaped and structured by the
scope and nature of its involvement at each stage of
conflict resolution. I would go further to state that the
extent of involvement in conflict resolution is to be set
as a benchmark, against which the success or failure of
the role of the United Nations in post-conflict
situations is measured. It is worthwhile to note that in
the United Nations Charter action by the United
Nations is correlative to promptness and effectiveness.

Where such conditions are not present, where the
United Nations resolutions are dishonoured by inaction
due to lack of will or sometimes by narrowly defined
self-interest, there are always high human, political and
security costs to be paid. This compelling reason makes
intervention by a State or group of States inevitable in
order to maintain international peace and security, as
was the case in Iraq. I would add that these States have
sound moral, political and even legal grounds for doing
so.

This is the main lesson the international
community has learned, I hope, in Iraq but has not yet
learned in the process of conflict resolution in a region
of my country - Abkhazia. Thus the greatest
challenge posed to the United Nations is the old one:
how to work out and implement an effective modus
operandi in both conflict resolution and post-conflict
situations.

The United Nations has an important role to play
here, given its unique expertise and experience in
undertaking a wide range of peace-building tasks. The
United Nations is particularly well placed for this role,
as it is able to forge the cooperation across institutional
boundaries and between organizations and States that is
required for finding durable solutions to complex
situations.

We are convinced that the United Nations must
continue sustained peace-building efforts in
Afghanistan and Sierra Leone, in particular to address
pressing issues of security and stability through
establishing and increasing the capacity of the local
army and police forces. Likewise, the reconstruction of
Iraq requires the United Nations to play a vital role
through utilizing its resources and expertise in
achieving that goal.

In our view the United Nations could greatly
benefit if it could draft ready-to-use models from its
experience of involvement in post-conflict situations,
to use in mapping out approaches in the future.

The Security Council bears primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security,
including in post-conflict situations. Thus it is
important that the Council commit itself to ensuring
that its mandates are best tailored to meet the needs of
the specific post-conflict situations and are fully
implemented.

The Security Council's handling of Iraq's post-
war reconstruction could serve as a litmus test of our
commitments. The attempt to manipulate the
technicalities of previously adopted resolutions and
thus prevent the Council from lifting sanctions in order
to pave the way for launching the reconstruction
process in Iraq is unacceptable and should be avoided.

