Mr. Mantovani (Italy): The unprecedented surge
in United Nations commitments in the field of
peacekeeping - rightly or wrongly perceived as
having been undertaken with scant attention to
sustainability - makes today's reflections on the issue
of conflict prevention more timely than ever. Italy is
very grateful to the Congolese presidency for
promoting this reflection, both today and through the
chairmanship of the working group, and welcomes the
participation of the Secretary-General in this debate.

Italy fully endorses the statement that will be
made by the Portuguese presidency of the European
Union, and wishes to make some additional
observations in our national capacity.

There are objective limits to the Council's action
in the field of prevention, and they are due to the fact
that the Council's agenda is dominated by current
events, if not emergencies. The Council is, to use an
expression that has often been heard in this chamber,
"the fireman who puts out crises".

Having said this, there are also many things that
the Council can do to contribute to collective efforts at
conflict prevention.

First, it can set appropriate guidelines for its
action. The Council's action to implement resolution
1625 (2005) should be built on the recognition that the
primary responsibility for conflict prevention resides
with Member States. The experience of the African
continent demonstrates that the absolute prerequisite
for any change is the political will of national actors,
especially in countries emerging from conflicts. The
Council should encourage and support the efforts of
national actors.

The Council's action should also stem from a
clear partnership of the United Nations with the
regional and subregional organizations that operate
within the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations and from an active promotion of the
principle of regional ownership. As we see it, this
promotion should strive for a balanced development of
the capacities of regional and subregional bodies. In
this light, we see particular potential in paragraph 7 of
the joint communique signed at the end of our mission
to Addis Ababa, which places our partnership with the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in a
comprehensive framework, ranging from prevention to
peacebuilding and reconstruction. The communique
rightly underlines the strategic value of implementing
of the framework for the 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union.

In this connection, we commend recent,
innovative examples of cooperation with the Africa
Union, notably the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS), the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Council's decision to deploy a
hybrid operation in Darfur.

Second, conflict prevention should be a collective
effort of the whole United Nations system, and I would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
General Assembly for having laid the foundations for
our common work, particularly through its resolution
57/337. I also wish to welcome here the participation
of the presidencies of the General Assembly and of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, represented by Mr. Merores and
Mr. Christian.

As for the specific role of the United Nations
Secretariat, Italy thinks that the Council should, first
and foremost, work closely with the Secretary-General,
who needs to feel the full weight and convinced
support of all the members of the Council in promoting
United Nations preventive diplomacy.

Resolution 1625 (2005) was born of the
awareness that the contribution of the United Nations
to operative conflict prevention lies essentially in the
hands of the Secretary-General. The current Secretary-
General and his predecessor have repeatedly drawn
attention to the contradiction between the awareness of
the need to strengthen the Secretariat's capacity for
mediation and early warning, which was expressed at
the highest level at the 2005 World Summit, and the
lack of sufficient resources. Italy supports the view that
the resources available to the Secretariat, particularly
the Department of Political Affairs, be commensurate
with their actual needs. As regards those needs, we
believe that particular importance should be attached to
strengthening political missions operating in crisis
situations, in support of existing political processes.
The most recent resolution on Somalia has given us an
excellent example of the recognition of this priority. In
our View, based on the positive experience of the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) in
West Africa, we think the Security Council should
consider applying more widely a subregional approach
to the root causes of instability, which often go beyond
national borders.

Thirdly, we should like to underscore the
importance of exploiting the full potential of the
instruments already available to the Security Council to
assist in promoting effective prevention. I refer, in the
first instance, to the Peacebuilding Commission, but
also to the United Nations Integrated Offices and to the
definition of peacekeeping operations mandates by this
Council.

The effectiveness of our collective efforts is
undermined by artificial divisions within the United
Nations family. If we are to overcome these divisions,
a wider sense of ownership of United Nations activities
in the field of conflict prevention is needed. Regular
interaction between the wider membership and the
Secretariat, particularly on issues pertaining to the
long-term prevention of conflicts, should be envisioned
as a necessary complement to the existing dialogue
between the Department of Political Affairs and the
Security Council. Such interaction would be critical in
strengthening confidence and cooperation among the
various United Nations bodies involved in conflict
prevention, giving the Secretariat a stronger and more
credible mandate to carry on its activities on the
ground.

In conclusion, Mr. President, let me express my
country's confidence that today's debate and its follow-
up will contribute, from the Security Council
perspective, to the elaboration of a comprehensive
conflict prevention strategy, based on the concurrent
efforts of all United Nations bodies.

