Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the Secretary-
General, I will devote this briefing to presenting the
seventh report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), covering the period
from 13 June to 12 September 2018. I will focus on
developments on the ground in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution, including on regional and
international efforts to advance peace.

Let me reiterate from the very beginning that these
developments cannot be divorced from the broader
context: Israel's continued military occupation of
Palestinian territory; uncertainties about the future of
the peace process and the two-State solution; Hamas'
continuing hold on Gaza and its militant activity,
including rocket attacks and tunnel construction;
unilateral actions that undermine peace efforts;
reduced donor support for the Palestinian Authority;
and turmoil in the Wider region.

I would like to highlight from the outset the very
serious financial situation that the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) continues to face. We welcome
the contributions that several Member States recently
announced and urge that additional new funding
be provided for its critical work. On 27 September,
a ministerial meeting in support of UNRWA will be
held on the margins of the General Assembly. I urge
all participants to engage constructively to ensure the
continuity of the Agency's vital services.

No steps have been taken during the reporting
period to "cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem", as
required by the resolution. I reiterate that all settlement
activities are a violation of international law and a
major obstacle to peace.

Approximately 2,800 housing units in settlements
in Area C of the occupied West Bank were advanced,
approved or tendered by Israel. Approximately one third
of those units are in outlying settlements, deep in the
West Bank. Plans for about 1,100 units were advanced
in the approval process, plans for an additional 600
units reached the final approval stage and tenders were
announced for about 1,100 units. A tender was also
announced for 603 housing units in the Ramat Shlomo
neighbourhood, the first tender in East Jerusalem
since 2016.

On 28 August, the district court in Jerusalem ruled
that the illegal outpost of Mizpe Kramim could be
legalized under Israeli law, despite being built partially
on private Palestinian land. The ruling was the first to
rely on the so-called market regulation principle, which
allows houses to be built in good faith on private land,
without the consent of the owner to be retroactively
legalized and the owner compensated. If the ruling is
upheld in Israel's High Court of Justice, it could enable
the legalization of additional outposts and housing
units in settlements.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures continued across the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. Citing the absence ofIsraeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians
to obtain, 117 structures were demolished or seized: 61
in Area C and 56 in East Jerusalem. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), that resulted in the displacement of 145
Palestinians, including 82 children, and affected the
livelihoods of approximately 950 people.

In Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu, a Bedouin
community of 181 people, Israeli authorities
requisitioned land, levelled access routes and
temporarily declared the area a closed military zone,
in advance of the expected demolition of its structures.
Following a protracted legal process, on 5 September,
the Israeli High Court of Justice denied several
petitions by residents to prevent the demolition. On
4 July, in Abu Nuwar, a Bedouin community of about
600 residents, 19 structures were demolished. OCHA
reported that 51 people, including 33 children, were
displaced. Later that month a donor-funded caravan
in the Bedouin community of Jabal Al-Baba, serving
as a kindergarten for 28 children and as a women's
centre, was also confiscated and dismantled. Those
communities are located in or next to an area that is
slated for settlement plans in the E-1 area, which, if
constructed, would create a continuous built-up area
between the Ma'ale Adumim and East Jerusalem.

In July, the Israeli Knesset approved a law
transferring the jurisdiction over certain petitions
against decisions by Israeli authorities in the West Bank
from the High Court of Justice to the administrative
affairs court in Jerusalem. That step could make it
more difficult and costly to challenge the demolition or
seizure of Palestinian properties in Area C.

On 11 September, the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs, Federica Mogherini,
called on Israeli authorities to reconsider the decision
to allow the demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar, warning
that "it would have grave humanitarian consequences"
and contravene international humanitarian law. That
call was reiterated by Germany, France, Italy, Spain
and the United Kingdom. I also issued a statement
expressing the same concern over such action. On
13 September, the European Parliament also called for
monetary compensation for financial losses, should
Khan Al-Ahmar be demolished.

Let me turn to the issue of violence, which also
remains an obstacle to peace. The reporting period saw
significant incidents and escalation that brought Israel
and Hamas almost to war on at least three occasions.

Palestinian protests at the Gaza fence continued on
almost a daily basis. While most occasions remained
fairly peaceful, militants placed improvised explosive
devices, attempted to breach the fence and continued
to send incendiary kites and balloons across the
border. The Israel Defence Forces (IDF) responded
with riot dispersal means and live fire. During protests
throughout the reporting period, 29 Palestinians were
killed or died ofwounds sustained previously, including
10 children. Approximately 900 people were injured
by live ammunition. One Israeli soldier was killed and
another injured.

In successive rounds of hostilities, Hamas and other
Palestinian militants fired approximately 500 rockets,
Grad missiles and mortars from Gaza towards Israel.
In response, the IDF fired approximately 400 missiles
and tank shells at targets in Gaza. It destroyed three
tunnels leading from Gaza into Israel, 18 Palestinians
were killed, including 5 children, 118 injured, and 37
Israelis were injured in those exchanges. On at least
three occasions the situation escalated dramatically.
Calm was restored only after Egypt and the United
Nations intervened to de-escalate tensions.
Incendiary kites and balloons continued to
be launched from Gaza into neighbouring Israeli
communities. In the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, 266 Palestinians, including 5 women
and 54 children, were injured in clashes with Israeli
security forces during search-and-arrest operations
and demonstrations.

On 23 July, a 15-year-old Palestinian was killed
during clashes in Bethlehem's Al-Duheisha refugee
camp. Three days later, in the settlement of Adam, a
17-year-old Palestinian stabbed and killed an Israeli man
and injured two others. On 17 August and 3 September,
Israeli security forces shot dead an Israeli-Arab and
a Palestinian in Jerusalem's Old City and in Hebron,
respectively, after they reportedly attempted to carry
out stabbing attacks against security forces.

On 27 July, clashes erupted at the Temple Mount/
Haram Al-Sharif compound between Palestinians and
Israeli security forces, where 10 Palestinians and four
Israeli police officers were injured. On 16 September,
in another attack a Palestinian teenager stabbed and
killed an Israeli-American outside a shopping mall in
the occupied West Bank. It is reprehensible that Hamas
and other factions chose to glorify that attack.

Despite the call in resolution 2334 (2016) for the
parties to refrain from acts of provocation, incitement
and inflammatory rhetoric, such statements continued.
Hamas leaders continued to incite violence, with one
senior official speaking of "cleansing Palestine of the
filth of Jews" and threatening to decapitate Israeli
leaders. Fatah's official social media pages continued
to glorify the perpetrators of previous attacks against
Israelis and failed to condemn terror attacks against
civilians. Some religious leaders and officials made
inflammatory statements, accusing Israel of plotting to
destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque and denying the Jewish
historic and religious connection to Jerusalem.

Meanwhile, some Israeli officials called for
the targeting of Palestinians launching incendiary
kites and balloons into Israel from Gaza and for the
extrajudicial killings of Hamas officials. One member
of the Knesset called for Israel to reconquer Gaza and
insisted that Palestinians in Gaza either acquiesce to
Israel's sovereignty or emigrate. Others continued to
provoke by rejecting the Palestinian right to statehood,
supporting settlement growth and the annexation of
parts of the West Bank.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the calls made by
the Middle East Quartet for
"affirmative steps to be taken immediately to
reverse negative trends on the ground that are
imperilling the two-State solution."

Some positive steps have been taken, including Israel
releasing approximately $44 million of withheld
Palestinian health stamp revenues, which is the result of
continuing direct engagement ofthe Finance Ministries
of both sides, as well as continued progress on Gaza
reconstruction. The Rafah crossing between Gaza
and Egypt remained largely open during the reporting
period, with the number of people crossing reaching
over 12,000 in both June and July.

The negative developments, however, outweigh
the positive news. Most worrying perhaps is the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian, security
and political situation in Gaza, as the implementation
of the Egyptian-brokered October agreement remains
stalled and the Palestinian Authority has not been able
to take up its responsibilities in Gaza.

As we meet today, the power crisis in Gaza is coming
to a head. The United Nations has run out of funding
for emergency fuel, putting critical health, water and
sanitation facilities at immediate risk of shutting down,
while essential medicines are at critically low levels.
On 5 September, the United Nations delivered the final
stocks of available emergency fuel to Gaza. Despite
calls for donors to urgently contribute, little additional
funding was forthcoming.

The situation was worsened by the temporary
closures of the Kerem Shalom crossing and reductions
in the fishing zone that were introduced by Israel during
the periods of escalation, as well as the continuing
measures by the Palestinian Authority to reduce
salaries, energy supplies and overall spending in Gaza.
The United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator has
released $1 million from the emergency pooled fund
to cover fuel for hospitals and water and sanitation
facilities to prevent a full collapse of essential services.

To address the chronic crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territory, the humanitarian community
appealed for nearly $550 million this year, through the
humanitarian response plan, 75 per cent of which is for
projects targeting Palestinians in Gaza. At present, the
appeal is less than 29 per cent funded, one of the most
poorly funded in the world.

Paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016) called on
Member States

"to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied in 1967".

No such steps were taken during the reporting period.
The resolution also called upon all parties to continue to
exert collective efforts to launch credible negotiations.
No progress was achieved in that respect.

The United States has repeatedly announced that
it is continuing its efforts aimed at a comprehensive
peace plan. In August, the Administration suspended
more than $200 million in its fiscal year 2017 Economic
Support Fund for the West Bank and Gaza, and a further
$25 million for the East Jerusalem hospitals network.
On 10 September, it closed the Palestine Liberation
Organization Office in Washington, DC, citing its
failure to take steps towards meaningful negotiations
with Israel and concerns with Palestinian attempts to
prompt an investigation of Israel by the International
Criminal Court.

The Palestinian Central Council convened in
August and ratified the continued severance of political
relations with the United States until the latter revisits
its decision regarding Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees
and settlements.

On 5 September, the Government of Paraguay
announced that it would reverse the previous decision
from May to relocate its Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem
and move it back to Tel Aviv.

Since the escalation ofhostilities in Gaza in July, the
United Nations has led an unprecedented effort with the
Governments of Egypt, Israel and other international
partners to prevent another outbreak of hostilities,
respond to the most urgent humanitarian needs
and support the return of the legitimate Palestinian
Government to Gaza, a crucial element in any political
effort to resolve the wider conflict.

The United Nations has enhanced its capacity in
Gaza to work with the Palestinian Government and
Israeli counterparts to support donor implementation
on all issues related to the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism and provide accountable and transparent
reporting to donors.

The World Bank has increased its allocation from
$55 million to $90 million for the West Bank and
Gaza over the next year, part of which will be used to
create approximately 4,400 short-term employment
opportunities. The United Nations Development
Programme has also accelerated its emergency
economic assistance programme, with support from
several donors.

I would now like to share some broad observations
concerning the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016) during the reporting period.

First, the expansion of Israeli settlements remains
illegal under international law and continues to erode
the viability of a two-State solution. Particularly
alarming are legal and administrative steps that could
consolidate and expand settlement activity deep in the
West Bank, further undermining the contiguity of a
future Palestinian State.

The persistent threat of demolitions and
displacement of Palestinians in Area C, including in
Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al- Helu, is of great concern. The
5 September decision ofthe High Court of Justice places
the Bedouin community at imminent risk of demolition.
Demolitions undermine the prospects for a two-State
solution and are also in violation of international law.

Violence, terror and the risk of conflict in Gaza
remain an obstacle to peace. I welcome the calm since
9 August, butI am very concerned by consistent attempts
to undermine it. All sides - and I underline all - must
continue their positive engagement with Egypt and the
United Nations and do their part. Hamas and other
armed militant groups must stop all provocations and
attacks. Israel must improve the movement and access
regime for Gaza. The Palestinian Authority must remain
engaged in Gaza. The international community must
address the urgent humanitarian needs. And, finally,
Fatah and Hamas must engage in earnest with Egypt in
order to bring back the legitimate Government to Gaza.

I once again call for all violent actions, which
continue to endanger the lives of both Israelis and
Palestinians, to stop immediately. Indiscriminate
attacks are prohibited under international humanitarian
law. I urge Hamas and other Palestinian militants to end
the indiscriminate firing ofrockets into southern Israel.

I reiterate that Israeli security forces have a
responsibility to exercise maximum restraint in the use
of live fire and must not resort to lethal force unless
in response to an imminent threat of death or serious
injury. The continued use of live fire by the Israeli
Defense Forces is deeply concerning. The killing of
children is absolutely unacceptable.

I call on the international community to join the
United Nations in condemning violence and incitement,
which continue to fuel a climate of mutual fear and
mistrust while hindering efforts to bridge the gaps
between both sides.

As explicitly outlined in the 2016 report of the
Middle East Quartet (S/2016/595, annex), current trends
are imperilling the viability of the two-State solution.
There has been no positive movement by the parties to
take steps to reverse the negative trends on the ground.
By complying with their obligations under previous
agreements and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the parties can, and must, reverse the current course.

Israel should make progress on the transition
to greater Palestinian civil authority of powers and
responsibilities in Area C, on improving Palestinian
economic prospects, as well as access to housing, water,
energy, communications, agriculture, and natural
resources, and on significantly easing Palestinian
movement restrictions.

The United Nations has been working tirelessly
to address the deepening humanitarian and economic
crisis on the ground. Support for emergency fuel is
urgently needed to avoid a total collapse of critical
services in hospitals and sewage treatment. The Deputy
Special Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator,
Jamie MCGoldrick, made two emergency appeals to
donors in August for new funding, and I reiterate the
urgency of his calls. It is also critical that UNRWA be
able to continue to deliver its vital services.

In addition, the United Nations is working with
several donors to advance key interventions that will
immediately improve the situation on the ground, both
in Gaza and the West Bank. I urge donors to consider
support for those activities, which play a vital role in
preventing further escalation.

Twenty-five years have now passed since the signing
of the Oslo Accords. It was a historic moment that
captured the world's attention and filled Palestinians,
Israelis and the region with hope that genuine peace
could be realized. Sadly, that courageous vision of
lasting peace now lies in tatters.
We must restore that hope. There is an alternative
to this perpetual cycle of violence. We must overcome
the current impasse and refocus our efforts on
ultimately returning to meaningful negotiations to
end the occupation and bring about a just, lasting and
comprehensive resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict - a resolution based on two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, based
on the 1967 lines and in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and previous agreements. I urge all
sides to continue to engage with each other and with
the international community to preserve and advance
its achievement.

Finally, let underline today that the urgency of
the situation that we face on the ground is really
desperate. Gaza could explode at any minute. We have
a humanitarian responsibility to react. But we must
also understand that it cannot be solved on the basis
of humanitarian action alone. It must be solved with a
political perspective to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We have a responsibility to support the parties
in this prospect.

