Mr. Razali (Malaysia): The Malaysian delegation
would like to recall with appreciation China's presidency
of the Security Council in March. We also express our
confidence, Sir, in your presidency this month.

The Malaysian delegation requested to participate in
the debate today to share our views on this very important
issue. Let me state it bluntly: we believe, over the long
run, in a time-bound period, in the total and complete
elimination of nuclear weapons as the only definitive
assurance we can live with. Until this can be achieved,
any assurance, whether positive or negative, whether
given jointly or severally, will merely constitute an
interim measure.

 
Malaysia and other members of the Non-Aligned
Movement have consistently called for assurances in the
context of a legally binding international instrument from
the nuclear-weapon States, pending the attainment of the
objective contained in Article VI of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Regrettably, there
have been no results.

It should be recalled that disagreement over this issue
was one of the reasons for the failure of the two NPT
Review Conferences, in 1980 and 1990, to adopt Final
Declarations. This is ironic given the fact that the nuclear-
weapon States have agreed to such a binding instrument in
the protocol to the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which established
the nuclear-weapon-free zone in South America.

Now that the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
of the NPT is just a week ahead, the nuclear-weapon States
seem to have realized that they have to do something about
this long-standing obligation. Their solution has been to
submit a draft resolution on positive security assurances and
to make individual declarations on negative security
assurances. This initiative can best be described as too little
too late, an effort whose motives are patently clear. The
draft resolution deals exclusively with positive security
assurances and says nothing regarding negative security
assurances beyond taking note of the fact that all five
nuclear-weapon States have given such assurances, either
individually - as in the case of China - or collectively -
as in the case of the United States, the United Kingdom,
France and Russia.

The positive security assurances envisaged in the draft
resolution do not break new ground. The draft includes
elements which are already covered by the Charter and in
resolution 255 (1968). The only new element in the draft
that is different from resolution 255 (1968) concerns the
elaboration of the types of assistance that the Security
Council might offer if a non-nuclear-weapon State is the
victim of nuclear aggression. This does not offer us any
comfort, as the language used is weak and, in the event of
a nuclear attack, no assistance would be able to undo the
irreversible death and destruction.

The draft resolution before the Council should have
included language committing the nuclear-weapon States to
take action, in the event of a threat of the use of nuclear
weapons, to suppress that threat. The relevant paragraphs
which should address this issue are weak and so vague that
they can be interpreted in several different ways. My
delegation has worked with the Caucus of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) to introduce amendments to the draft to
address this concern, but the proposals of the NAM
Caucus were not accepted.
My delegation would like to remind the Council that
obligations such as coming to the assistance of non-
nuclear-weapon States in the event of aggression are
already stipulated by Articles 39, 41 and 42 of the
Charter, regardless of the types of weapons used.
Aggression is aggression, and to discriminate against
States non-Parties to the Treaty in giving assistance on
the basis of the type of weapons used is against the
fundamental provisions of the Charter for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

My delegation also cannot support the inclusion of
operative paragraph 9 of the draft resolution. This
paragraph sidesteps the question of the legality of the use
of nuclear weapons because it justifies the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons in cases of "self-defence". Given
the fact that all the nuclear-weapon States are also
permanent members of the Security Council, and that the
Council has the power to determine whether or not a
threat is an act of aggression or of self-defence, the
assurance contained in the draft is at best questionable, if
not hollow political expedience. In essence, in no way can
Council substitute that assurance for an obligation
assumed under a treaty, especially a Council where many
political factors and imperatives are brought to bear.

The NAM. Caucus, on behalf of non-nuclear-weapon
States, had tried to propose language that addressed our
concerns on this matter. We note with appreciation that
some of those proposals have been accommodated in the
draft. However, our concerns to the effect that the draft
resolution should affirm the belief that the only sure
assurance against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons is the elimination of nuclear weapons and that,
pending that objective, such assurances should take the
form of a legally binding instrument, were rejected.
Accordingly, the draft resolution in its present form does
not satisfy our call regarding security assurances.
Nevertheless, we welcome the transfer of a preambular
paragraph of the penultimate draft to the operative part as
its paragraph 8 and the acknowledgement in the new last
operative paragraph that the issue raised in the draft
resolution remains a continuing concern of the Security
Council.

My delegation had studied the individual statements
made by each of the nuclear-weapon States and contained
in documents S/1995/261, 262, 263, 264 and 265. Of the
five, only the declaration by China contains the position

 

that the non-nuclear-weapon States had envisaged, which is
straightforward and contains no conditions. The declarations
by all the other four nuclear-weapon States contain specific
conditions. They also say nothing on the question of the
threat of use of nuclear weapons. More importantly, they
fail to address the question of nuclear disarmament, which
is closely linked to the question of assurances.

That the five declarations vary in terms of structure
and content and remain devoid of legal force does not
provide any measure of comfort at all. They amplify the
need for an internationally negotiated, legally binding
instrument whereby all the nuclear-weapon States would be
obligated to apply the same provisions and meet the same
conditions. My delegation must conclude that the five
declarations do not provide a high degree of confidence.

My delegation is committed to the need to implement
fully all the provisions of the NPT. This is particularly
important, since the Treaty cannot be improved upon. Any
amendment to the NPT, as reflected in paragraph 2 of its
article VIII requires, among other things, the concurrence
of all five nuclear-weapon States. In other words, the
nuclear-weapon States already have a veto. Strict adherence
to the letter of the Treaty, therefore, is the only guarantee
that we will be able to prevent proliferation and move
decisively towards nuclear disarmament.

Having said this, my delegation would like to state
here that we are equally concerned about proliferation and
unregulated access to nuclear materials. We are still hopeful
that, despite the clear discrimination in the NPT,
improvements can somehow be made which could influence
the small group of countries that are not party to it.

Finally, the draft resolution is at best a first step
towards the institution of a legally binding instrument. The
adoption of this draft by the Council cannot absolve the
nuclear-weapon States from their obligation to negotiate
complete nuclear disarmament, in addition to fulfilling the
commitments elaborated above.

