Ms. Loj (Denmark): Yet again, we have heard a
deeply disturbing account of the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur. All indicators point
towards a sharp downward spiral and a looming
manmade humanitarian catastrophe.

In order to prevent this from happening, there is a
vital need to, first, achieve immediately improved
security and humanitarian access, and, secondly, work
persistently towards sustained security in order for the
people of Darfur to gradually return to normal life. In
essence, this is an issue of how to attain drastically
improved security in Darfur in the short and medium
term.

Twelve days ago, the Council adopted resolution
1706 (2006) authorizing a United Nations peace
support operation in Darfur and immediate support to a
strengthening of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS). Denmark co-sponsored the resolution,
as we are strongly in favour of all its elements. We
deeply regret Khartoum's immediate reactions to
resolution 1706 (2006) as they have been reported to
us.

The international community - and indeed the
Council - have shown exceptional patience with the
Government of the Sudan. We have pursued dialogue,
travelled to the Sudan, invited the Government to our
meetings, and, not least, provided assurances that any
Government having good intentions for its citizens
should readily be able to accept. Still, we are faced
with Government rejection and uncertainty for the
people of Darfur beyond 30 September.

We must spare no effort to prevent yet another
genocide from taking place on the African continent.
The horrors of Rwanda still haunt our minds and can
only serve to strengthen our resolve. The moral
credibility of the Security Council is indeed challenged
by this extended crisis.

Through bilateral contacts with key partners in
Africa and beyond, and together with our partners in
the European Union, we have stepped up efforts to
convince the Government of the Sudan that there is no
viable alternative to a United Nations mission in
Darfur. We must ensure that all obstacles are removed
and that the objectives of a robust peace support
operation in Darfur - as set out in resolution 1706
(2006) - are achieved.

All channels of dialogue with Khartoum - direct
and indirect - must be kept open and used to their
fullest. This can very soon become a race against time.
If agreement is not achieved within the next few
weeks, we will all - including the Government of the
Sudan - be left with only a few not very attractive
options.

Friends of the Government of the Sudan have
over the past couple of weeks voiced support for the
position that the people of Darfur are best served by a
continuation of AMIS alongside the implementation of
the Government's own plan of "stability and
protection" in Darfur. We beg to disagree. Facts on the
ground speak their own language, and, in the words of
Mr. Egeland, who spoke before the Council two weeks
ago, we are
06-51559
"at a point where even hope may escape us and
the lives of hundreds of thousands could be
needlessly lost".

Let me put it simply: True friends will assist the
Government - any Government - in fulfilling its
most important purpose: to protect its own citizens
from starvation, violence and death, regardless of
ethnicity, cultural differences or religion.

It has been said many times over that there is no
military solution to the crisis in Darfur, only a political
one. The non-signatories to the Darfur Peace
Agreement (DPA) - and their supporters on the
ground - cannot be wiped out through military action.
One important lesson learned from 20 years of conflict
between the north and the south is that the Government
has to engage with its adversaries. The non-signatories
to the DPA are still part of the N'Djamena ceasefire
agreements and should as such be included in the
ceasefire monitoring mechanisms. A political process
to address the concerns of non-signatories and to get
them to participate in the Darfur Peace Agreement
must be re-established, supported and maintained. At
the moment, both sides appear entirely focused on
military solutions. Through outside encouragement and
pressure, all parties must show more flexibility and
remain open to compromises.

As an avid supporter of international justice and
the rule of law, Denmark firmly believes that all those
responsible must and will be held accountable. The
instrument of sanctions is still on the table, as
underscored in resolution 1706 (2006). In our View, if
the Sudanese Government presses on with its current
plans in Darfur, broader political and economic
sanctions should not be ruled out.

While sanctions are intended to encourage and
push for wise political decisions that will respect and
implement Security Council decisions, it should never
be forgotten that, ultimately, accountability is also an
aspect of this crisis. By adopting resolution 1593
(2005) and referring the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court, the Council has already
shown that it will not accept impunity for serious
crimes against humanity. Again, we must show that we
have learned our lessons from Rwanda and that those
responsible for the continuation of this crisis will
eventually have to face the consequences of their
actions.

A week from today, the African Union Peace and
Security Council will meet here in New York to take a
definite decision on the mandate of AMIS. AMIS has
done a commendable job, and the African Union
demonstrated leadership and readiness to apply
pressure on peers when it concluded the Abuja talks.
The decision to be taken next Monday is difficult and
will require the same kind of leadership by the African
Union.

By adopting resolution 1706 (2006), the Security
Council provided a concrete basis on which AMIS
would be transferred to the United Nations. Denmark
firmly believes that a robust United Nations force in
Darfur is a prerequisite for keeping the Darfur Peace
Agreement alive. Furthermore, failure to keep the DPA
alive would not only put the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement at risk, but also have grave regional
repercussions - a scenario that is certainly not in the
interests of anyone.

To conclude, let me also express, on behalf of the
Government of Denmark, my condolences to the
United States and to the American people on the
horrendous terrorist attacks that took place in the
United States five years ago today.

