The President (spoke in French): I therefore
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting was suspended at 11.05 am. and
resumed at 1.30 p.m.

The President (spoke in French): After
consultations among Council members, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern at the continued instability in Somalia
which has led to a multitude of problems,
including terrorism, acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, hostage-
taking and a dire humanitarian situation, and
reiterates the need for a comprehensive strategy
10

to encourage the establishment of peace and
stability in Somalia through the collaborative
efforts of all stakeholders.

"The Security Council reiterates its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia. It reaffirms
its support for the Djibouti Agreement and peace
process as the basis for the resolution of the
conflict in Somalia. It reiterates the importance of
political outreach and reconciliation in Somalia
and stresses the importance of broad-based,
representative institutions reached through a
political process ultimately inclusive of all.

"The Security Council expresses its support
for the work of Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations and the African Union to promote
peace and reconciliation in Somalia.

"The Security Council notes that the
transitional period will end in August 2011. It
commends the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to facilitate the
consultative process among Somalis in their
efforts to reach an agreement on post-transitional
arrangements, in consultation with the
international community and within the
framework of the Djibouti Agreement. In this
regard, it welcomes the high-level consultative
meeting held in Nairobi on 12 and 13 April 2011.
The Security Council welcomes the participation
of a wide range of Somali stakeholders and
partners. It deeply regrets the failure of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to
participate in this consultative meeting and urges
the TFG to engage fully, constructively and
without further delay in the consultative process
facilitated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to support his efforts to
move the peace process forward.

"The Security Council welcomes the
upcoming consultative meeting to be held in
Mogadishu, which will further the debate
generated at the high-level consultative meeting
in Nairobi. The Council urges all Somali
stakeholders to participate in this meeting and to
play a role in finalizing arrangements for ending
the transition in August 2011. It calls upon the
international community, the United Nations and
international organizations to fully support this
meeting.

"The Security Council reiterates the primary
responsibility of Somalis to achieve peace,
security and reconciliation in Somalia. It regrets
the decisions taken by the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs) to extend their mandates
unilaterally and urges them to refrain from further
unilateral action. The Security Council urges the
TFIs to focus on implementing reforms to build
their legitimacy, representativeness and
credibility and to reach agreement as soon as
possible on the holding of elections for the
positions of President and Speaker of Parliament,
without which there can be no extension.

"The Security Council expresses concern at
the discord between the TFIs and its impact on
the political process and the security situation. It
calls upon the TFIs to ensure cohesion, unite and
focus on the completion of the transitional tasks
set out by the Djibouti Agreement and the
Transitional Charter. It stresses the importance of
cooperation and collective leadership by the
President and Speaker.

"The Security Council notes with concern
that many core transitional tasks remain
outstanding and urges the TFIs to demonstrate
tangible results on the completion of these tasks
before the end of the transition, prioritizing
progress on reconciliation, the Constitution and
facilitating the delivery of basic services. It notes
its intention to keep the situation under review
and notes that its future support to the TF Is will
be contingent upon the delivery of tangible
results.

"The Security Council strongly commends
the progress made by the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali security
forces in consolidating security and stability in
Mogadishu, and recognizes the significant
sacrifices made by these forces. It calls on the
TFG to take advantage of these tactical gains by
demonstrating progress on facilitating the
delivery of basic services, the integration of
military objectives into a clear political strategy
in line with the Djibouti Agreement, and all the
other benchmarks spelled out in paragraph 3 of
resolution 1964 (2010). It calls for an increased
United Nations presence in Mogadishu and other
parts of Somalia and calls on the United Nations
to work in a coordinated manner.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support to AMISOM. and expresses its continued
appreciation for the commitment of troops by the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda. It stresses
the importance of predictable, reliable and timely
resources for AMISOM. in order for it to better
fulfil its mandate. The Security Council calls
upon the international community to make
contributions urgently to AMISOM, without
caveats. It notes the recommendations on Somalia
of the African Union Peace and Security Council
of 15 October 2010 and underlines its intension
to keep the situation under review.

11-3318]
"The Security Council calls upon all States,
particularly in the region, to fully implement the
Somalia and Eritrea arms embargoes. The
Security Council condemns attacks, including
terrorist attacks, on the TFG, AMISOM. and the
civilian population by armed opposition groups
and foreign fighters, particularly Al-Shabaab. It
calls upon all opposition groups to lay down their
arms and join the peace process."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/201 1/ 10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

