Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): My
delegation associates itself with the statement of the
European Union delivered earlier by the European
Union Special Representative for Human Rights. 1
would like to add some remarks in my national capacity,
echoing some of the sentiments expressed earlier in the
ideas of the Secretary-General and Minister Laurent
Fabius.

I warmly commend France for having taken
the initiative to organize this important debate. The
systematic and widespread persecution conducted by
Daesh against many ethnic and religious groups in the
Middle East seeks to achieve the systematic destruction
of the very fabric of the societies of the region, their
cultural diversity and their identities. I am referring,
of course, to the Christians, including the Orthodox
Christians, who are among the most vulnerable, as
well as to the Yazidis, whom the High Commissioner
of Human Rights has just noted were perhaps subject of
genuine genocide. That is truly shocking.

It is urgent that we act quickly and with
determination to defeat these monstrous designs. As
a member of the international coalition against Daesh,
Bulgaria is at the heart of the action to preserve the
multi-ethnic and multi-confessional character of the
Middle East. While we deplore the loss of life, my
country does not forget that Daesh's barbarism also
represents a very serious threat against the historical
and cultural heritage of the region, which was one
of the cradles of human Civilization. In this regard,
we noted with great interest the French proposal of
including cultural genocide among the crimes subject
to international prosecution.

The information regarding the widespread abuses
committed by Daesh, including killings, torture,
targeted assassinations, abductions, sexual and physical
violence, forced conversions and the recruitment of
children, are a source of deep concern. Moreover,
according to report of the Commission of Inquiry,
Daesh may have committed the three most serious
international crimes: war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.

Bulgaria reiterates its call on the Security
Council to refer the cases of crimes against humanity
and genocide committed in Iraq and Syria to the
International Criminal Court. I recall that last year my
country sponsored a draft resolution on Syria before
the Council submitted by France. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes with great interest and support
the idea proposed earlier by Foreign Minister Fabius
concerning the formulation of an action plan and road
map aimed at preserving the religious, cultural and
ethnic diversity of the Middle East. It is high time for
us to act as one.

The ongoing Violence has triggered a humanitarian
crisis of unprecedented scale: the worst humanitarian
crisis of our time. Bulgaria has joined international
efforts to mitigate the suffering of Syrian refugees in
the neighbouring countries and will contribute for the
third consecutive year to the activities of the World
Food Programme.

Bulgaria fully supports the Secretary-General's
initiative to develop an action plan that addresses
matters relating to security, social and political
inclusiveness, humanitarian assistance, the fight to
combat impunity and against discrimination, as well as
to preserve the region's ethnic and religious diversity.
The implementation of such measures requires a
strong commitment from the Security Council and
the international community to put an end to Daesh's
persecution of individuals belonging to different ethnic
and religious groups.

