Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for
his comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, for joining us in the Chamber today.

Uruguay recognizes the efforts of the Malian
Government to make progress in the peace process.
However, we are concerned about the recent violations of
the ceasefire. The parties must show a real and constant
will in implementing the Peace Agreement. We are also
concerned about allegations of human rights violations
by various actors, including the Malian armed forces,
armed groups and terrorist groups. In that regard, we
must emphasize the fact that respect for human rights by
all parties in the conflict is indispensable to achieving
lasting peace.

The humanitarian situation in Mali remains serious,
as the country faces, inter alia, issues of food insecurity,
lack of access to basic goods, including access to clean
water and sanitation, and an increase in the number of
internally displaced persons and refugees. Children
remain the most vulnerable, and the closure of many
schools has an impact on the future of 150,000, children
who are unable to attend classes and are exposed to
social conditions that result in them being recruited by
terrorist groups. In the light of such a difficult situation,
the funds available under the humanitarian response
plan are insufficient. In addition, the increase in the
number of attacks on humanitarian workers simply
undermines humanitarian assistance.

Uruguay echoes the recommendations put forward
at the Conference for National Harmony on the need
to address issues related to governance and security,
cultural diversity, inclusiveness in the political process
and socioeconomic conditions, and the need to fully
implement the Agreement. In that regard, we also
underscore the Government's leadership role.

Threats to, and direct attacks on, Mission staff are
of concern. The safety of the members of peacekeeping
operations must be the focus of our attention, as that
makes it possible to discharge their mandate. I would
like to reiterate that attacks on Blue Helmets could
amount to war crimes, and perpetrators of such attacks
will be held accountable. Because it operates in a
hostile environment, the Mission must be equipped
with the capacity it needs to protect its personnel
and to carry out its mandate. That is why we are also
concerned about the current shortages of military and
police personnel and of equipment. In that regard, it
should be underscored that the pledges made at the
force generation conference held on 22 and 23 May to
mobilize support for MINUSMA must be honoured.

In conclusion, I would like to commend all
MINUSMA staff, who, day after day, play a fundamental
role in the country, as well as to pay tribute to those
who were killed in the line of duty.

