Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me start by expressing our sincere condolences on the passing of His Royal Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the State of Kuwait. May His Highness rest in peace. Let me also begin by expressing my appreciation to the presidency of the Niger for having convened today's meeting and, of course, to the Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. As we commemorate the historic seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we are constantly reminded of what the United Nations stands for. It stands for peace, it stands for international order, and it stands for equality. These are the principles that Indonesia also believes in and emphasized at the 1955 Asia-Africa Conference as pivotal guidelines on the subject of the independence of nations that are under occupation or colonization. Sadly, despite various United Nations resolutions and widespread global support, and in defiance of international law, Palestine remains the only country attending the Conference that has not enjoyed its independence. To this day, it is still illegally occupied, and its people are discriminated against and their lands often arbitrarily seized. Indonesia affirms that it is time for the United Nations to do more. We all need to do more. With that in mind, allow me to share three important points. First, peace without addressing the relevant root causes is not peace at all. Indonesia would like to take this opportunity to remind Member States that the root cause of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is the illegal occupation. The conflict has been further amplified by decades of Israel's creeping annexation and illegal settlement policy in the occupied territories, a policy that is flagrantly unlawful and goes against resolution 2334 (2016). As such, the idea of promising peace without addressing root causes is just an illusion of peace. Any efforts to resolve the conflict and achieve peace should first and foremost be undertaken with the involvement of the two main parties, the Palestinians and the Israelis. Seeking solutions that disregard other parties is unjust and one-sided. I thus come to my second point: restarting a credible peace process. We need to show our support for the Secretary-General's call urging both Israeli and Palestinian leaders to re-engage in meaningful negotiations. We also should welcome President Abbas's call at the high-level debate last week for the Secretary- General to commence, together with the Quartet and the Security Council, an international conference with all concerned parties to engage in a peace process based on international law, United Nations resolutions and other internationally agreed parameters. My third point is continued support for the Palestinian cause. In addition to facing the menace of forced evictions, the demolition of homes and discrimination and violence, as well as years of blockade, the Palestinians are now, sadly, also confronted with the increasing coronavirus disease pandemic and its socioeconomic spillover effects. Once again, Nickolay's briefing presented a gloomy picture of the situation on the ground. According to the World Health Organization, between July and September the number of cases soared from around 3,000 to more than 40,000. In these crises, we need to show our solidarity. We need to show our humanity. I urge the Israeli Government to end the blockade of Gaza and to allow unhindered access to humanitarian assistance and goods. Furthermore, I urge the international community to strengthen its commitment to providing humanitarian and development aid to the Palestinian people, particularly through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East UNRWA, which supports more than 5.6 million Palestine refugees. To conclude, I would like to reaffirm Indonesia's unequivocal solidarity with and support for the Palestinian people gaining their rights, including the establishment of an independent State of Palestine, within the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
