Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Russian): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country's presidency of the Security Council this
month and wish you and the delegation of the Russian
Federation every success.

(spoke in Arabic)

I would like also to welcome Mrs. Kelly Craft,
Permanent Representative of the United States, and
wish her every success.

I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.

The Republic of Yemen condemns in the strongest
terms the cowardly terrorist attack perpetrated against
the two ARAMCO facilities in the sisterly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia last Saturday at dawn. It was a drone
attack. In that regard, the Government of Yemen
affirms its solidarity with the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in combating attempts to undermine its security
and stability. We support all measures taken by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to fight terrorism and ensure
security and stability in the region.

Developments since 8 August in the temporary
capital Aden and in some governorates in southern
Yemen - including the armed rebellion by the Southern
Transitional Council, supported by the United Arab
Emirates - require us to seriously and transparently
review the situation in order to overcome this dilemma,
address its causes and prevent its repercussions. The
dilemma is marked by the taking control of State
civilian and military institutions, as well as an assault
on public and private property. It has deflected us from
our main objective: the Houthi coup d'etat supported
by Iran.

On 8 August, military formation groups of the
Southern Transitional Council waged a military
rebellion, the second following a similar attempt in
January 2018. Those military groups operating outside
the State framework attacked legitimate Government
forces, their positions and their facilities in Aden.
Following that attack, the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, which heads the coalition, along with its
wise leadership, made great efforts to contain this
crisis, and we appreciate that. Nevertheless, the rebels
continued attacking State institutions in two other
governorates, Abyan and Shabwah. The national army
opposed the attacks, which run counter to the coalition
proclamations, and was able to force those military
formation groups to withdraw.

Unfortunately, on 28 August we were taken by
surprise by air strikes waged by the United Arab
Emirates on our military troops posted in Aden. To
curb the bloodshed, we withdrew our units from the
interim capital of Yemen. The next day we were also
surprised by continued illegal air strikes, in violation
of the coalition's goals, against the national army in
Aden and in Abyan governorate. Those attacks claimed
the lives of many national army soldiers and injured
numerous others.

We reaffirm our unequivocal condemnation of
the continued efforts to arm and support military
formation groups outside the State framework, for
whatever reason. Moreover, the Government of Yemen
welcomes the appeals for dialogue made by the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We value the Kingdom's
position, which totally rejects the recent escalation of
violence in the interim capital, Aden, and a number of
southern governorates. We also thank the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia for its rejection of all the repercussions of
those military attacks and for its strong insistence on
the restoration of all civilian and military institutions
in the quest for Yemen's full security, stability,
unity and territorial integrity. Indeed, any threat to
Yemen's stability is a threat to the Kingdom's security
and stability.

We also commend the clear position ofthe Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia in supporting the Government of
Yemen as represented by the President of the Republic
of Yemen, His Excellency Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour. We thank the Kingdom for its efforts to
preserve the foundations of the Yemeni State and the
interests of our Yemeni people. We thank it for its
opposition to the Houthi coup, and we value its efforts
to ensure that we do not overlook the coalition's goals:
supporting State legitimacy, uniting all efforts to put
an end to the coup d'e'tat and addressing the Iranian
interference in Yemeni domestic affairs and the region.

The Yemeni Government has undertaken tremendous
endeavours and made tireless efforts to put an end to
the crisis and to return to the rightful path of achieving
an overarching, peaceful solution based on the agreed
terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council and its executive mechanism, the outcome of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015).

We have expressed our full support for the
efforts undertaken by Mr. Griffiths and for all other
international efforts aiming to achieve lasting peace in
Yemen. The Yemeni Government, in its commitment
to achieving lasting peace, has taken part in a number
of discussions, the most recent of which were held in
Sweden. The Government expresses its commitment
to implementing the Stockholm Agreement; which
is a positive step forward in terms of building trust,
alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people and
achieving the lasting peace we so desire.

The Yemeni Government has demonstrated great
flexibility in order to save the Stockholm Agreement.
However, the stubborn armed Houthi militias are
playing for time and have duped the international
community while prolonging the war and the people's
suffering and undermining the peace efforts sponsored
by the United Nations through its envoy, Mr. Griffiths.
They could also undermine the Council's efforts to
achieve a comprehensive political solution based
on the agreed terms of reference, one that meets the
aspirations of all the Yemeni people and fulfils their
desire to build a new, federal Yemen based on the
principles ofjustice, equality, respect for the law, good
governance and national partnership for peace, rather
than war and destruction.

Following the agreement reached at the sixth
joint meeting in Al-Hudaydah of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee on 8 and 9 September, we
nevertheless are gravely concerned about the continued
shelling, incursions and violations of the ceasefire in
various directorates in Al-Hudaydah governorate.
Those violations are being perpetrated by the Houthi
militias, which target civilians in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law. Those militias must uphold all provisions of
the Stockholm Agreement and the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement. They must rapidly redeploy their troops as
provided for in the agreed operational concept while
activating the tripartite control mechanism and freeing
all prisoners and detainees as well as those forcibly
disappeared, in addition to lifting the blockade on the
city of Taiz.

The Government of Yemen is striving to achieve
a number of goals. At the humanitarian and economic
levels, we are looking to increase the State's revenue
so that it can pay all civil servants in all governorates.
We are looking to ensure that fuel can reach all parts
of Yemen, abiding, of course, by the necessary safety
standards and legal constraints. We are working to
ensure that there is no shortage of fuel in local markets
and that fuel prices cannot be manipulated. Since
the coup d'etat, Houthi militias have been collecting
taxes and imposing illegal taxes on importers of oil
products. The Government of Yemen calls upon the
United Nations and its agencies to discharge their
responsibilities and to play their humanitarian and
professional role. We urge them to force the Houthi
militias to cease impeding the Government's efforts
aimed at alleviating the humanitarian suffering of the
Yemeni people in such difficult circumstances. They
must lift all impediments that obstruct the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to those in need. We call for
sanctions and pressure to be imposed on the Houthi
militias so that they do not cause an oil crisis, which
would only worsen the humanitarian situation and
compel merchants to violate Government directives.

We would warn against the continued efforts of
Houthi militias to hinder the work of United Nations
experts to evaluate the situation of the FSO SAFER
tanker, which contains 1.14 million barrels of crude
oil. If that oil were to spill, there could be devastating
environmental consequences in the Red Sea. We deplore
the silence of the international community on this point
and urge the Secretary-General and the Council to take
urgent measures to bring pressure to bear on Houthi
militias, which would make it possible for the group
of experts to reach the tanker and assess its technical
status, thus avoiding a maritime catastrophe that would
have repercussions for Yemen and the region.

Iran has caused a great deal of damage in Yemen
and the region and has played a serious sabotaging
role by providing arms and funding to the Houthi
militias. Those militias, under the banner of the Iranian
revolution, strive to practise oppression and torture,
while using certain areas in Yemen as platforms to launch
missiles that threaten the security of neighbouring
States and maritime navigation in the Red Sea. They
also undermine regional and international security.

The United Nations reports demonstrate the
support that the Houthi militias receive from Iran.
As a result of the coup d'etat by the Houthi militias,
Yemen is witnessing the worst humanitarian disaster
in the world. The militias continue their violations by
pillaging humanitarian aid, bombing silos, expanding
their siege of cities and villages and launching attacks
against civilians and residential areas. They lay
mines, recruit children, destroy the homes of political
opponents, target journalists, detain people arbitrarily
and kidnap political and human rights activists, as
well as bank managers and businessmen, with no
legal justification. All such acts are in violation of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

Before concluding, I would like to stress that
there can be no further consultations without the
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
We therefore call on the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities by implementing the Agreement and all
its provisions without further delay.
I also wish to affirm that the Yemeni Government
has done its utmost and will continue to do all it can
to support the United Nations and its agencies in
carrying out their activities. We are ready for increased
cooperation and support so that they can continue their
United Nations-facilitated work without impediment.
We have clarified this issue in our response to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Addressing the conflict in Yemen means putting an
end to the coup and restoring the State institutions that
have been taken over. We once again call on the Council
to implement its resolutions on Yemen in order to reach
a comprehensive political settlement that meets the
aspirations of all Yemeni people and achieve a lasting
peace based on the agreed terms of reference.

