Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we should like to thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Poland, Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, and the entire Polish
delegation for having organized this very important
debate on children and armed conflict in the light of
the increasing threats they face throughout the world.
We also wish to thank all of today's briefers for their
enlightening briefings.

This year, we are commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1261
(1999) 4 a resolution that we voted in favour of during
our membership of the Council and that places the
issue of children and armed conflict at the heart of
the Council's agenda. Conflicts persist in a number of
regions around the world, with appalling crimes being
committed by militias and terrorist groups. Children
are the first victims of crime in times of conflict. They
are recruited, exploited, kidnapped and trafficked; they
suffer sexual violence and are killed and maimed. They
also suffer the indirect effects of war. They are robbed
of their fundamental rights, depriving them of a decent
life in peace and security, without education, food or
health care. Based on the conviction that it is essential
to protect children, in 1992 the Kingdom of Bahrain
acceded to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols on the Involvement of Children
in Armed Conflict and on the Sale of Children, Child
Prostitution and Child Pornography.

The coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen
also attaches special importance to promoting the
protection of children, as evidenced by the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between the
coalition and the United Nations that provides the
legislative framework for establishing a plan of action
to strengthen the protection of children in Yemen, in
cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
In that context, we condemn the violations committed
against children and their recruitment by Iran-backed
Houthi militias.

The violence that children witness in areas of
armed conflict and unrest 4 often involving losing
family members and loved ones - has permanent
psychological effects. We must address this issue in
order to avoid losing an entire generation to warfare,
particularly with regard to children living in those
countries most affected by war and conflict. We should
focus on developing national, regional and international
action plans aimed at preventing these violations before
they take place, in line with resolution 2427 (2018).
In the event that such violations do occur, it is vital
that we ensure the rehabilitation of children and their
reintegration into society.

In conclusion, we underscore the important role
that the international community should play in
combating all inhuman practices carried out against
children and in effectively responding to all matters
that threaten international peace and security, in full
compliance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, in order to provide
effective protection to children and guarantee their
legitimate rights.

