Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her briefing on
areas in peacekeeping where improvement is needed
and on how it can be achieved.

Unlike many other issues related to peacekeeping
that require our attention, force generation and
capability gaps present challenges where concrete
progress is not only possible, but measurable.
Since 2005, the United States has invested more
than $1.3 billion in 66 partner countries and five
international organizations through our peacekeeping
capacity-building initiatives alone, demonstrating a
shared commitment with our partners to work together
to address critical gaps in United Nations and regional
peace operations. The United States will remain the
largest contributor to United Nations peacekeeping in
terms of assessed contributions, bilateral training and
capacity-building efforts.

We understand that missions require resources
and capabilities to fulfil their mandates and to support
sustainable political solutions. Such investments have
yielded demonstrative positive outcomes. Yet sustained
efforts, in partnership with other financial donors,
troop- and police-contributing countries and the United
Nations, are required to further strengthen capacity
so as to execute operations effectively. One crucial
aspect of filling capability gaps is through training and
capacity-building aimed at improving peacekeeping
performance. Deficiencies in training and equipment
undermine the success of missions. Even the most
well-designed mission will fall short of its mandate if
its peacekeepers are not proficient in basic soldiering
and policing skills. With that in mind, we would like
to see a move towards more objective decision-making
on elements such as deployment, remediation and
repatriation when approaching force generation and
addressing capability gaps. It is important that the
United Nations know where the needs are greatest
and what has to be remedied, so that countries, like
the United States, can better target their support and
diplomatic engagement.

We encourage, in particular, the Office of Military
Affairs, the Police Division and other relevant offices
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support to redouble their
efforts to integrate performance-based data into
the force-generation process and regular reviews of
mission staffing. We commend the work conducted
by the Strategic Force Generation and Capability
Planning Cell on those fronts. A performance-based
decision-making process must be transparent and
standardized, and the States Members of the United
Nations must fully understand all of the assessment
processes and standards that are employed. In saying
that, we are not seeking to punish countries that
provide forces to the United Nations or individual
units. Performance-based decision-making will allow
the best mix of capabilities to be matched to mission
requirements and improve the potential for mission
success. It will also help contributing countries to focus
on what must be improved, while helping to target
capacity-building assistance to those who most need
and deserve it.

For our part, we are eager to see how the improved
capture and analysis of peacekeeping performance
information can help us target our training support.
We understand that performance is just one part of
improving peacekeeping capacity, but it is a part
where we must work together to see results. The
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries must partner to make
missions more effective, efficient and safer.

In October, Ambassador Nikki Haley joined
Ambassador Fode Seck of Senegal and several other
permanent representatives in a meeting of the Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to discuss
those and other issues. We believe the Working Group
is a good venue for the Council, the United Nations
and troop- and police-contributing countries to engage
in such discussions, and that it would be helpful for
performance to be considered in that Group, under Cote
d'Ivoire's leadership in the New Year.

