Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Resolution 2118 (2013), which we have just adopted,
is a historic milestone. It contains strong, specific
elements to constrain Syria to respect its obligations
and to prevent chemical weapons from being used once
again in Syria. The Security Council has thus put in
place a robust mechanism that creates legally binding
obligations through rigourous verification measures.
The objective is clear and cannot be misinterpreted.
Syria must fully cooperate with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations with a view to dismantling its chemical arms
programme as quickly as possible.

If the Syrian authorities fully respect their
obligations, the resolution will make it possible to
eliminate one of the most significant chemical weapons
programmes in the world through non-military means.
We all bore witness a month ago to the terrible massacre
in the suburbs of Damascus using chemical weapons.
Each of us saw with our own eyes, on dozens of Videos,
the events of 21 August - unbearable images ofvictims
in agony, and dozens of children's corpses in rows. It is
important that such events never recur.

Today's resolution also represents a breakthrough
on the normative level. For the first time, the Security
Council has determined that the use of chemical
weapons, Wherever it occurs, is a threat to peace and
international security. That authorizes the Council
to be seized automatically of the issue in future.
That is significant progress. The resolution is also
innovative in another critical area. For the first time,
the Security Council was able to agree to endorse the
Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex), which called for the creation of a transitional
Government body with full executive powers in Syria.
The adoption of the resolution, as important as it
is, will not put an end to the war or end the enormous
suffering of the Syrian people. In the long run, the
humanitarian and security challenges cannot be
resolved other than through a negotiated political
solution to the crisis. Syria must engage in a political
transition process that responds to the aspirations of
all Syrians. Consequently, we encourage all concerned
parties to take advantage of the positive dynamic that
has been created in this case of chemical weapons to
progress towards a cessation of hostilities, towards
the holding of "Geneva II", and towards the necessary
political transition in Syria. Any delay will lead only to
more death and more suffering.

While our attention is focused on the most recent
chapters in recent days concerning chemical weapons,
we cannot and must not forget the humanitarian
catastrophe that continues to unfold in Syria and
neighbouring countries, especially Lebanon and Jordan,
but also in Iraq and Turkey. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres, has
said that

"Syria has become the great tragedy of this
century - a disgraceful humanitarian calamity
with suffering and displacement unparalleled in
recent history".

The Syrians need assistance, and they need it
now. They enjoy the right to such assistance under
the most elementary criteria of humanity enshrined in
humanitarian international law. It is urgent that Syria
respond to the demands of humanitarian actors and that
it facilitate immediate, unimpeded and free access to
the affected populations. It is urgent that bureaucratic
obstacles be lifted in order to ensure supplies of medical
equipment, to establish humanitarian relief, and to
open humanitarian routes, and to facilitate access to the
affected populations across borders and the front lines.

With Australia, Luxembourg wishes to echo the
demands of the humanitarian actors to the parties in
conflict in Syria through a message sent by the entire
Council. We hope that those efforts will lead very soon
to the adoption of a strong humanitarian text. The
Security Council must also shoulder its responsibility
on that point as well. I listened with interest carefully
to the words of the United Kingdom Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Mr. William
Hague, in that regard.

In conclusion, I reiterate our conviction that the
perpetrators of the crimes committed on 21 August,
as well as those behind all other atrocities committed
in Syria since the onset of hostilities, must be held
accountable for their acts. The time has come to finally
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court.

