Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing
today.

Over the past few weeks we have seen images and
news of tunnels discovered in northern Israel. As the
Under-Secretary-General has told us this morning, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has confirmed so far the existence of four tunnels
close to the Blue Line and to date has independently
verified that two of those tunnels cross the Blue Line.
UNIFIL has also determined that two of those tunnels
constitute violations of resolution 1701 (2006). We can
only speculate how many more will be uncovered in the
coming days and weeks. Those facts are indisputable,
and they should leave no doubt on who is responsible.
The United States has taken Hizbullah's threats to the
security of Israel and the Israeli people at face value,
and it is high time that the Council and the international
community do so as well.

The Council's differing views on Hizbullah have
undermined the international community's efforts to
support peace and stability along the Blue Line and
between Israel and Lebanon. UNIFIL and the Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
play a critical role in ensuring peace and stability. We
call upon them to proactively implement their respective
mandates to advance efforts towards a durable peace
between Israel and Lebanon.

It is both regrettable and incomprehensible
that some Council members dismiss the threat that
Hizbullah poses and its ability to act as a spoiler to the
Council's broader objective for peace between Israel
and Lebanon. It is time that the Security Council acts
as one and speaks in one voice - Hizbullah is a serious
and a real threat. That reality must underpin all of our
actions moving forward from today.

To those who are not yet convinced that Hizbullah
is a serious threat to the peace and security of Israel,
Lebanon and the region I ask the following * What
further proof do you need? Did we forget the violence
in 2006? Do we not hear Nasrallah bragging of his
vast stocks of precise weapons and his ability to hit
anywhere inside Israel? We appreciate that Israel
and Lebanon expressed to UNIFIL that they have no
intention to escalate the situation along the Blue Line
any will continue to work with UNIFIL to that end.

We urge both partners to continue to exercise
restraint and to utilize fully UNIFIL's liaison
capabilities. UNIFIL must be in a position to exercise its
mandate to the fullest extent possible. But can we know
with certainty that Hizbullah is equally committed to
maintaining peace and stability? The answer is no, we
cannot. The United States strongly supports Israel's
efforts to defend its sovereignty and unconditionally
affirms Israel's right to self-defence.

We call on President Michel Aoun and the
Lebanese Government to undertake all possible efforts
to halt Hizbullah's illicit tunnelling into Israel and
to ensure that there is no escalation of tensions or
violence. That includes President Aoun directing the
Lebanese Armed Forces to act promptly to investigate
the suspected starting points of the tunnels. We also
call upon UNIFIL to take all the necessary measures to
ensure that its area of operations is not used for hostile
activities and to ensure that those tunnels do not pose a
threat to peace and security. UNIFIL must be provided
all possible relevant information, and full access to, the
suspected tunnel locations in southern Lebanon, if it is
to complete its independent assessment.
The United States strongly supports the Lebanese
Armed Forces (LAF) as the sole legitimate defender
of Lebanon. We continue to work with others in the
international community to provide assistance to the
LAF to allow it to perform its mission as effectively
as possible. More broadly, we also call on Iran and
its agents to stop their aggressive behaviour and
provocation in the region, which pose an unacceptable
threat to Israeli and regional security.

We thank UNIFIL for the constructive liaison
role the mission has played between the Governments
of Lebanon and Israel in order to facilitate clear
communication, preserve stability along the Blue Line
and document these incidents. However, we urge the
mission to continue its heightened security posture and
visible presence in southern Lebanon and to actively
and regularly update the Security Council on this very
serious and ongoing issue.

