Mr. Menon (Singapore): Let me first thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive progress
report (S/2004/888) on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for the past
3 months. I would also like to pay tribute to Special
Representative Sukehiro Hasegawa for his leadership,
commitment and outstanding work.

We are encouraged by the steady progress made
in various aspects of Timor-Leste's development
efforts. The Secretary-General's report has confirmed
that the decision of the Security Council in May 2004
to extend the mandate of UNMISET by one year was
correct and that the mandate was appropriately defined.
Please allow me to highlight a few observations
concerning the report.

First, it is clear from the report that Timor-Leste's

judiciary and public administration systems are still in
the early stages of development. Internal capacity in
those areas has yet to be fully established. The work of
international judges and United Nations civilian
advisers is therefore crucial to the development of the
judicial system and other governmental institutions.
The building of those important institutions will take
time, and I commend the judges and the civilian
advisers for their hard work and commitment. Given
the significant increase in the number of returnees and
the growing population of Dili, programmes focusing
on the areas of education, job creation, the provision of
utilities and health care will also have to be
continuously developed and sustained.

Secondly, we note that the overall security
situation in Timor-Leste has been calm and peaceful in
recent months. That is due in no small measure to the
presence of United Nations forces. But the work to
build Timor-Leste's own capacity to ensure stability
has only just begun. Until the capacity of the Timorese
national police and defence force is fully realized, the
work of the UNMISET security forces will be vital to
the provision of a secure framework for development.
The Secretary-General's report has noted the lack of
professional experience of the police and the defence
forces, the slow resolution of the grievances raised by
ex-combatants and veterans and the growing voice of
martial arts groups. Those are possible challenges to
the internal security situation that merit our attention.

We support the Secretary-General's recommendation
that UNMISET's current tasks, configuration and size
be retained until 20 May 2005. That is critical to the
consolidation of what has been achieved thus far. We
agree that it is important for UNMISET to focus on the
strengthening of local institutions before the final exit
of United Nations forces. The remaining months are
crucial, and UNMISET must ensure that the departure
of the United Nations does not create a vacuum in
which instability and uncertainty prevail. The United
Nations will need to consider how the current
programmes by the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and
the United Nations Children's Fund can be further
expanded so as to ensure a smooth transition to
Timorese ownership.

I would urge the Security Council to conduct a
further evaluation of the state of Timor-Leste's self-
sufficiency before the expiry of the UNMISET
mandate, in May 2005. That will enable the Security
Council to take an objective decision on the level of
support and assistance to be rendered to Timor-Leste in
the months ahead, as well as after the expiry of the
United Nations mandate. While Timor-Leste continues
to seek sources of bilateral and multilateral assistance,
the United Nations must correspondingly harness the
collective efforts of its development programmes for
the benefit of that young nation.

The people of Timor-Leste have made
considerable progress since the country became
independent, in May 2002. However, there is still much
that needs to be done. Further international assistance
will be critical to consolidate and build upon the gains
that have been made in an atmosphere of peace and
security. Timor-Leste will continue to require
international assistance, specifically in the area of
strengthening its security forces, public administration
and judicial institutions. Let us, as responsible partners
and friends, continue to render the necessary support to
that young nation so that it will see measurable and
sustainable success in its efforts at nation-building.
Singapore remains fully committed to assist and
support Timor-Leste. Together with the United
Nations, we have a stake in helping Timor-Leste
succeed.

