Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Out the outset, I thank
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing, reporting the lack of progress and
the contradictions of the Organization with regard
to the Palestinian question. I would like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the dedication of the
Secretary-General to peace in the Middle East and
his firm commitment to the women, men and children
who have suffered because of the conflicts affecting
the region.
In the context of the various complex and tragic
events now taking place in the Middle East, which
continue to be a source of deep concern for the
international community, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela will focus its statement today - which will
probably be the last in the Security Council - on the
Palestinian question, one of the most unjust and tragic
situations that even the United Nations has not been able
to resolve. It is one of the deepest and most influential
with regard to the other problems and tensions affecting
that afflicted region. Moreover, it is a long-standing
issue that we have not be able to resolve. So far it has
been a massive failure of the Security Council, above
all of the permanent members, who through their veto
or their silence have encouraged Israeli violence against
the Palestinian people.

During our term as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, we have witnessed with frustration
the disregard of continual appeals by Venezuela and
other Council members, as well as numerous Member
States and the international community in general, for
the Security Council to take decisive action and adopt
a unified position promoting peace, the end of the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem, the lifting of the blockade on the Gaza
Strip and the settlement of the conflict through the two-
State solution.

We believe that the Organization's ethical
commitment to the Palestinians and the responsibility of
the Security Council in maintaining peace and security
compel us to insist more forcefully, in this body,
that it take steps to move the peace process forward,
ensure that the Council continues to be actively and
constructively involved in the process to achieve a just
and lasting solution to the conflict and restore hope
to those who are suffering from the brutal occupation
that United Nations will honour its moral debt towards
the Palestinian people. Otherwise, this meeting will be
nothing other than an exercise in diplomatic rhetoric.

We believe the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is at a
total impasse. The occupying Power, Israel, remains
intransigent and not only continues its pernicious
and unjust occupation of Palestine, but also the
expansion of its territory through the expropriation
of land legitimately held by Palestinians and the
building of settlements. The aggression of the Israeli
Government against the Palestinian people through
the expropriation of land, the forced displacement and
expulsion of Palestinians, the demolition of Palestinian
infrastructure and homes and attempts to retroactively
legalize Israeli settlements in the West Bank is a clear
demonstration of an extremist and aggressive policy
launched by the Israeli Government and supported by
the colonist sectors of public opinion in Israel that see
the annexation of Palestinian territory as a fact on the
ground, thereby undermining of the two-State solution
and the viability of a Palestinian State. Approximately
700 Palestinian homes have been destroyed this year by
the occupying Power, while plans to expand settlements
and construction have not ceased. It is up to the Council
to take urgent action to condemn illegal settlements
and demand and require that Israel end this illegal
expansionist policy.

Furthermore, the Israeli authorities have insisted
on their intent to crush the will of the Palestinians by
ongoing violations of their most fundamental basic
rights in the occupied territories and in the Gaza Strip,
which has been under siege and blockaded by Israel.
Israel has made disproportionate and indiscriminate
use of force through its military and security forces,
with lethal consequences, including more than 220
Palestinian fatalities since October 2015 and more than
7,000 Palestinians wounded by real ammunition and
rubber bullets fired by the Israeli forces. That violence
has not subsided.

One must also take into account the more than 7,000
Palestinians who are being held in Israelijails, including
more than 500 children, for whose release we continue
to call. We wonder how the permanent members of the
Council can remain silent on that situation, especially
those who provide Israel with political and military
support while in other situations they deliver emotional
statements on the subject of human rights. How is it
possible to sustain such a double moral standard?

Moreover, the situation of the more than 700
individuals who are suffering unjust administrative
detention is of grave concern. They include the recent
cases of Anas Shadid and Ahmad Abu Fara, victims
of administrative detention who have been on a hunger
strike for more than 50 days to protest the deplorable
conditions of detention in Israeli jails. Their health has
been seriously harmed by the authorities' indifference
and refusal to release them. Israel does not care about
the fate ofthe Palestinian people. Its responsibility as an
occupying Power is totally ignored. We therefore once
again request the Council to consider the possibility
of seeking concrete and expeditious measures for the
effective protection of the Palestinian people from

the abuses by Israel in the occupied territories, in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention, on the
protection of Civilians.
There must also be an end to impunity, which shelters
those responsible for attacks, acts of aggresion, killings
and violations of the human rights of Palestinians.
Accountability for such reprehensible behaviour should
a part of the demands to which the Israeli authorities
must answer. In addition to the aggresion provoked
by institutional authorities, Palestinians are currently
suffering from the violence from more than 600,000
Israeli settlers - with the direct and implicit support of
the Israeli authorities to carry out their acts of extreme
Violence - who are continuing to uproot Palestinians
from their own ancestral land in order to blot out the
notion and the very possibility of a Palestinian State.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, which
has been blockaded and besieged by Israel, as well as
in the other occupied territories, reveals a deteriorating
situation characterized by continuous violence and
ongoing pressure exerted by Israel, in violation of
fundamental norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law, so as to limit or deny
access to health care, education, housing, jobs and basic
services - such as water and electricity 4 and the
freedom of Palestinians in the West Bank to undertake
religious and cultural activities. Furthermore, the
blockade in Gaza has prevented the Palestinians from
even beginning to rebuild the territory after the criminal
Israel aggression of 2014. The blockade has cut all links
with the West Bank.

The people of Gaza are encountering similar
difficulties to those in other occupied territories
regarding access to basic services and fundamental
rights. All of this is due to the actions of the occupying
Power. The blockade ofGaza serves to further radicalize
the Palestinian population in order to maintain the
division between Gaza from the West Bank.

In that sombre context for Palestinians, the
possibility of negotations that might lead to a peaceful,
sustainable and fair two-State solution is more
urgent than ever. The role of the Security Council is
fundamental in moving towards the resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We must therefore abandon
inaction and commit ourselves to seeking effective
options to achieve peace. In that regard, there is a
need for a Security Council resolution demanding an
immediate cessation of the illegal Israeli settlements,
in order to send an initial message of the unity of the
Council, and thereby on an issue on which there is a
broad convergence of views with respect to settlements
being illegal, constituting an obstacle to peace and
a factor that negatively affects the possibility of a
two-State solution. We all agree that the end of the
settlement policy would be an important step towards
direct negotiations.

We would like to say that we think it inappropriate and
unjust to speak in this Chamber about disproportionate
resolutions against Israel. It is unacceptable when
the responsibility of the United Nations is to support
the weakest party to a conflict, who is often the
victim - in this case, that party is the Palestinian
people. The Palestinian people have been savagely
assaulted and violently punished by the occupying
Power, which violates international law with impunity
thanks to its military superiority and the political
support it has in the Security Council. We think that
the Council ought to assume its responsibility, which is
common but differentiated in this case, because a large
part of the Palestinian tragedy is the responsibility of
the Council due to its inaction and its veto of peace.

In the waning days of our country's status as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, we
would like to reiterate the position that we expressed
on the very first day of our term on the Council,
namely, that the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land
must end - for we all know that it is the root cause
of the conflict - and that we must support the work
of the Middle East Quartet and all other efforts by
the international community, including initiatives by
various members of the Council, such as Egypt, France
and Russia, which we commend.

We also welcome the holding of an international
conference in January. We should do everything
possible to promote the political process and
negotiations between Israel and Palestine with a
View to establishing a peaceful two-State solution,
taking into account the Arab Peace Initiative and
acknowledging the right of the Palestinian people to
live in their own State - a full-fledged State Member
of the Organization that cosexists peacefully alongside
Israel, in line with the internationally recognized pre-
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
All of this is in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. These are inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. My country, which
has always supported the just Palestinian cause, will
continue to advocate in this forum and others for urgent
action to end the conflict at hand and put an end to
the shameful and criminal occupation by Israel of
Palestinian territory.

As we have said on numerous occasions, and as
has been repeated numerous times here in the Council,
the status quo is unsustainable. We cannot continue
offering excuses and preconditions on events that
are the consequence of the occupation, including the
desperate acts of violence, which we also condemn;
or for the lack of unity among Palestinians. The
Security Council must act decisively to effect change
in this situation that demands and obliges both sides
to come back to negotiations. It must express support
for the Middle East Quartet in order to show support
for the efforts of other Member States in the Council
to bring the parties together. Venezuela is ready to
work on a draft resolution with Member States, such as
New Zealand, to provide impetus to work urgently on
this and constructively contribute to a document that
reflects the consensus that exists among the members
of the Council regarding the necessary condemnation
of illegal Israeli settlements and the need for progress
on the Palestinian question.

As this is our last statement as a non-permament
member of the Security Council on the Palestinian
question, we call on the conscience of all those present,
particularly the permanent members, so that we can
hear the clamor of the Palestinian people for their
inalienable rights to their own State and to peaceful
coexistence. We must take concrete steps forward on
the difficult path towards a peaceful resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

