Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
has been following attentively, and with profound
concern, developments in the situation in Darfur and in
its impact on the civilian population, which faces an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. We have followed
those developments all the more attentively and with
all the more concern because the tragedy affects a
country and populations that are bound to my country
and my people by exceptionally strong fraternal
relations. The unspeakable, tragic suffering daily
experienced by those populations powerfully demands
our involvement. It is our fervent desire and our
priority objective that this suffering should come to an
end as soon as possible.

Therefore - and because Algeria is active in the
African Union observer mission in Darfur and in the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, of
which it is a member - my country has been
unstinting in its humanitarian and political efforts, and
has worked with the discretion and effectiveness
required to restore peace and stability to that part of the
Sudan and to enable displaced populations to return to
their homes in calm and security.

It is in that spirit that from the very outset Algeria
has lent its full support to the efforts of the African
Union, in the conviction that President Obasanjo -
who is fully committed to attaining a political
solution- will succeed in bringing the parties
concerned together. We are convinced too that the
African Union will maintain constant contact with the
Sudanese Government to ensure its full cooperation
with the United Nations and with the African Union.
We are all aware that there is no alternative to the
Sudanese Government's active cooperation, so that,
with the support of the African Union and the
international community, the suffering of the
population of Darfur may come to an end.

Our conviction that the African Union is the most
appropriate organization to seek a settlement to the
crisis in all its dimensions was further strengthened by
the attainment on 1 September of an agreement among
the parties on humanitarian issues, and even more so
when we saw the Sudanese Government itself taking
the initiative to request the African Union to step up its
presence in Darfur, as confirmed in a letter dated
7 September from the Chairperson of the African
Commission addressed to the Secretary-General.

Moreover, both the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative have noted significant progress
in Darfur, while pointing out areas where this is
lacking. And Mr. Pronk even paid tribute in this
Chamber to the Government of Sudan for the progress
it has made and for the good will shown in its
relationship with the United Nations.

Because of the progress made and in the light of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2004/703), we
therefore naturally expected the Security Council to
take note of that progress and to urge the Sudanese
Government to undertake further efforts in areas where
shortcomings have been highlighted - particularly in
the area of security, which will be a source of
legitimate concern for the whole international
community if we do not set strict parameters to be
respected.

We also expected that the Security Council would
call on the rebel groups to try harder to arrive at a just
and final settlement of the crisis and that - together
with the African Union, which had decided to do so -
it would call for the cantonment of rebel forces in
mutually agreed sites, simultaneously with the
Sudanese Government's disarmament of the armed
militias.

Because neither the Secretary-General nor his
Special Representative recommended that, and because
we believed that a dynamic of cooperation had replaced
the spirit of confrontation, we did not expect the
Security Council to threaten the Sudanese Government
once again with recourse to sanctions.

Despite the improvements that were made, the
text before us today poses problems, for the following
reasons.

First, in our View, it does not really do justice to
the Government of the Sudan - which has taken
initiatives and carried out actions that go in the right
direction - and highlights only the shortcomings that
have been noted.

Secondly, it envisages the possibility of using
sanctions against the Sudan, not only if there is a lack
of compliance with the Security Council resolution, but
also if there is a lack of cooperation with the African
Union concerning the extension of its mandate, even
though Sudan has itself officially requested the
extension and strengthening of the mandate of the
African mission in Darfur and has committed itself to
serious cooperation with the United Nations to
implement resolution 1556 (2004) and with the African
Union to expand its presence in Darfur.

Finally, this text calls for the creation of an
international commission of inquiry charged with
determining whether genocide has been committed in
Darfur, whereas, for the sake of effectiveness and in
order to address the urgency and gravity of the crisis,
the international community - as attested to by
statements of the Secretary-General and the Secretary
of State of the United States - had wisely set aside, at
least for the time being, the question of whether or not
genocide had been committed, so as not to disrupt or
jeopardize the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
the ongoing African Union efforts aimed at reaching a
political settlement.

Those are three basic points concerning which we
would have wished the sponsors of the draft resolution
to show the same understanding and flexibility that
they demonstrated - and we thank them for that -
with regard to other aspects of the text, particularly by
clarifying and defining the African Union's leading
role, for which we are particularly grateful; by
removing certain measures that might have been
unacceptable assaults on Sudan's sovereignty, such as
unrestricted overflight of its territory; and, finally, by
underscoring the need to respect the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Sudan.

Greater flexibility would have enabled the
Council to adopt a unified position in the face of the
Darfur crisis; I stress that we need to speak with one
voice when a tragedy of the scope of that in Darfur
challenges us to act together to put an end to it.
Unfortunately, that was not the case. Therefore,
although we welcome some of the highly positive
elements of the draft resolution, we will abstain in the
voting on the text.

