Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin, Mr. President, by expressing my
delegation's pleasure at seeing you preside over this
debate. I especially want to thank you for having
organized this meeting to take up the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait. I also wish to convey our gratitude to
the delegation of Malaysia, which called for this
meeting on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. In
addition, I would like to thank Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElB aradei for their dedicated work.

The Argentine Republic is once again
participating in this debate to stress the need for the
Security Council to assume its responsibilities and take
action with regard to the grave Iraqi crisis. That crisis
has an effect on international security, and will
eventually also affect peace.

Resolution 1441 (2002), which was unanimously
adopted on 8 November 2002, gave Iraq, a State that is
defying the international community, one last
opportunity to fully and completely comply with the
disarmament obligations imposed by resolution 687
(1991), which was adopted on 3 April 1991, and to
provide immediate, unconditional and substantive
cooperation to United Nations inspectors.

Despite the fact that there has been some
progress, as Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei reported at the
meeting held on Friday, 7 March, no one in this
Chamber could believe that the level of cooperation
demanded of Iraq by resolution 1441 (2001) has been
met. It is clear that Iraq has not fully complied with
that resolution.

Iraq's partial and unsatisfactory compliance
proves that constant pressure must be maintained,
given that after 12 years - and especially during the
four months that have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1441 (2002) - it is obvious that the Iraqi
regime only cooperates when it has no other alternative
and that it only reacts to diplomatic and military
pressure. The regime does not seem willing to disarm
itself any other way.

Despite such behaviour by the Iraqi regime, my
country believes that we still have time to reach a
peaceful outcome to this crisis. That is why we want to
appeal once again to the Security Council to stand
united and give Iraq one last chance to cooperate fully
and in good faith to achieve disarmament. That
cooperation should take place in a concrete and
verifiable manner. It could do so by, for example,
meeting clearly defined targets that could be verified
objectively by the Security Council through the reports
provided by the inspectors from the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, within a
reasonable time-frame, taking into account the sense of
urgency underlying resolution 1441 (2002).

My country believes that the Security Council is
the right place in which to secure the consensus
necessary to achieve a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
The Council, which is the only body that can
legitimately authorize the use of force, must live up
that serious responsibility. This is particularly
necessary at the current time, when other serious
threats, including terrorism and the proliferation of
nuclear weapons, as well as regional conflicts such as
that in the Middle East, demand that the Council have
the requisite authority and prestige to tackle them and
fulfil the responsibility that States Members entrusted
to it - the maintenance of international peace and
security.

