Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): Allow me
at the outset to extend my delegation's appreciation to
you, Sir, for taking the initiative of organizing this open
debate on the very important issue of protecting civilians
in armed conflict. We recognize highly the effort of the
Netherlands to build on the previous Council debate on
this subject - a debate initiated by Canada in February
of this year - and also to promote the transparency of
the work of the Council. My delegation equally
appreciates Secretary-General Kofi Annan's
comprehensive and action-oriented report on this issue
and his inspiring statement yesterday morning. My
appreciation goes also to Mrs. Mary Robinson for her
valuable contribution yesterday and to Mr. de Mello in
particular for his important role in the process of
preparing this important report.

Across the planet, the plight of innocent civilians, in
particular those of vulnerable groups, has been continuing
with alarming frequency and intensity, as those in war
zones have increasingly become the deliberate targets of
warring parties. It is all the more frustrating to note this
 

unfortunate trend when just last August we celebrated the
fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Geneva
Conventions.

To deal with this daunting challenge with a sense of
urgency, the Republic of Korea, during its presidency of the
Security Council in the month of May 1997, took the
initiative of organizing an open debate, the first of its kind,
on the subject of protecting humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations. My delegation is
pleased to see that our initiative has been continuously
followed up and further expanded by other like-minded
member States. In this regard, my delegation welcomes
wholeheartedly the Secretary-General's report contained in
document S/1999/957 as a comprehensive blueprint for
future action by the Security Council and other relevant
organs, bodies and agencies of the United Nations to
improve both the legal and the physical protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation therefore supports the draft resolution
before the Council, which endorses a number of practical
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report. My delegation hopes that the adoption of this draft
resolution will mark another step forward for the
international community in its fight against the culture of
impunity and to foster a climate of compliance.

Having said that, I would like to highlight the
following points to which my delegation attaches particular
importance.

My first point concerns the issue of how to strengthen
the legal framework so as to better protect civilians in
conflicts. We are encouraged by the recent developments
aimed at enabling the international community to
collectively combat the culture of impunity. In particular,
we are encouraged by the adoption in Rome last year of the
Statute of International Criminal Court. The Security
Council has set examples by establishing the two ad hoc
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. In
this context, we agree with the Secretary-General's View
that there is a need to consider using enforcement measures
to facilitate the arrest and surrender of those persons
accused by the ad hoc Tribunals, and to devise judicial and
investigative mechanisms, with national and international
components, pending the establishment of the International
Criminal Court.

In View of the urgency of better ensuring the safety of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel, we join the
Secretary-General's call for early ratification of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. My delegation also favours the
exploration of an appropriate mechanism to extend the
scope of legal protection to cover all personnel. As
suggested in the report before the Council, the
development of a protocol to the 1994 Convention could
be a useful idea.

Now I would like to turn to the issue of how to
improve the physical protection of civilians in conflicts.
My delegation believes that the Security Council should
continue to take a proactive role in this field as the
international community increasingly considers serious
humanitarian problems to be a threat to international
peace and security. The first issue I would like to raise in
this regard is the need to strengthen the United Nations
capability for conflict prevention and rapid response to
crises. My delegation concurs with the Secretary-
General's recommendation on the proactive use of a
preventive monitoring presence in areas of potential
conflict and on the deployment of preventive
peacekeeping missions. We believe that the positive
contribution made by the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force can be further built upon.

In view of the multifaceted nature of recent
conflicts, there is an urgent need to strengthen the rapid-
reaction capability of the United Nations to cover not
only the traditional mandates of peacekeeping but also a
number of other functions of peace-building, in particular
protection of humanitarian assistance to of innocent
civilians and of their human rights. In this context, we
would like to join the appeal to all Member States to
participate more actively in the United Nations Stand-by
Arrangements System, with increased inclusion of
specialized civil and humanitarian units. We also support
the Secretary-General's recommendation to make use of
relevant human rights information and analysis as
indicators for potential preventive action by the United
Nations.

Secondly, I would like to touch upon the issue of
sanctions and arms embargoes. The Security Council has
made consistent efforts to refine the use of sanctions.
While we recognize the difficulty of achieving "smart
sanctions" in the real world, we also believe that there is
a continuing need to minimize collateral, unintended
humanitarian suffering through the imposition of more
specifically targeted sanctions and mechanisms for
periodic substantive reviews.

 

Arms embargoes should be imposed in all situations
where parties to the conflict target civilians. With cross-
border arms flows in full swing, country-specific arms
embargoes may not suffice to staunch the illicit flow of
arms, and therefore the regional approach warrants serious
examination. The Security Council should also devise a
more reliable mechanism to better implement the arms
embargoes which have already been imposed by the
Council in some conflict areas but which have been deemed
ineffective. This problem ought to be urgently addressed in
the interest of both the credibility of Council action and the
practical need to stop an activity responsible for prolonging
civilian suffering.

Thirdly, in his report the Secretary-General encourages
Member States to give political and financial support and
assistance to other States to facilitate compliance with the
Ottawa Convention on Landmines. Removing landmines
has now become a global agenda item, requiring global
action. In both conflict and post-conflict situations, mine
clearance is an urgent precondition for securing the
minimum safety of civilians. As a donor of the Mine
Action Support Group, the Republic of Korea has, since
1996, actively participated in demining activities in
Cambodia, Tajikistan and Ethiopia. We will continue to
make such contributions in the future.

Fourthly, we would like to echo the primary
importance of maintaining the civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps. We have witnessed the
ramifications of the failure to do so in some conflict
situations, most notably in the Great Lakes region of
Africa. We fully support a number of practical suggestions
made by the Secretary-General, in particular the deployment
of international military observers and the relocation of
camps to a safe area away from war zones. My delegation
also appreciates the ongoing efforts made by Mrs. Ogata
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to deal with this problem through the
elaboration of three tiered options, namely, soft,
intermediate and hard.

Last but not least, we share the view of the Secretary-
General that it is important to establish an agreed
mechanism and timetable for follow-up and review of the
report. The primary responsibility of the Security Council
resides in promoting the political settlement of regional
conflicts in such a way as not to unjustly prolong civilian
suffering. My delegation hopes that following the Council's
adoption of the draft resolution today, the implementation
of concrete recommendations will be tenaciously pursued,
closely monitored and periodically reviewed in close
collaboration with other United Nations organs and
agencies and, of course, with the full support of the entire
United Nations membership.

Let me conclude by reiterating my delegation's hope
that the Security Council will continue to expand its
involvement in the area of protection of civilians and all
displaced persons in conflict situations in the months to
come. For its part, the Republic of Korea will continue to
be actively involved in and to make contributions to this
process.

