The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat and Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for
the detailed information provided regarding
developments in Timor-Leste. We agree with the major
conclusions of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2004/669).

In recent months, the authorities of Timor-Leste,
along with the active assistance of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), have
been able to achieve tangible progress towards further
developing a legislative foundation and strengthening
the basic institutions of the new Timorese State. It is
important that the process to establish genuine
sovereignty for this country has been consistent.

Nevertheless, Timor-Leste continues to face such
drastic problems as a lack of resources and a shortage
of skilled trained personnel, particularly in the
executive branch and the law enforcement and judicial
areas. With the support of the United Nations and the
international community, the people of Timor-Leste
still have a great deal to do in order to achieve genuine
self-sufficiency ahead of next year's conclusion of
UNMISET's mandate.

We are pleased that the domestic political
situation in Timor-Leste has continued to be generally
stable. On the whole, the preparatory process for local
elections is being successfully carried out. Those
elections will be very significant, as they will be the
first expression of popular will since the country
gained its independence. We call on all of the country's
political actors to participate constructively in the
elections.

We welcome the continued development of
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We call
upon both countries to engage in a further
intensification of bilateral cooperation to speedily
resolve the outstanding an unregulated issues,
including the important problem of the demarcation
and settlement of the common border.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
gratitude to all of the personnel of the United Nations
Mission for their active and important work in carrying
out the mandate given by the Security Council for this
operation.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council. I give the floor to the representative
of Timor-Leste.

