Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
report (S/2015/841, annex). The twentieth anniversary
of the General Framework for Peace in Bosnia and

Herzegovina is an opportunity to encourage joint
work in the search for a united, stable Bosnia and
Herzegovina, where all communities of the country
can live together in peace. National integration and
reconciliation call for a shared vision for the country.
For that reason, we welcome the adoption of the
reform agenda for Bosnia and Herzegovina for 2015-
2018, which the Parliamentary Assembly adopted on
17 September.

We call once again for leaders to refrain from
negative rhetoric, which invariably exacerbates
inter-community violence, undermines cohesion,
blocks national reconciliation and delays the country's
progress. Civil society plays a key role in fostering
understanding and dialogue to pave the way to
peacebuilding.

We support Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts to
overcome its past, and we acknowledge the progress
made by the Supervisory Board for the Implementation
of the War Crimes Prosecution Strategy in tackling
the pending cases. We also commend the efforts of the
Office of the High Representative in support of the
authorities for recognition and compensation to the
victims of sexual violence. However, efforts must be
made to continue supporting the return and reintegration
of refugees and internally displaced persons, as well
as the exhumation, identification and restitution of the
remains of the disappeared. Those are indispensable
conditions for achieving national reconciliation. We
reiterate the firm commitment that our country has had
from the beginning to a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with institutions that work in the service of its people.

The presence of the multinational European
Union military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR ALTHEA) and the NATO headquarters in
Sarajevo remain the guarantors of the country's social
and political stability. That is why we have actively
participated in the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea for more than 10 years and
why we have supported the renewal of its presence in
the country for 12 months. Similarly, we call on the
international community to remain committed to the
full implementation of the Dayton Accords of 1995.
We hope that all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to cooperate with the Office of the
High Representative until the end of its mandate, in
accordance with the Peace Agreement.

Finally, I wish to reiterate our support for the Office

of the High Representative, which should continue to

receive the political, financial and logistical support
needed for the fulfilment of its important functions.

