Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for introducing the report (S/2011/43) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation in today's Security Council
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremic', and we share his assessments.

We had hoped for a more objective statement by
Mrs. Citaku.

Russia supports the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia. In our view, it is
undeniable that resolution 1244 (1999) remains in full
effect and continues to be binding on all parties as the
international legal basis for a Kosovo settlement and
for ensuring security in the province. Our position of
non-recognition of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence has not changed.

We believe that it is important for the
stakeholders to resume dialogue so as to reach a
settlement of the Kosovo issue. In that connection, the
unilateral actions of Pristina and the international
presence in northern Kosovo are unacceptable. Those
actions are aimed at changing realities on the ground in
order to influence the modalities and outcome of the
upcoming dialogue.

Russia does not consider the Kosovo Assembly
elections held on 12 December 2010 to be legitimate,
as they were organized by the authorities of the self-
proclaimed Republic of Kosovo and were not based on
a decision by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as required by resolution 1244
(1999).

We cannot but take into account the fact that from
the beginning, international monitoring organizations
declined to certify the elections. Participation by the
Serb community in the elections was limited. In
northern Kosovo, Serbs essentially boycotted the event.
Observers noted serious violations during the election
process, including tampering with the electoral lists,
the use of counterfeit ballots, multiple votes cast by the
same people and bribery of voters. Also worrisome are
the results achieved at the polls by radical Kosovo
Albanian parties, in particular the Self-Determination
Movement, which advocates for the creation of a
greater Albania.

The security situation in the province remains
tense, owing primarily to growing tendencies among
Kosovo Albanians towards independent and largely
provocative actions. We are concerned at the fact that
the self-proclaimed authorities in the province, as
noted in the Secretary-General's report, are carrying
out infrastructure projects without coordinating with

ll-23603
UNMIK, and encouraging Kosovo Albanians to
undertake unregulated and unilateral returns to their
previous places of residence without appropriate legal
authorization. Such actions could seriously exacerbate
the inter-ethnic situation in northern Kosovo.

We share the concern of the Serb authorities and
the Serbian Orthodox Church at the situation that has
developed in connection with the handover by the
NATO Kosovo Force of the duty of protecting the
province's most significant Serbian cultural and
religious heritage sites to the Kosovo Police. We
believe that those actions could create additional
tensions over security in Kosovo, especially because
further incidents of robbery and vandalism at Serbian
holy sites occurred during the reporting period.

The situation of the return to Kosovo of internally
displaced persons, including the Serb population,
remains unsatisfactory, for many reasons. One of the
main reasons is that returnees have no assurance of
their own security. We continue to believe that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, on the basis of its mandate from the Security
Council, should play the most active role possible in
assisting with the Kosovo settlement process.

UNMIK must also fully carry out its duties in
respect of the external representation of Kosovo in
regional and international organizations and
mechanisms.

Attempts to discredit UNMIK in the Kosovar
media continue to be unacceptable. The campaign
against United Nations staff threatens the security of
international personnel and prevents them from
fulfilling their duties.

We are deeply alarmed by the information in the
Secretary-General's report regarding the investigations
into allegations of inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo, as
reported by Special Rapporteur Dick Marty, a member
of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights
of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe. The report not only is timely, but also has
considerable moral and humanitarian significance. We
welcome the adoption of a resolution by the
Parliamentary Assembly in support of investigating the
incidents mentioned in the document.

Carrying out such a detailed and comprehensive
investigation is the duty of the international community.

ll-23603
We agree with the arguments put forward by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia with regard to
that, and support the establishment by the Security
Council of a special international investigation
mechanism accountable to the United Nations.

Such an investigation format is necessary since
those activities could go far beyond the region, and
given the extremely unsatisfactory situation in Kosovo
with regard to witness protection, as mentioned in
Mr. Gardetto's report to the Council of Europe.
According to data contained in the report, in Kosovo,
"there is a real threat of retaliation and key witnesses
being eliminated". In essence, the only real way to
protect witnesses and their relatives is by relocating
them outside Kosovo.

It continues to be necessary for the Security
Council to play a leading role in the settlement of
Kosovo, as it remains the guarantor of compliance
with international law, the United Nations Charter and
the Council's own decisions.

