Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like first to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his briefing on the situation in Kosovo,
Serbia and Montenegro.

The large-scale violent inter-ethnic conflict that
took place in Kosovo last month seriously undermines
the peace process in Kosovo and the international
community's efforts there. Although the situation has
eased somewhat, it remains extremely precarious. We
deplore the violent acts against Kosovo Serbs and the
destruction of religious and cultural facilities described
by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno in his briefing.

We urge the parties concerned to discover the
truth about those events as soon as possible and to
bring the perpetrators to justice. We hope that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government will adopt
further measures to strengthen the rule of law, improve
public order, ensure the safety of all ethnic
communities, especially minorities, and guarantee the
right of return and freedom of movement. We call on
the parties concerned also to continue their
commitment to ethnic reconciliation in order to create
conditions for the establishment of a multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo.

We have always maintained that the solution to
the Kosovo problem should be based on resolution
1244 (1999) and the principle of "standards before
status". That is the common understanding of the entire
international community as well. We note that UNMIK
has formulated the Kosovo Standards Implementation
Plan and intends to revise it further. We hope the Plan
will help Kosovo achieve substantial progress in the
political, economic and social fields.

I stress once again that political dialogue is the
only right way to solve the Kosovo problem. Violence
will not help to find a solution to the problem and is in
no one's interest. We hope that Belgrade and Pristina
will resume their dialogue as soon as possible and
resolve their differences through patient negotiations.

