Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, for holding this open thematic debate, the
second such meeting convened by the Security Council
under your presidency. It reflects your active and
enthusiastic approach to leading the Council.

I also wish to thank my colleague Ambassador
Peter Burian, the Permanent Representative of
Slovakia to the United Nations and Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), for his strenuous efforts at the
head of the Committee. We also wish to convey our
thanks to Mr. Tanaka, Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Pfirter, Director-General of
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, Mr. Zlauvinen , Representative of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and Mr. Schmitz, Director for Compliance and
Facilitation of the World Customs Organization, for
their participation in today's meeting.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) was a
historic landmark in the effort to limit the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, which endanger
human security, and to achieve the goal of preventing
non-State actors from acquiring such weapons and
using them in terrorist acts. The adoption of resolution
1540 (2004) was an additional step in the efforts made
by the Security Council on this serious issue,
especially since the adoption of resolution 1673
(2005). Two years after the adoption of resolution 1540
07-24806

(2004), which was also the period of the mandate of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to that resolution, the Security Council extended the
Committee's mandate for an additional two years by
adopting resolution 1673 (2006), thereby reaffirming
that it continues to attach importance to the work of the
Committee.

The importance of implementing resolution 1540
(2004) is not in question. Nevertheless, three years
after it was adopted, almost one third of the Member
States of the United Nations have yet to submit to the
Committee their reports under the resolution. That is
the case despite the efforts of the Committee to
promote technical cooperation between States with a
View to achieving compliance with the resolution,
including the information and outreach activities on
which the Committee focuses.

Given that the Committee cannot lend direct
assistance to States in implementing the provisions of
the resolution, as well as the fact that the submission of
reports by States is the first step in achieving the aims
of the resolution, we are duty-bound to identify ways
and means to help to fulfil those goals and to arm
ourselves with all available means to help States in that
regard. That would serve to achieve the basic
objectives of the resolution, namely, limiting the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
preventing non-State actors from acquiring them.
Undoubtedly, international organizations concerned
with the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004), some
representatives of which are participating in this
meeting, have the resources to play an effective role in
this connection. That is especially the case given that
some of those organizations are actually carrying out
activities in the areas intended to improve national
implementation of the obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and conventions
pertaining to nuclear safety and security.

It is a well-known fact that resolution 1673
(2006) called upon the 1540 Committee to explore -
together with States and international, regional and
subregional organizations - ways of exchanging
experiences and lessons learned in the areas covered by
resolution 1540 (2004), as well as the availability of
programmes to facilitate the implementation of the
resolution. This open meeting therefore provides an
opportunity for Member States, the Organisation for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the International
07-24806

Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant international
organizations to exchange experiences and lessons
learned and address possible ways to promote
cooperation between international organizations and
the Security Council as regards efforts aimed at the
comprehensive implementation of the resolution. It is
also an opportunity to encourage States to make use of
assistance programmes provided by international
organizations, including training and counselling for
national governmental bodies concerned with the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
assistance in the drafting of the necessary national
legislation.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
support for the draft presidential statement on
cooperation with international organizations in the
implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006), which the President's delegation kindly
prepared in the course of the consultations it held on
the language of the statement. We look forward to its
adoption at the conclusion of this meeting.

