Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for including
the issue of post-conflict peacebuilding on the agenda
of the Security Council during your presidency. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul
Momen of Bangladesh and Ambassador Ranko Vilovie
of Croatia for their statements.

The Organization, through regular debates on post-
conflict peacebuilding, provides the members of the
Council with the opportunity to assess the work being
done on the ground by the Peacebuilding Commission,
the country-specific configurations and the countries
on its agenda. The importance of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be measured by its
real contribution to the process of reconstruction and
reconciliation and the establishment of the rule of law.
Those actions are carried out over the long term, and
the results are often not quantifiable in the short term.

Taking into account the issues that fall within
the comprehensive framework of reconstruction and
development calls for the participation of as broad a
group as possible of different actors, both national and
international, in particular the United Nations system,
in the identification of priorities. It is important that we
place greater emphasis on such an approach.

My delegation welcomes the fact that, in recent
years, collaboration with and listening to the main
beneficiaries have helped advance the agenda of the
United Nations in the field of peacebuilding. The credit
for that result is due to the Commission itself and the
peacebuilding country teams.

Togo believes that post-conflict peacebuilding
remains, first and foremost, the responsibility of the
State concerned. It goes without saying that the State's
role is a determing factor in ensuring the success of that
endeavour, because it is up to that country to define the
priorities and establish a framework for cooperation and
partnership with the support of national, international
and regional actors.

However, it seems that, in defining priorities,
there is a problem of non-inclusiveness - of not
taking into account the interests of various parts of
the population. For example, the identification of the
needs of vulnerable groups, in particular those of
women and children, is crucial in the peacebuilding
process. Women are the main victims of conflicts, so
it is fitting that they should be involved in all phases
of the peacebuilding process. Moreover, an inclusive
approach that takes into account all needs will facilitate
the participation of all actors and will later strengthen
national ownership of the actions undertaken within the
peacebuilding framework.

Another aspect relates to the assistance that should
be made available to post-conflict States, which are still
fragile, whatever their size and economic potential. It is
therefore important that States in the region, financial
institutions and the international community as a whole
provide their support to those countries and help them
to establish frameworks for sustainable cooperation and
partnerships, which, in our opinion, are what determine
the success of peacebuilding. In most cases, the interest
attached to a country, especially one emerging from
conflict, is determined by the wealth of its land and
not really by the need to ensure that it does not fall into
another conflict as a result ofa lack of adequate support.
Since the creation of the Commission, however, we
are happy to see that the Commission is increasingly
working to reverse that kind of tendency. That is why we
believe that the African Solidarity Initiative, launched
by the African Union on 13 July 2012, which aims to
encourage and motivate African States to support the
efforts of reconstruction and development in countries
emerging from conflict and to strengthen their capacity
to that end, should be supported.

Another factor in the success of any peacebuilding
process is the coordination of actions. Given that
many institutions are involved in the peacebuilding
process, we must ensure that a framework is in place
to coordinate all the actions undertaken, so as to
avoid duplication and wasting resources and energy.
That coordination should make it possible to create
frameworks for exchanging experiences in order to
adopt actions that have been successful and consider
how the implementation of those actions can be adapted
to other countries that find themselves in similar
situations. We note with satisfaction that the report
(S/2013/63) under review shares that view. It is essential
that the Security Council provide its support in order
to implement the recommendations contained in the
report.

How long a post-conflict country remains on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission depends on
the progress achieved on the ground. In most cases, the
countries concerned and the institutions that support
them take time to establish the transitional mechanisms
between peacebuilding and the country's assumption
of control over its situation. My country believes that
those kinds of mechanisms should be established at the
beginning of the process.

Togo continues to believe that the various tasks
assigned to the Peacebuilding Commission by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council demonstrate the
commitment of those bodies to providing assistance
to countries emerging from conflict. They must act
in a spirit of cooperation and complementarity. The
international community should continue to sustainably
support the Commission in its efforts to promote peace
and security in post-conflict countries with a view
to ensuring that the country does not slip back into
violence.

In conclusion, my country would like to take the
opportunity of this debate to express its deep gratitude
to the Peacebuilding Commission for the satisfactory
results achieved in some countries, such as Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Burundi. Togo commends the efforts
of the countries, organizations and institutions that
support the daily work of the Commission and the
country configurations.

