Mr. Asumu Abeme (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to commend Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, for his comprehensive and excellent
briefing to the Security Council, which has once
again given us detailed information on the current
evolution of peacekeeping operations through the
reforms introduced by the Secretary-General, aimed at
comprehensive improvement and structural innovation
with regard to equipment and human capabilities, with
a view to dealing with new challenges in an agile,
effective and coherent manner.

I would also like to express our appreciation for the
commendable work of Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona,
Adviser to the Mayor of the Third Arrondissement of
Bangui, Ms. Mary Gahonzire, Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei, Mr. Issoufou Yacouba, Police Commissioner
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and Mr. Awale
Abdounasir, Police Commissioner ofthe United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also thank the presidency of
the United Kingdom for including this important item
on the agenda of its presidency. It is an opportunity for
all of us to discuss and analyse the development and
ongoing progress of peacekeeping operations in the
wake of the Secretary-General's reforms.

As we well know, police in peacekeeping operations
are one of the most effective tools that the United
Nations has for ensuring, maintaining and building
peace. To that end, it is clear that United Nations police
peacekeepers must have the best possible training and
equipment and the highest standards of personal conduct
considering the level of their responsibilities. At the
global level, my Government therefore commends the
work of the police in peacekeeping missions in building
and strengthening peace at every stage of a conflict,
because we understand that the police embody and
sustain people's survival in conflicts by monitoring,
applying, protecting and supporting the law, working
as they do alongside the civilian population and facing
the same challenges on the front lines in carrying out
their job of ensuring citizens' security. For that, police
services must be effective, efficient, representative,
receptive and responsible so that they can serve and
protect populations.

The Action for Peacekeeping initiative strengthens
peacekeeping by mobilizing collective action by
peacekeeping actors, including all States Members
of the United Nations, the Security Council, the
General Assembly, financial contributors, troop-
and police-contributing countries, host countries,
intergovernmental, regional and subregional
organizations, civil society and the Secretary-General
ofthe United Nations. In that context, Equatorial Guinea
appreciates all the reforms and actions that have been
undertaken by the Secretary-General, as well as the
improvements that have been made in the balance of the
capacities of peacekeeping operations. That represents
a successful transformation with considerable progress
in terms of political solutions to conflicts and in
improving the political impact of peacekeeping.

In the spirit of this meeting, we have some
questions. Some of them have already been brought
up by a number of other speakers, so I will ask those
that no one has posed yet. First, generally speaking,
what are the obstacles to women's full integration
into peacekeeping operations? Have there been any
assessments made of the obstacles that they face in
different geographical areas? Secondly, what is the
impact of peacekeeping operations on the ground in the
wake of the new changes made through the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative?

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea remains firmly
committed to continuing its support for all peace
initiatives, from prevention to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding at every level. We also pay tribute
to the brave men and women who fight every day in
peacekeeping missions in order to ensure international
peace and security, while also securing and saving the
lives of others.

