Slovakia aligns itself with the statement of the European Union (see annex 25) and would like to present some additional remarks in its national capacity. We welcome the participation of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the debate, and we express our appreciation for her briefing, as well as the briefings by Special Representative Shearer and Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga. Human rights are not only one of the three pillars of the United Nations work but also a fundamental pillar of all peacekeeping operations. While primarily intervening to seek a peaceful settlement in troubled areas, members of United Nations peacekeeping missions also have to ensure the protection and promotion of human rights. In 2018, the Secretary-General announced the launch of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, underlining the clear role of human rights in peacekeeping efforts. Slovakia endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. The focus on the human rights aspect is one the main optics in our national implementation of that initiative, which serves as a blueprint for the United Nations peacekeeping agenda and helps to overcome the critical challenges that peacekeeping faces today. Human rights and international humanitarian law are an integral part of the regular and predeployment training of the Slovak Armed Forces, which without a doubt helps to fulfil humanitarian and human rights tasks where those are a part of the mandate of the peacekeeping mission. As we see a rising trend in including human rights tasks in the mandates of the Security Council and substantive human rights capacities or components in missions, appropriate training becomes inevitable for all troops and should therefore be made mandatory. The United Nations should not replace host countries in their primary responsibility to promote and protect human rights, although it has an obligation to become involved in case of absence of such conduct by the host country. The adequate training of host country authorities helps to bridge the gap and is necessary for good cooperation with the human rights capacities of peacekeeping missions. The failure of peacekeeping missions to consistently and effectively respond in cases of gross human rights violations and to anticipate the threat of atrocity crimes highlights the need to develop the capacity of peacekeeping personnel to conduct threat assessments and improve monitoring mechanisms. The effective monitoring of violations of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law should make clear the gravity and scale of threats to particular groups of civilians and provide information on perpetrators. Monitoring should also include the analysis of historical trends and patterns in relation to targeted populations. Improved coordination between human rights officers and military and police personnel can enable missions to use different types of expertise in order to maximize their mission's impact with regard to the protection of civilians. We are convinced that the protection and promotion of human rights should be key functions of peacekeeping operations. The human rights aspects of these operations have immense potential for enhancing conflict resolution through peaceful means.
