Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We very much appreciate and take
note of the briefing by the Director of Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging.

We once again express our dismay that the people
of Syria continues to live under siege and in violence,
primarily the most vulnerable population, children, who
in some cases have known only that reality their whole
lives. We regret that, at the time of the presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/777), as a
result of the conflict approximately 1.48 million people
were still living in hard-to-reach areas, and that among
the more than 6 million internally displaced persons
2.6 million are children. We also regret that in July
alone, in the south-west of Syria, up to 325,000 were
displaced, thereby increasing the number of displaced
persons of this already vulnerable population.

In that regard, we renew our appeal to the relevant
parties and call for the cessation of hostilities in the
context of resolution 2401 (2018). Any increase in
tensions must be prevented so as not to cause greater
instability in the region. We therefore reiterate our
concern and alarm about what may happen not only
in Aleppo province, but particularly in Idlib, since
any use of force in that region can lead to, apart from
mass population displacement, a greater humanitarian
catastrophe. We therefore draw attention to the fact
that, in the month of July alone, the population in Idlib
increased to 4.2 million people.
It is essential to avoid any kind of tension or
escalation of violence in order to prevent a greater
tragedy. To that end, the full implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018) is crucial. In that regard, we
highlight the various initiatives that made it possible
to reach local agreements that facilitated not only
the delivery of humanitarian assistance but also the
evacuation ofpeople in need, such as the populations of
Fo'ah and Kafraya on 16 July.

Likewise, we highlight the delivery of supplies
by France, which were transported to Syria with the
support of the Russian Federation. That example should
be repeated if we hope to reach the 13.1 million people
who need assistance throughout Syrian territory. We
are convinced that dialogue and cooperation are more
effective than the use of violence.

We once again condemn any kind of indiscriminate
attack on civilian installations. We call on the parties
to respect their obligations under international law
and international humanitarian law in order to ensure
the protection of civilians, hospitals and educational
facilities and not make such civilian infrastructure the
target of their attacks, but particularly to have regard
for and to protect medical and humanitarian personnel.
We believe that only respect for international law and
international humanitarian law will make it possible
achieve a gradual sustainable peace in Syria.

We pay heartfelt tribute to humanitarian and medical
personnel, whose tireless work, including risking their
own lives, has enabled the much-needed humanitarian
access. We urge the various humanitarian agencies not
to stop such assistance, since, thanks to them, it has
been possible to reach more than 3.3 million people
with food and 1 million people with water, sanitation
and hygiene services and supplies. In that regard,
we emphasize that, in the month of July alone, more
than 188,000 children and mothers received primary
health-care and immunization services, while more
than 193,000 children and nursing mothers received
nutritional supplements and services. However, we
particularly emphasize that it has been possible to
provide protection and psychosocial support services to
more than 209,000 children.

That is why we reiterate the need for cooperation
on the part of the Syrian Government so that, working
in a more coordinated and active way with the various
United Nations agencies and their representatives,
such assistance can be increased. That also urgently
requires visa approvals, as well as authorization for the
entry of convoys. We therefore highlight the dispatch
of at least four cross-border convoys during the month
of July. We urge that the delivery of humanitarian
assistance through such inter-agency humanitarian
convoys continue.

We insist on the need to ensure the clearing of
explosive remnants of war throughout the territory and
populated areas, in particular in Raqqa city. We believe
that to be an urgent and essential task, not only since
they threaten humanitarian activities but also because
the necessary measures must be taken to prevent
fatalities among medical staff, humanitarian workers
and, in particular, civilians returning to their cities of
origin. In that regard, we recall the fact that any return
must be voluntary, unhindered, in full dignity and in
safe conditions.

Finally, we reiterate that the only way to resolve the
conflict is through an inclusive, negotiated and agreed
political process, led by and for the Syrian people and
which facilitates a peaceful solution.

