Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The
Togolese delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his timely initiative to dispatch an assessment mission
on the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region.
It welcomes the report (S/2012/42) of the mission that
Mr. Lynn Pascoe has just presented. The inter-agency
composition of the mission demonstrates the importance
that the United Nations attaches to the topic under
consideration in the context of regional and
international peace and security.

Over the past two decades, the once stable Sahel
region has become an area where insecurity is rife
owing to acts of terrorism and trafficking in drugs,
weapons, goods and humans - in short, all the
elements of organized crime. Since the region borders
West Africa, the scourge has rapidly spread there.
While the leaders of the region took bold measures to
combat that scourge, the Libyan crisis arose and
exacerbated the situation. The true impact of that crisis
has been clearly established by the assessment team,

since it identified several sectors that have suffered,
such as the political, security, humanitarian and
development spheres. In short, all the foundations of
the State have been affected.

In addition to the foregoing issues are the already
chronic and recurrent problems of the region, such as
drought, famine and malnutrition. The Libyan crisis
has therefore exacerbated the region's problems. The
return of migrant workers to their countries and
provinces of origin completely impoverished, people
fleeing the fighting, refugees in neighbouring countries
and the freer movement of all types of weapons in the
region are new challenges now facing the Sahel
countries and the entire region.

One such challenge remaining is the population
growth of countries, which has a direct consequence on
housing, schooling and the availability of farmland. To
that, one can add the terrorist acts of the Organization
of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram,
as well as increased transnational organized crime.
Together, those challenges put political pressure on
Governments and have a direct and dangerous impact
on the peace, security and stability in the countries
concerned.

In the View of the delegation of Togo, all those
issues require prompt action to prevent the Sahel region
from sinking into complete insecurity, which would be
very damaging to its development. In that regard, the
recommendations made by the assessment team to
prevent the spread of conflicts, the destabilization of
States and worsening humanitarian problems deserve
close attention. In that regard, the international
community should provide economic and financial
support to the countries of the region and help them to
develop economic and social reintegration programmes.

It is generally recognized that when States face
serious insecurity issues, respect for human rights takes
second place. The efforts of the United Nations should
also address the human rights component and urge
Governments to fully respect such rights in combating
insecurity and terrorism.

The States of the region are making great
individual efforts to deal with the situation.
Strengthening the capacity of security personnel,
increasing border controls and other targeted measures
are part of that committed struggle. However, Togo
believes that regional and international cooperation
should be one of the effective tools for combating the
situation. The ease with which criminals and other
highway bandits communicate and move from one
country to another requires the establishment of
multifaceted cooperation in order to make it possible
for the various initiatives undertaken to achieve the
anticipated goals.

To that end, my country welcomes the ongoing
cooperation among the Economic Community of West
African States, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa in the context of combating those new
threats to peace and security in the region.

By acting together, the international community
can overcome organized crime in the Sahel. Togo
firmly believes that the Security Council should play a
decisive role to that end in the coming months. Togo
also supports the draft press statement that the French
delegation has proposed to the Council.

