Mr. Hume (United States of America): I would
like to take this opportunity first of all to commend
Ambassador Valdivieso for the critical leadership he
has provided to the Council's sanctions Committee. We
rely on him for his leadership and expertise. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Menkerios and
congratulate him and his Committee of Experts on the
extraordinary work that they have been able to do in a
very short period of time. They have given us a
significant and substantive report that merits our full
consideration.

The challenges and threats presented by
Afghanistan are immense and multifaceted. The
Council has addressed these issues many times and will
have to continue to do so. Today we are here to focus
on the report of the Committee of Experts on how to
monitor the arms embargo and the closure of terrorist
training camps that was demanded in Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000).

This Council has stated repeatedly that the
Taliban must cease its support for terrorism. We have
taken an unambiguous stand in our resolutions. We are
prepared to back up words with action - primarily
through implementing an effective arms embargo
against the Taliban.

Now this Committee of Experts has informed us
that for our resolutions to have an impact we need to
establish a mechanism to monitor compliance. The
United States agrees with this recommendation and
would support a resolution to establish such a
mechanism. We support the conclusion of the
Committee of Experts that the proposed monitoring
mechanism should augment the ability and efforts of
Afghanistan's neighbouring States to enforce the
Council's resolutions, especially to cut off the flow of
weapons and to close down the terrorist training camps.
I would like here to note the cooperation that each of
Afghanistan's neighbours provided to the work of the
Committee of Experts.

The mechanism will be useful in providing
information and assisting countries bordering Taliban-
controlled areas of Afghanistan so that they can
improve the national enforcement of each nation's
international obligations under resolution 1333 (2000).
The mechanism should also provide accurate
information to the sanctions Committee so that
suspected violators can be named and shamed. We
believe this action should also serve as a deterrent.

The mechanism, as we see it, should be put
together carefully. It cannot replace the work that has
to be done by the thousands of border police, customs
agents and other national officials responsible for
compliance with the arms embargo. Nor should it seek
to duplicate the efforts of other agencies such as the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
(UNDCP), Interpol and the Wassenaar Arrangement.

We see this mechanism as a critical means to
assist Ambassador Valdivieso with his work as
Chairman of the sanctions Committee. Therefore, we
agree with the comment just made that the monitoring
mechanism should be established in New York, where
it can have close links with the work of the Council,
and that it should have the capacity to have some staff
in the field.

Although financing for the mechanism needs to
be discussed, the United States favours the immediate
establishment of a trust fund through which the
mechanism, whatever its exact final form, would be
financed. The United States Government is in the
process of identifying resources that will allow it to
make a substantial contribution to a trust fund, so that
an effective monitoring mechanism can be established
as soon as possible.

Finally, the United States congratulates
Ambassador Menkerios for his leadership and his
Expert Committee's invaluable contribution. We also
thank Ambassador Valdivieso for his continuing and
critical leadership.

The United States looks forward to working with
all present to establish an effective monitoring
mechanism and to adopt a draft resolution later this
month to put this into effect.

