Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing. On behalf
of the United States, I express our sincere gratitude to
him for his four and a half years of service as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. We greatly
appreciate the tireless effort that he has put into that
work and his efforts to bring peace and stability to
Syria. We wish him all the best. The United States also
looks forward to maintaining a close and constructive
relationship with his successor, Mr. Geir Pedersen, as
he assumes his role as Special Envoy.

The United States remains committed to the
permanent destruction of Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham and other terrorist groups in Syria and around the
world. As we have said, we will use all instruments of
our national power to press for a withdrawal of Iranian-
backed forces and, most importantly for today's
meeting, the United States will continue to advance a
peaceful, diplomatic solution to the Syrian crisis in a
way that honours the will of the Syrian people and is
consistent with resolution 2254 (2015). We will continue
to work together with our allies to fight terrorism. The
United States will also work with like-minded States,
the United Nations and the Syrian opposition to seek
a diplomatic end to this conflict. There is only one
internationally agreed road map for achieving those
goals. It is a political solution to the Syrian conflict,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). And the first step
towards the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) is
the creation of a new Syrian constitution.

In January, the Russian Federation, in close
consultation with the United Nations, published the
Sochi declaration. The declaration called for the
creation of a constitutional committee in Geneva,
led by the Special Envoy, as a contribution to
reinvigorating United Nations efforts to implement
resolution 2254 (2015), which had stalled from a lack
of genuine participation by the Al-Assad regime. The
Sochi declaration made it clear that the constitutional
committee's 150-person membership would have equal
representation among the regime, the Syrian opposition
and independents, and that its scope of work, schedule
and voting procedures would be determined by the
Special Envoy. In no way was the Syrian regime to
be given a veto over the membership or procedures of
the committee. Russia agreed that the United Nations
would have the authority to manage the committee in
order to receive the imprimatur of legitimacy from
and attention of the Council as a credible Russian
contribution to peace in Syria.

For 11 months, Russia's so-called Sochi initiative
has produced nothing but a stalemate. We are now just
11 days away from the end of the year and are rapidly
approaching the Syrian regime's and Russia's last
chance to follow through on that commitment. In recent
months, the United States, members of the Council
and the small group on Syria have worked tirelessly to
support Special Envoy De Mistura's efforts to launch
a credible and balanced constitutional committee.
The Astana group has failed thus far to convince the
Al-Assad regime to accept the United Nations balanced
list of members for the constitutional committee, which
would have allowed the committee to move forward.
A committee that is not balanced or representative of
the Syrian people, including the opposition, cannot be
considered legitimate.

Progress towards a political solution to the conflict,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), is urgent, given
the situation in Idlib. Idlib's 3 million civilians have
been able to live in relative peace, thanks to Russian
and Turkish efforts to de-escalate the violence and
keep pressure on the regime to not launch an offensive.
However, there are increasing indications of a potential
military escalation in Idlib, despite the fragile ceasefire
held together by the Turkish-Russian creation of a
demilitarized zone. Any military escalation in Idlib
would be reckless and catastrophic for millions of
people and for the stability of Syria's neighbours.

We are at a crossroads that will define the end of
the Syrian conflict. If Russia and the regime do not help
form a legitimate, credible and balanced constitutional
committee before the end of the year, we should all
place that failure squarely at their feet. The United
States is ready, with our allies and partners in the
small group, to focus on supporting United Nations-
led efforts to reinvigorate a political process. We also
would work to further isolate the regime diplomatically
and economically. Let me be clear - there will be no
reconstruction money. There will be no legitimacy for
the regime. There will be no facilitation for returns of
refugees. That will not be discussed or even considered
until we get the political process moving. The United
States remains firmly committed to the blueprint for
a political solution to the Syrian conflict, agreed by
resolution 2254 (2015), in order to achieve peace and
stability in Syria. We look forward to working with the
United Nations and with the incoming Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen to create a permanent and peaceful end
to the conflict.

