Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you,
Mr. President. At the outset, I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for
his briefing this morning and, through him, to
commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their tireless efforts in
advancing the protection of civilians. I would also like
to commend the Secretary-General for his latest
comprehensive report (S/2009/277) on this very serious
subject. The breadth of the report is striking and serves
to remind us of the challenges we need to overcome if
we are really serious about affording protection to
civilians.

Given the constraints of time, it is not possible,
obviously, to do justice to the report in its entirety;
rather, I will focus my remarks on three areas of
particular importance for Australia.

First, the question of humanitarian access remains
a critical challenge for the Council and for Member
States. It is vital that people in need have access to
humanitarian assistance. While we may all agree on
that broad principle, in practice constraints on access
deprive millions of vulnerable people of life-saving
assistance. The annex to the Secretary-General's report
helpfully seeks to unpack this issue, highlighting the
key types of constraints that are faced and identifying
practical measures that need to be taken to overcome
them.

As emphasized by the Secretary-General,
Member States need to increase their efforts to address
these constraints to access. In particular, there is a clear
need for action to streamline bureaucratic procedures
to facilitate humanitarian assistance. While we
welcome the efforts of many States in that regard, there
remain too many instances where onerous bureaucratic
restrictions jeopardize timely responses and add to the
cost and reduce the effectiveness of humanitarian
operations.

Furthermore, all parties to a conflict must respect
international humanitarian law and protect
humanitarian personnel, assets and facilities. To this
end, it is important for all parties, including non-State
actors, to cooperate with humanitarian organizations to
establish arrangements that allow for the safe passage
of humanitarian workers and relief items to affected
populations.

We also support increased efforts to build
partnerships and strengthen coordination between
affected States, regional organizations, the United
Nations system, the Red Cross movement, and the
broader international humanitarian community. Strong
partnerships built on trust and mutual respect are
clearly essential to ensuring access.

The second issue I would like to touch on is the
inclusion of protection of civilians tasks in
peacekeeping mandates. The will to mandate for the
protection of civilians has a growing consensus, as
demonstrated by the recognition of such mandates in
the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations for the first time earlier this year.
Nevertheless, there is a commonly identified gap
between the strategic and operational levels in United
Nations protection of civilians mandates. The absence
of guidelines and training for peacekeepers on
protection tasks contributes to the ineffective
implementation of mandates. We would encourage the
development of such guidelines and training to assist
mission personnel in understanding how to effectively
implement their mandates. We would also encourage
closer cooperation between the Security Council, the

Secretariat, and troop- and police-contributing
countries in developing and implementing realistic
mandates.

The third point I would like to touch on is that the
Council needs to be more willing to consider country
situations in which civilians are at risk. The experience
of the past 10 years has demonstrated that the Council
accepts its responsibility to address the protection
needs of civilians in internal conflicts. We welcome the
Council's attention to the needs of civilians in such
conflicts, from Afghanistan to the Sudan, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Timor-Leste.

However, there is clearly a need for greater
consistency in the Council's approach. Too often still,
the Council appears unwilling to address the plight of
civilians in many internal armed conflicts,
notwithstanding the obvious destabilizing effects and
regional consequences of such conflicts. In failing to
do so, the Council falls short of its obligations under
the Charter.

The Council does not want for policy options in
addressing such threats. Chapters VI, VII and VIII of
the Charter, as demonstrated by past Council practice,
provide the Council with adequate tools to make a
difference, including the condemnation of violations of
international humanitarian law, targeted measures such
as sanctions, the utilization of international criminal
justice mechanisms to end impunity, and the
authorization of the use of force. What is lacking at
times, as we know, is the political resolve of the
Council to use those tools to protect civilians and of
the broader membership to support such Council
action.

Australia looks forward to continuing to work
with the Council, other Member States and the
Secretariat in advancing our collective consideration of
these important issues.

