Mr. Dieng: I would first like to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting me to brief the Security
Council on my Visit to South Sudan last week. As the
Council may know, I decided to go because of growing
concern about recent developments there, including
reports of Violence targeting multiple ethnic groups that
is taking place against the background of a breakdown
in the political process and stalled implementation of
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan. The purpose of my visit
was to assess the situation from the perspective of my
mandate in order to better understand the landscape of
ethnically fuelled violence, including hate speech and
incitement to violence, and the risk that it could lead to
further atrocity crimes, including genocide.

In the course of the week, I met with a variety of
stakeholders, including religious leaders and community
members. I also Visited a protection-of-civilians site
in Juba and travelled to the town of Yei in Yei River
state to meet with members of the community and
Government. Yei, which until recently had been spared
the violence seen in other areas, has now been identified
as a conflict hotspot, with escalating Violence against
multiple tribal groups in Yei and the State of Central
Equatoria ofwhich Yei River is a part. The perpetrators
of the Violence are varied and reportedly include the
Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), the Sudan
People's Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO),
unidentified armed groups, militias and bandits.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Laj for the excellent support
provided by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) for my visit, and to express my appreciation
to the Transitional Government of National Unity for
facilitating the visit and for its cooperation while I was
there. That said, however, as I reported last week, I was
dismayed that what I saw and heard in South Sudan
confirmed my concerns about the fact that there is a
strong risk of violence escalating along ethnic lines,
with the potential for genocide. I do not say that lightly.
As the Secretary-General highlights in his report
(S/2016/950), there are myriad underlying risk factors
that in my assessment provide an environment ripe for
the commission of mass atrocities.

First, in addition to the loss of life and trauma,
the Violence has an ever-increasing economic cost,
both domestically and internationally. It is causing a
drain on much-needed resources for development and
humanitarian assistance. The Government is reportedly
spending half of the national budget on security. There
will be neither growth nor development in South
Sudan if that continues. The economy has stagnated,
inflation is very high and the population is increasingly
desperate. The political and security crisis that resulted
from the violence in July was fresh in the minds of those
with whom I spoke, and many referred to the potential
for a further deterioration of the security situation in
the coming dry season, when movement around the
country will be easier. Reports from the field indicate
the existence of constant security incidents and the
arming, recruitment and training of both the SPLA and
SPLA-IO.

As the Security Council has noted, we have
seen patterns of human-rights violations and abuses
committed mainly by SPLA soldiers, police officers
and members of the National Security Service, as well
as by SPLA-IO and militia groups. Those Violations
have not been addressed. There is widespread impunity
and lack of accountability for violations, including
those committed in the name of counter-insurgency.
Civil society organizations have been directly targeted,
as have human-rights defenders and journalists. Some
have been killed, and many others have fled the country
out of fear for their safety. Many people with whom
I spoke referred to an amorphous and undisciplined
army formed out of what had once been two opposing
forces. They have now splintered into multiple armed
groups, criminal gangs and bandits, over which the
Government is failing to exercise control. Some of the
groups are formed along ethnic lines and are pursuing
their own objectives.

In speaking to people, I heard of tremendous
mistrust between the civilian population and the
military. The people no longer seem to view the
military as their protectors but rather as an entity to be
feared - orjoined as one of the country's few potential
employers. One elder I met summed up the current
ethnic polarization, saying that he could see fear in the
eyes of some and enthusiasm in the eyes of others.

There is a serious, protracted humanitarian crisis
and widespread, prolonged displacement ofpopulations,
both internally and to neighbouring countries. In
some cases, displacement has caused the disruption
of agricultural activities and food insecurity. Despite
that crisis, the Government and non-State armed
groups continue to hinder access to the humanitarian
and human rights community. While aid agencies
continue to deliver assistance to people in need across
the country, at times there is outright obstruction of the
delivery of services and support to people in need.

The scarcity of resources has contributed to
divisions within society. Instead of the development
of a South Sudanese national identity, we are seeing
the extreme polarization of some ethnic groups, which
has increased in certain places since the outbreak of
violence in July and the disintegration of the peace
process. Some groups shared with me their feelings of
betrayal, and a perception that the SPLA is increasingly
ethnically homogenous, composed mostly of Dinka
members, and has been ethnicized as part ofa wider plan
to launch systematic attacks against ethnic Nuer and
multiple tribal groups which make up the Equatorias.
At the same time, there were a number of incidents last
month that specifically targeted Dinkas.
Inflammatory rhetoric, stereotyping and
name-calling have been accompanied by threats,
targeted killings and rape of members of particular
ethnic groups, and by violent attacks against individuals
or communities on the basis of their perceived political
affiliation. Especially worrying was a statement issued
by President Kiir on 19 October, in which he said he
would personally lead military operations against the
armed groups responsible for killings in the Equatorias.

I visited Yei River State, and I was shocked by what
I found. Yei had previously been spared the violence
seen elsewhere but did suffer the consequences of the
violence in July, when the SPLA pursued Rick Machar
and his supporters through the Equatorias into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Recent reports
detail the expulsion of farmers from their land into
the city of Yei. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees reported that 100,000
people were trapped in Yei at the end of September.
Many farmers have lost their homes and belongings,
livestock and land. Property has been looted and
villages have been burned. I heard reports of targeted
killings, assault, maiming, mutilation, rape, and the
barbarous use of machetes to hack families to death.

When I Visited, there was widespread fear among
the people. One person told me in desperation,
"Tonight I don't know what will happen to me". An
elder expressed terror that his community would be
finished. And Yei is just one location among many
that are experiencing that kind of violence. Despite
the challenges it faces, the United Nations system has
been monitoring signs ofincreased conflict potential in
other areas of Central Equatoria, as well as in Western
and Eastern Equatoria, Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Upper
Nile, Unity, and Jonglei. However, there is much that
we do not know.

The media, including social media, are being used
to spread hatred and encourage ethnic polarization,
and letters threatening particular ethnic groups, telling
them to leave, face violence or be eliminated from
specific areas, have surfaced in the past month. I am
particularly worried by the involvement of the youth,
who make up a large percentage of the population and
who are particularly susceptible to divisions within
society. I was also informed by a number of people
that the South Sudanese diaspora has been playing
an influential, negative, role in spreading hatred and
inciting violence.

There is a range of different perpetrators and
Victims, which makes an assessment of the risk of
atrocity crimes in South Sudan more complex. But
the warning signs are there. Throughout my visit,
conversations with all actors confirmed that what began
as a political conflict has transformed into what could
become an outright ethnic war. With the stalling of the
implementation of the peace agreement; the current,
worsening, humanitarian crisis; a stagnating economy
and the proliferation of arms, all of the ingredients exist
for a dangerous escalation of violence. There is both
motivation and the means.

I must emphasize that genocide is a process; it does
not happen overnight. And because it is a process and
one that takes time to prepare, it can be prevented. The
political leadership of South Sudan has the primary
responsibility of protecting its population and must be
held to that responsibility. Action can and must be taken
now to address some of the factors that could provide
fertile ground for genocide.

My intention in delivering this briefing is to provide
impetus for preventive action. We have a collective
responsibility to protect the population of South Sudan
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. Bearing that in mind, it is
highly desirable that the Security Council consider the
following options which, if implemented, could reduce
the risk of atrocity crimes.

First, while I commend the Security Council for its
strong condemnation of ethnically fuelled violence and
hate speech, it should continue to insist on preventing
further incitement to discrimination, hostility, and
hatred that could lead to more violence. The Security
Council should also publicly call for the political
leadership of South Sudan to immediately condemn
and take steps to prevent any act of discrimination,
hostility, and hatred that could constitute incitement
to violence. The Security Council must specifically
request that UNMISS monitor, investigate and report on
all incidents of hate speech and incitement to violence,
and be provided full access by the Government of South
Sudan to do so.

All support should be given to UNMISS to carry
out all the Mission's mandated tasks, in particular,
tasks that relate to the protection of civilians and human
rights monitoring, which could contribute to preventing
future violence. The Government should be pressed
to ensure that freedom of movement is granted to all
United Nations personnel, both civilian and military,
to conduct patrols, investigate and report on incidents,
and conduct community-based conflict prevention and
resolution initiatives.

The Security Council might also consider requesting
that the Panel of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) investigate and
report on individuals, within the country and in the
diaspora, who are inciting Violence, have perpetrated
targeted ethnic killings or are propagating hate speech.
Given the current scenario, it is urgent that the Security
Council impose an arms embargo. The proliferation of
arms is devastating and could have an significant impact.

Similarly, the sanctions regime should not be
limited to a few individuals; freezing assets and
restricting offenders' movements should be imposed
more widely. South Sudan's top officials have benefited
both financially and politically from the war, and could
not maintain the status quo without the free flow of
funds and arms into the country. There is a known
system of international banks, businesses, weapons
traders, and intermediaries that has contributed to the
perpetuation of the conflict through their dealings, and
the Security Council certainly has the power to bring
its influence to bear on the situation.

The Security Council should also continue to
stress the importance of an inclusive political process,
accompanied by a cessation of hostilities. If some
sectors of the population continue to feel excluded
from participation, there is little incentive for them
to pursue peace. Until the formal peace process is
reinstated, there is much that can be done in terms of
facilitating dialogue. What surfaced over and over in
my discussions last week was the presence of long-
standing anger, combined with misconceptions and
preconceived notions. These need to be addressed if
there is to be a change to peace.

All ofthe actors with whom I met stressed that there
was an urgent need to engage in both community and
national level dialogue and I was encouraged by their
eagerness to engage in such processes. Community
and religious leaders, provincial level authorities and
UNMISS colleagues shared experiences of efforts
to promote communication. Such efforts should be
supported by the international community. Once
there is greater stability and redoubling of efforts for
dialogue, I urge the establishment of the commission
of truth, healing and reconciliation by the Government,
foreseen in the peace agreement.
Beyond reconciliation, justice and accountability
were common themes in my discussions with the people
of South Sudan. Even as the conflict becomes more
complex, the effects of the December 2013 outbreak
of violence and subsequent violence linger, and human
rights violations committed during the past few years
have not been adequately documented or accounted
for. I welcome the commitment of the signatories of
the peace agreement to establishing a hybrid court to
prosecute cases of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes, as well as other serious crimes
under international law. It is my sincere hope that the
Council's discussions with national authorities and
with the African Union may move such plans forward.
In the interim, I urge the Security Council to call for
the establishment of an investigation mechanism that
would collect and preserve evidence that could later
provide evidence to national or international courts.
That would help in assessing the full scale of violations
and track patterns in Violence.

Finally, while the State has the primary
responsibility to protect its populations, other States,
regional organizations and the international community
can assist its protection efforts. Indeed, neighbouring
countries have an intrinsic interest in doing so. The
involvement of neighbouring countries in domestic
conflicts with resulting spill-over beyond national
borders has occurred in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Somalia, to name a few. Regional action
needs to be reinvigorated. African leaders must coalesce
around a unified strategy to prevent an escalation of
violence. Given the different regional interests and
allegiances of the political leadership in South Sudan,
any political strategy must be endorsed by all national
actors if it is to succeed. The Security Council should
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union
Peace and Security Council and relevant actors within
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
order to move that process forward.

Last week, I saw all the signs that ethnic hatred and
the targeting of civilians could evolve into genocide if
something is not done now to stop it. I urge the Security
Council and member States of the region to unite and
take action.

