Ms. Mernik (Slovenia): Our delegation thanks the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard Miyet, for his
briefing on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Slovenia, as an outgoing elected member of the
Security Council, is very pleased indeed that after a year
and three months of ongoing armed conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo the Council members
finally agreed to take, and have taken, the first concrete
step in assisting the process of restoring peace in the
country by approving resolution 1279 (1999) on 30
November, which authorizes the United Nations to begin
preparations for the deployment of 500 military observers.

In this connection, the Slovenian delegation wishes
to express once again its appreciation to Mr. Frederick
Chiluba, the President of Zambia, for his work and
efforts, which - through the diplomacy conducted at the
level of African heads of State - resulted in the so-called
Lusaka peace Agreement, which is a first major
contribution towards peace in the country. The non-
violation of its provisions will provide the basis for
further United Nations assistance, which is undoubtedly
needed. The Agreement should be implemented through
effective cooperation with the Organization of African
Unity and its Joint Military Commission.

During his briefing of the Security Council at its
meeting on 21 September 1999, President Chiluba
appealed to the United Nations for generous contributions
and assistance in the normalization of the situation in the
country. He requested the Council to provide support and
to authorize the peacekeeping operation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, an action that can be defined as
one of short-term tasks to be completed in the nearest
future, hopefully.

There are also long-term tasks that will have to be
accomplished. One of them, as mentioned by President
Chiluba on that occasion, is the process of internal
Congolese dialogue, which will be facilitated by the
former President of Botswana and which might need the
adequate support of the Security Council - something
that President Chiluba also requested on the same
occasion at the open briefing in September.

On many previous occasions members of the
Council have spoken of a regional conference to provide
a solid framework for future cooperation in the region and
for the achievement of irreversible, durable peace.
Slovenia believes that the humanitarian needs of the
Congolese people have to be met. The Council's help is
needed in the mobilization of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and internally displaced persons, the facilitation
of their return and the protection of children, in particular
child soldiers, is needed. But, furthermore, the
investigation of the massacres that have taken place in the
recent past is also one of the tasks related to the
protection of human rights and will help in facilitating
long-lasting peace. At a later stage, assistance from the

 

international community as a whole in economic
reconstruction and development will be needed.

Slovenia hopes that in the near future the Security
Council - functioning and working in a new
composition - will be completely successful in finding
solutions to the problems in Africa today, the most
challenging of which is the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

