Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (Spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we thank you for convening today's
ministerial briefing to discuss cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), as well as the concept paper
circulated by your delegation (S/2013/588). We also
appreciate your presence among us here today, Sir.

Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement, in which he gave us a broad vision of the
cooperation established between the two organizations.
Similarly, we express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General of the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation for
the information presented to us on the affinities of the
work of that organization and of the Security Council
in the general area of conflict prevention, including
mediation. We congratulate him on his constructive
management at the head of the organization.
We come from a country and a subregion that
greatly value intraregional cooperation. Our delegation
has therefore always supported the Security Council
partnerships cited in Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The core of such partnerships is
founded on the comparative advantages that each
party brings to the arrangement. The Security Council
represents the highest level of multilateral diplomacy
working to ensure international peace and security. The
regional and subregional organizations, for their part,
are more intimately acquainted with the countries they
are made up of, which makes them strategic partners in
conflict prevention.

The peculiarity of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation is that it is not a regional organization,
since its ranks include countries from various parts
of the world whose common bond lies in a vision and
values that are shared among its partners. It has already
accumulated valuable experience in cooperating
since 1969 with the United Nations throughout our
Organization's various incarnations as an institution,
chiefly through the General Assembly and the Security
Council, as well as in the area of humanitarian
assistance.

We commend its performance in recent years and
at various levels in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and combating terrorism.
Its active participation in situations such as those in
Somalia, Afghanistan, Mali, Myanmar and Darfur
are proof of its invaluable work in pursuit of peace
as a noble ideal, sharing the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We trust that those efforts can
also contribute to finding a solution to the conflicts in
the Middle East, which is the founding reason for the
existence of this Organization.

We believe there is always room to improve the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, so that regardless
of differences of opinion, the spirit whereby this
mechanism was included in the Charter of the United
Nations is not lost. In that context, we feel it is
important to remember that when it comes to conflict
prevention, we should prioritize partnerships with
those regional and subregional organizations that can
rely on a mandate for the maintenance of international
peace and security and that can be identified as crucial
stakeholders in conflict resolution. There is no doubt
that the Organization of Islamic Cooperation falls into
that category.

Finally, from our national perspective as a
multicultural nation, we recognize the valuable and
pertinent role that the OIC has played in helping to
promote respect and intercultural dialogue, within the
framework ofthe Alliance of Civilizations of the United
Nations, in order to combat religious intolerance. Its
worthy contribution is in step with respect for human
rights, which is a high priority of our own foreign
policy.

