Mr. Pamir (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Security Council in a fairly critical period and, as the
representative of our neighbour and close friend,
Bulgaria, we wish you every success in your efforts.
Our warm thanks also go to Ambassador Negroponte,
the representative of the United States, which held the
presidency of the Council during the month of August.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Denmark on
behalf of the European Union. Likewise, we fully
subscribe to the eloquent speech delivered this morning
by Mr. Kofi Annan. The wisdom of his words should
inspire us all.

We are gathered here today after a six-week
period of relative calm in Israel, which was
undermined by the two brutal suicide attacks of last
week on Israelis in Umm el-Fahm and Tel Aviv and by
the bomb planted at a Palestinian school in Hebron. We
extend our deepest condolences to the bereaved
families of the Victims. We are dismayed to see that the
tension in the Middle East grows and the situation in
the Palestinian territories deteriorates as the siege in
and around the compound of the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, continues. All
these remind us of the desperate days of the vicious
cycle of violence.

Turkey strongly and unequivocally condemns all
acts of terror and violence. We reiterate our firm stance
that there is no justification for any such actions under
any pretext. Terror and violence lead nations to
darkness and misery and only help kill the hopes of
their future generations. Fighting terrorism is not only
a sovereign right of States but also a moral obligation
incumbent upon each and every member of the
international community. In this respect, we welcome
the call of President Arafat to the Palestinian people
and to all other parties to halt any violent attacks inside
Israel.

Turkey deeply regrets the morally repugnant
suicide attacks targeting civilians and deplores that
Israel has once again used harsh military measures in
the Palestinian cities, in particular in Ramallah. We are
gravely concerned at the Israeli actions in and around
the Muqata'a, the headquarters of President Arafat,
who is the elected leader of the Palestinian people.
Here, we call upon the Israeli Government to put an
immediate end to reoccupation. We urge the Israeli
Government to stop destruction in the Palestinian
cities, which serves only to aggravate the dire and
strained humanitarian conditions of the civilian
Palestinian population. Indeed, a more forthcoming
attitude from Israel towards its Palestinian counterparts
would brighten political prospects.

In this vein, we call upon the leadership of Israel
to think over the possible consequences that isolating
Mr. Arafat might have on the ongoing Palestinian
reforms in particular, and the fragile peace process, in
general.

The rise in tensions amid the siege, suicide
bombings and street protests have further damaged
hopes of ending two years of violence, which has taken
a heavy toll on innocent lives, most of them
Palestinians. We wish to hope that the opponents of
durable peace in the Middle East will not be given
another opportunity to undermine the intensified efforts
of the international community towards achieving a
final settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based
on the common vision of two States, Israel and an
independent, viable and democratic Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security.

Turkey supports all efforts, including those of the
Quartet, towards this end and as a regional facilitator is
ready to provide its assistance in whatever way may be
necessary. Finally, we wish to encourage all parties to
assume their responsibilities to seek a just and
comprehensive settlement of the conflict based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), along with the Madrid terms of
reference, the principle of land for peace and the
implementation of all existing agreements between the
parties.

