Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam, I would like to thank the Venezuelan
presidency of the Security Council for this current
month for presenting this extremely important subject
for a debate in the Council.

Undoubtedly, the Charter of the United Nations is
not merely an international legal document. Rather, it
is the result and the product of a painful experience
that humankind went through. At the end of the Second
World War, the world had come to realize that it is
extremely important to have a number of purposes
and principles, along with fundamental rules, so as to
preserve international peace and security and achieve
the development and protection of human rights for all
times. Those principles were included in the Charter and
have acquired the status ofjus cogens and have became a
charter or constitution legitimizing international action
taken multilaterally by States. States are not permitted
even to agree to disagree on those principles. Despite
the ideals of the purposes, principles and the rules of
the Charter, their real essence should be represented in
their implementation and respect and the presence of
the political will to carry them out.

The world has witnessed conflicts and decades-
long cases of occupation and conflict. Terrorism is
spreading. The use of weapons of mass destruction has
occurred. There are great numbers of refugees, and we
have seen the large illegal movements of migrants as a
result of double standards and violations of the purposes,
principles and rules of the Charter, and the fact that
certain parties have asserted incorrect or distorted
interpretations in order to render those principles void
of their intent. Against the backdrop of the current
extreme and deteriorating situation and because the
United Nations is the umbrella for our international
acts, based on the Charter, the Organization must
assume its responsibilities and develop and reform its
performance, so as to be able to continue discharging
its role according to its mandate. Otherwise, the
alternative will be the sidelining of the United Nations.
It will not be relied upon, but rather looked upon as an
Organization without credibility and unable to move or
take action.

We believe that it is necessary for the political will
to be present in order to commit ourselves to all the
purposes and principles of the Charter, in particular
the peaceful settlement of disputes. In that respect,
Egypt underlines the importance of implementing the
following steps. When it discusses the various issues,
the Security Council must remain objective in its
assessment of the dimensions of threats to international
peace and security. The Security Council must adopt
the natural path to address issues, in accordance to
the Charter, giving priority to the peaceful means of
settling disputes, while respecting national sovereignty
and the principle of noninterference in the internal
affairs of States and taking all necessary actions to
that end. Among other things, that includes asking
the Secretary-General to engage his good offices,
strengthening possibilities for mediation and gathering
information from fact-finding committees, asking the
International Court of Justice for advisory opinions,
and implementating paragraph 3 of Article 36 of the
Charter, which refers to legal disputes and conflicts
among the parties to the International Court of Justice.
If the Security Council is to be successful in that
regard, it must be promptly and steadily informed and
updated on cases of conflict or situations that, if left
unchecked, could lead to disputes or conflicts. That in
itself require would the strengthening of early-warning
mechanisms at the United Nations and in the various
regions, the openness of the Council, and coordination
with the various regional mechanisms to avoid disputes
and conflicts.

Secondly, every effort should be made to settle
disputes, especially protracted ones, in particular the
question of Palestine, so that the United Nations does
not continue to lose the confidence of the international
community and States do not seek alternative methods
outside, the scope of the United Nations, to obtain or
exercise their rights. It is also extremely important to

prevent countries in conflict from collapsing and not to
be content with addressing them in a traditional manner
or with moving slowly, which would lead to escalation
or aggravation and allow terrorists to use those areas as
their playground. It would then become very difficult to
attain peace and security.

Thirdly, we must review the right of the veto and
its - as it has been used before- to obstruct the
implementation of the principles and purposes of the
Charter.

Fourthly, the United Nations must develop its
peacebuilding and peacekeeping activities so that it
can ensure that conflicts do not erupt or re-emerge. It
is also extremely important to give the United Nations
added value in that regard.

Fifthly, it is extremely important to promote social
and economic aspects in the work ofthe United Nations
because they are among the fundamental pillars
of the Organization's work, in particular since the
international community has adopted the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) in September 2015. In addition, it
could compensate for the failure of the United Nations
to address various crises and challenges that have
threatened international peace and security. However,
the most important problem that we face in that regard
is finding the necessary funding for relevant activities
and projects.

Sixthly, on the question of counter terrorism, we
must prove to our peoples that the United Nations
can take serious action above and beyond the mere
adoption of articulate resolutions in closed chambers.
We are not less capable than the Da'esh organization
in planning, managing and acting. We must therefore
move ahead and make tangible achievements on the
ground to confront Da'esh and stop it from spreading its
ideas and ideologies, recruiting fighters, using modern
technology and social media, and obtaining funding
from various sources. In that regard, we believe that
it is extremely important to ensure coordination at the
highest level, be it among the counter-terrorism bodies
of the United Nations or the efforts made within and
outside the Organization to counter terrorism.

Finally, the Egyptian delegation supports the
expected summary of today's debate in a document to
be issued by the President of the Council that would
include recommendations, as outlined in the concept
note and pursuant to the suggestions submitted by
the various States for implementation by the Security
Council and its various committees.

