Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Special Representative Jan Kubis,
for his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/656), and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.

As we await the results of the second round of the
presidential elections, Argentina calls on the candidates
and the parties involved to accept the result of the vote
recount so that Afghanistan can continue to consolidate
its political transition, improve its stability and cement
national unity. The challenges the new authorities will
face are well known and include fulfilling the Afghan
people's desire for peace in general and for cordial
relations with other countries in the region. In that
regard, we commend the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations and Mr. Kerry, the United States Secretary of
State, to generate dialogue between the presidential
candidates, and to obtain a commitment to a political
transition in the hands of a Government of national
unity. We would also like to highlight the efforts of
Afghanistan and Pakistan to establish better and greater
cooperation over national security, which could also be
extended to other important areas.

Argentina notes with concern the increase in
security incidents that occurred during and as a
result of the second round of presidential elections
in Afghanistan. We regret the attacks by the Taliban,
criminal organizations and international and national
terrorist groups. We note that they were aimed at
civilian targets as well as military ones, resulting
chiefly in innocent victims, particularly women and
children. Like the Secretary-General, we believe in
the importance of the Afghan national security forces,
who have demonstrated their ability and effectiveness
in confronting the country's many threats to peace.
However, as the Secretary-General's report eloquently
expresses it, their efforts will require the support of the
international community, to a greater or lesser degree,
in the next few years, if we are to achieve long-term
peace and stability.

We would like to call attention to the importance
of stepping up humanitarian efforts in order to combat
the chronic child malnutrition in Afghanistan. We
emphasize that resources must be allocated through a
common humanitarian fund in order to prioritize the
support and response of the United Nations and other
non-governmental partners in the provinces where
malnutrition is most acute and problematic. We also

support the efforts to implement the action plan for the
prevention of underage recruitment.

Argentina supports the efforts to prevent the
production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan.
We emphasize the importance of the role of the
United Nations in monitoring the drug situation in
Afghanistan and of its support to national efforts, as
well as the importance of coordinating the system's
various agencies in order to ensure a comprehensive
approach to the issue. Finally, we emphasize that the
role of the United Nations will continue to be essential,
both in helping a future Government of national unity
to meet its commitments in the areas of development
and security and in cooperating in the coordination
of humanitarian assistance and the fight against the
production and trafficking of drugs. We have full
confidence in the work ofthe United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and will continue to support
them in the future.

