Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I would first like to thank
the Portuguese presidency for convening today's open
debate and you, Sir, for your initiative to discuss the
Security Council's working methods and assess the
implementation of measures set out in the renewed
presidential note S/2010/507 of July 2010. I would also
like to recognize Bosnia and Herzegovina's
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
pay tribute to the work and contribution of Japan to the
development of the Security Council's working
methods, including through its leadership on the
presidential note contained in document S/2006/507
and its renewed version. Slovenia also welcomes and
supports the initiatives of group of five small nations in
this regard.

It is timely and appropriate to have a debate in
open format on this important issue. The need to
further adapt the Security Council's working methods
is one of the key areas of the reform of the Council,
and one on which there is a broad sense of agreement.
There is still room for improvement in order to
enhance the transparency, inclusiveness, legitimacy
and accountability of the Council so that it can fulfil its
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security in the most effective and efficient manner. In
recent years, we have seen some progress towards the
11-61406
realization of these goals. Strengthening the Council's
interaction with the wider United Nations membership
is an important element in these efforts.

United Nations Members have been confronted
with an increasing number of Security Council
decisions with notable security, legal and financial
implications for each Member State. It is also for this
reason that the Council must ensure better transparency
and engagement with non-member States in its
decision-making processes on a more regular basis.

The holding of open briefings and debates
remains of particular importance. The wider
membership should have an opportunity for its views
to be heard and, to the extent possible, reflected in the
outcomes of such debates. Consideration could be
given to the order of speakers, while at the same time
allowing some time between the meeting and the
adoption of the possible outcome document, thus
demonstrating that the Council is willing to reflect on
the views presented by the wider membership before
the final decision is taken. The distribution of concept
papers has proved to be a useful tool for delegations to
adequately prepare for their interventions and to focus
discussions.

We support enhanced dialogue of the Council
with relevant actors, in particular parties directly
affected, concerned or interested. We welcome the
Council's approach to new meeting formats, such as
Arria Formula meetings and informal interactive
dialogues, and call for greater use of such meetings.
Interaction with non-State actors, non-governmental
organizations and civil society should be further
encouraged.

We support a more systematic consultation
process with troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat on peacekeeping mandates. We
welcome the concrete steps taken to cooperate more
closely with the chairs of country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
well as to interact with regional and subregional
organizations and make better use of Article 54 of the
United Nations Charter.

We welcome the introduction of monthly horizon-
scanning briefings as an important contribution to
conflict prevention and early warning. We support
more frequent and open briefings by the Secretariat,
the Special Representatives and Special Advisers of the
Secretary-General on situations on the Council's
3
agenda and those of emerging concern. We welcome
the use of available technology that allows for more
briefings from the field and real-time reaction to
situations on the ground. We see Council field missions
as a valuable tool in providing the right perspective on
local realities.

In our view, the Security Council should
emphasize the importance of the rule of law in dealing
with matters on its agenda. This embraces reference to
upholding and promoting international law and
ensuring that the Council's own decisions are firmly
rooted in that body of law, including the Charter,
international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international criminal law.
Special attention should be paid to the protection of
civilians and those most vulnerable. We urge the
permanent members to refrain from the use of the veto
in the event of genocide, crimes against humanity and
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
We also support further consideration of ways to
improve the transparency and work of the sanctions
Committees.

Throughout the years, we have witnessed the
widening of the diversity of the Council's agenda, its
ever-increasing workload, and the growth in
complexity of the issues before the Council. We
believe that the way the Security Council considers
improving its working methods is in large part
connected to the increasing need to refine and enhance
its work throughout the conflict cycle by considering
prevention, including new emerging threats,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in a
holistic manner.

Slovenia remains convinced that Security Council
reform needs to address both the enlargement of the
membership and improvement of its working methods.
In that context, it is crucial to ensure that the Security
Council continues to regularly assess how its practice
matches the goals contained in presidential note 507
and that it continues to collect valuable inputs from the
entire membership on ways to improve its working
methods further.

