Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): We warmly
welcome you to New York, Sir. My delegation is happy
to see you presiding here at today's Council meeting as
East Timor accedes to full sovereignty.
The event we celebrate today is testimony to the
long and heroic march of the East Timorese people
towards independence. This is a time for the United
Nations and the entire international community
justifiably to rejoice at this historic event. The
sacrifices and suffering of the people of East Timor
have finally yielded success.

My country, Guinea, which has always supported
the struggle of the East Timorese people for
recognition of its inalienable rights, welcomes this
historic event and forthwith commits itself to enjoying
cordial relations and mutually advantageous relations
with that new State.

The month of May undoubtedly represents
unforgettable milestones in the history of East Timor. 5
May 1999 was a starting point for the East Timorese
people's process of self-determination, while 20 May
2002 enshrines its accession to independence. This is
an opportunity for my delegation to pay a well-
deserved tribute to all the bilateral and multilateral
actors for their critical role in ensuring the positive
outcome of the situation in East Timor. We thank
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and all the staff of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor for their tremendous contributions.

Today a new era opens for East Timor in which to
build an independent and prosperous nation. We all
recognize that the task awaiting the new authorities is
immense. To meet the numerous challenges inherent in
laying the foundations of a viable State, the
international community's commitment is
indispensable in supporting the efforts of the East
Timorese people.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
establishment of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) to contribute to the
consolidation and the strengthening of a stable
environment in the country. We are pleased at the
outcome of the donors meeting held in Dili on 14 and
15 May 2002. To ensure the effective follow-up of
development issues, my delegation believes that it
would be desirable to appoint the Resident Coordinator
of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) as a deputy special representative of the
Secretary-General. We also endorse the idea whereby
assistance to East Timor would be the object of
coordination among the various actors involved.

The establishment of democratic institutions is a
precondition for any sustainable development. At the
same time, respect for those institutions is a sine qua
non for the success of any developmental programme.
That responsibility lies with the head of Government
and with the people of East Timor, who, as in the past,
will show the political will and the determination to
achieve their legitimate aspirations. We welcome the
positive evolution of the relations between East Timor
and its neighbours, and we urge them to place emphasis
on dialogue and cooperation for peace and stability in
the region.

On this memorable day, I should like to conclude
by expressing to the East Timorese people my best
wishes for success. We look forward to welcoming East
Timor as a member of the great family of the United
Nations.

