Mr. Bakarumutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): Since this is the first time that I have personally
spoken in the Council, permit me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Rwanda is confident that with your
experience and competence you will lead the work of the
Council successfully. We can assure you of our
cooperation.

It is an honour for the delegation of Rwanda to
welcome the new members of the Security Council and to
assure them of our full and fruitful cooperation this year.

My delegation wishes to pay a wholehearted tribute
to the Secretary-General for his report dated 6 January
1995 (S/ 1995/9) on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL). We wish also to extend deep
thanks to the current Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
President of Ghana; to all the States members of
ECOWAS; to the personnel of the ECOWAS Cease-fire
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG); and to the international
community for their invaluable support for the peace
process in Liberia.

In regard to the Liberian conflict and its disastrous
effects on neighbouring countries, the delegation of
Rwanda deplores the deterioration of the situation in
Liberia caused by the non-compliance with the letter of
the Cotonou and Accra agreements signed in 1993 and
1994.

At this time when the peace process in Liberia is
proceeding in fits and starts and therefore dampening the
international community's optimism, the delegation of
Rwanda believes the Accra Agreement to be an oasis of
hope in a desert almost totally devoid of peace.

My delegation nevertheless deplores a widespread
attitude in the Security Council vis-a-vis the resolution of
African conflicts. It became clear in 1994 alone that in
some cases the withdrawal of troops led to massacres. In
the case of another African country, the decision by the
United Nations to disengage its forces was not the best
solution for the people of that country who were victims
of warlords.
In the case of Liberia, the decision to extend the
presence of UNOMIL's peace forces by three months has
not been taken for the good of the population but is,
instead, a solution based on a strategy of threatening the
parties to the conflicts.

Africa is going through a period of crisis and its
effects are not felt by just one country. At the same time,
Africa is at a stage of advanced marginalization in many
spheres as compared to the rest of the world.

The search for solutions to conflicts like the one in
Liberia should not be limited to a three-month period.
Only a process, a slow path, can lead to consensus by all

 

parties concerned. This is evidenced by the fact that in
other regions of the world the Council has acted differently.

As a gesture of solidarity and cooperation, my
delegation voted in favour of the extension of UNOMIL's

mandate until 13 April 1995. but we promise the Council
that we will return to this matter at an appropriate
moment.

Meanwhile, my delegation encourages and supports
all efforts undertaken by the countries of the subregion to
assist in speeding up the implementation of the provisions
of the various peace agreements in Liberia.

