Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of Jordan and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Palestine to our debate.

I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov
for his informative briefing. His presentation of the
eleventh report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) again draws our attention to the gravity of
the situation, in particular with regard to the issue of
colonization. Ahead of the meetings to be held under
resolution 2334 (2016), I would again like to thank the
Secretariat for granting our request for regular written
reports. They are essential tools for documenting the
issue of colonization, as well as that of violence, and for
guiding the work of the Council.

The threats to the two-State solution are of great
concern. Announcements concerning the possible
annexation of some areas in the West Bank, in particular
the Jordan Valley, the northern coast of the Dead Sea
and, eventually, the settlements on the West Bank
are very worrisome. If implemented, such measures
would constitute not only a serious and unprecedented
violation of international law, but would also provoke
instability in the region by exacerbating tensions and
fuelling extremism of all forms. We therefore call on
the parties to refrain from any action that is at variance
with international law and that would jeopardize
the viability of the two-State solution. Together with
our European partners, we will continue to monitor
the situation closely, including any move towards
annexation, and act accordingly.

Ongoing colonization is also a cause for deep
concern for France. We have condemned the decisions
taken by the Israeli authorities in August to allow the
construction of 2,300 housing units in the West Bank.
We also condemn the decision by the Israeli Government
on 15 September, under Israeli law, to legalize the
illegal settlement in the Jordan Valley. As reaffirmed
by resolution 2334 (2016), settlement activity is illegal;
it serves to heighten tensions. By undermining the
viability of the two-State solution, it jeopardizes the
conditions for a just and lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians and must stop. In that regard, I thank
the Special Coordinator for his quarterly briefing on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).

Lastly, the deterioration of the situation in recent
weeks in Gaza - where the firing of rockets into
Israel has resumed and several more demonstrators
have been killed - sparks fear of a further escalation.
We call on all parties to show the utmost restraint. We
reiterate our condemnation of the firing of rockets from
Gaza into the occupied areas of Israel, as well as of
the disproportionate use of force against Palestinian
demonstrators. Those developments come against
the backdrop of the deadlock in intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, despite Egypt's efforts, which I
welcome, and the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
including a shortage of medicines and the crisis in the
health-care system.

The support of the international community, in
particular for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, is
essential. However, there will be no lasting improvement
in the situation in Gaza without a political solution,
involving the return of the Palestinian Authority and the
lifting of the blockade, along with credible guarantees
for Israel, whose security, I repeat, is not negotiable.
In that regard, the imminent session of the General
Assembly should be an opportunity for us to reaffirm
our collective commitment to the parameters agreed
upon by the international community and to Security
Council resolutions.

The objective must remain that of a Palestinian
State, living in peace and security alongside the State
of Israel, within secure and internationally recognized
borders drawn on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States. France stands
ready to support any peace effort in that context. Any
attempt to deviate from those internationally agreed and
collectively defined parameters would be doomed to
failure. It could also lead to regional destabilization, as
there is no viable alternative to the two-State solution.
None of the two peoples can sustainably satisfy its
aspirations to the detriment of the other. The path to
lasting peace requires a two-State solution. As a friend
of Israel and Palestine alike, France remains more
determined than ever to support them on that path.

