Mr. Delattre (France): First of all, I would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, as well as the Under-

Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for
their very informative briefings and their exemplary
dedication and that of their teams. I would like to revisit
briefly the following three points.

First, after the adoption of two resolutions and
the deployment on the ground of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, the
priority now is for the parties remain committed to the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. It is also
essential that the parties ensure the safety and security
of Mission personnel, as well as their free movement.

As we have been informed, tangible progress has
already been made. In that regard, we welcome the
agreement reached last weekend in the context of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee chaired by
Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, on the first phase of
redeployment, as well as the ongoing discussions on
the exchange of prisoners. These are encouraging steps
that reduce the threat of a resumption of hostilities.
Discussions should therefore continue so as to further
bolster the progress made; the redeployment operations
on the ground agreed this weekend should be launched;
and we must move towards the second phase of the
redeployment and exchange of prisoners. The goal is
to strengthen trust among the parties and to make the
process irreversible by creating a positive dynamic.

The situation in Al-Hudaydah, however, remains
fragile, and military operations are continuing in the
rest of the country. As we noted earlier, we remain
concerned at these continuing operations as well as
at the ongoing threat of ballistic transfers. The parties
must continue to maintain an ever stronger engagement
with the Special Envoy and with General Lollesgaard
by playing a responsible and constructive role. Failing
that, sanctions could be imposed against any individuals
and entities obstructing the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement.

Secondly, as my British colleague reminded us,
this progress should not make us forget to what extent
the humanitarian situation remains worrisome. I can
only echo what has just been stated so eloquently by
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
The Agreement reached in Stockholm must lead to full
access and to the immediate, secure and unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance and trade flows.
The initial progress achieved with the lifting of
bureaucratic obstacles must continue. It is urgent in
particular to allow access to the Red Sea Mills, as has
been mentioned, and to then reach as quickly as possible
an agreement to ensure that the critically important
route between Sana'a and Al-Hudaydah can be used by
humanitarian actors.

The Stockholm Agreement must also make it
possible to protect civilians - in particular women
and children, who are often forced to leave their
homes due to conflict, which makes them very
vulnerable - as well as humanitarian personnel. Mark
Lowcock underscored very clearly that it is vital to
provide a financial response to the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen. France will announce once again this year a
contribution to the humanitarian response plan. France
also has announced that it will provide a contribution to
the peace support facility that was presented in January
in Berlin.

The Geneva conference will be an opportunity
for the Council, regional actors and, more broadly, the
entire international community to send a very strong
signal of support to the Yemeni people.

Thirdly, and lastly, we should bear in mind that the
conclusion of a negotiated political settlement is the
ultimate goal. That is why it is crucial that we remain
collectively mobilized in the process of supporting
the efforts of the Special Envoy. Indeed, everything
is interconnected. Without significant progress on the
ground, prospects for future negotiations will become
more remote. Consistent messages must be conveyed to
Yemeni and regional actors, and we therefore encourage
the Special Representative to continue to reach out to
all the parties in order to continue making progress in
the dynamic under way.

Relaunching the discussions in a comprehensive
political framework is the only path towards a lasting
solution to the conflict in Yemen that will make it
possible to ease the humanitarian suffering of the
Yemeni people. We fully support the efforts of the
Special Envoy, Martin Griffiths, and call on all parties
to perpetuate and translate into action the positive
momentum created by the Stockholm negotiations.

On the demanding path towards peace in Yemen,
the unity of the Security Council is our most valuable
asset. This is not the case, as we know, in all crises - to
put it very diplomatically - so let us take advantage of
this unity as leverage to help find a political solution,
which today, in spite of the magnitude of the difficulties

faced, is within reach.

