Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Ghassan Salame for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Libya. At the outset, our
delegation would like to commend him and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya for their work and
successful mediation efforts to facilitate a ceasefire
agreement and bring an end to the violence between the
armed groups in Tripoli.

We once again reiterate our call for focusing on
strengthening Libya's State structures, including its
armed forces and security sector. Without that, we
will continue to see a breeding ground created for the
emergence and illegal activities of terrorist, extremist
and other destructive forces in Libya. Timely action
will also prevent the recent tragic events in Tripoli
from recurring. In that context, the agreement between
the House of Representatives and the High Council of
State on a mechanism for restructuring the Presidency
Council is a welcome step towards that goal. There is
hope that that newly restructured body could act as
a Government of unity for all of Libya. We reiterate
our appeal to all Libyan parties and stakeholders to
maintain a strong commitment to the common goal
of seeking a political settlement to the lasting crisis
by implementing confidence-building measures.
Kazakhstan welcomes the upcoming international
conference on Libya to be held in Palermo on 12 and
13 November, which will bring together the main
Libyan stakeholders and international actors. We firmly
believe that the only possible solution to the Libyan
crisis is political, not military, and that all differences
should be resolved through political and diplomatic
means, with a comprehensive and inclusive dialogue.

In conclusion, my delegation would also like to
commend the recent visit to Libya of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, led by Ambassador Skoog, the first
such visit since the sanctions regime began in 2011. We
look forward to the Chair's report in due course.

