Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba commends the Nigerian presidency of the Security
Council on guiding our work, and especially, Madam
President, your presence here throughout the day.

We support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Cuba welcomes and supports the holding of this
open debate of the Security Council on an issue as
important as the one before us. Maintaining international
peace and security is the primary responsibility of the
Security Council, and one ofthe purposes of the United
Nations. Therefore, all States Members have the duty
to promote it.

Cuba has the honour - alongside 32 other States of
the Latin America and Caribbean region - ofbelonging
to the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC). It is a mechanism for dialogue and
consultation that is becoming a political forum and
actor in promoting the process of political, economic,
social and cultural integration, thereby achieving the
necessary balance between the unity and diversity of
our peoples.

In its short history, CELAC has already reached
a major milestone, which is the proclamation of Latin
America and the Caribbean as a zone of peace - in
the context of the second Summit, held in Havana. That
proclamation confirms our region's commitment to the
principles of international law and enhances the culture
of peace, with the aim of removing forever the threat
or use of force, promoting the peaceful resolution of
disputes and promoting the commitment of the peoples
of Latin America and the Caribbean to encourage
friendly relations and cooperation among themselves
and other nations, regardless of their differences.

We believe that CELAC is a tangible example of how
regional integration can lead to ongoing dialogue and
be based on the principle of complementarity, in order
to work towards achieving the inclusive development of
its member States on the basis of solidarity. In facing
contemporary challenges to global security, regional
and subregional organizations and their member States
must always uphold decision-making on the basis of
consensus and through framework of multilateralism.
Those elements will always form the foundation of
an effective international order - one that rejects
unilateral steps that are extraterritorial in nature
and contrary to international law, and may endanger
multilateralism.

The role of regional organizations and associations
in no way reduces the responsibility of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security. However, for the United Nations to become a
standard for transparency, democracy and participation
of the entire international community in resolving
serious global problems, it is urgent to reform the
Organization. That includes having a Security Council
that is democratic and transparent, in which none of
its members should promote armed confrontations
or the philosophy of regime change. That contradicts
the purposes and principles that should guide the
Organization.

The General Assembly must also be revitalized. It
should assume its key role in achieving the rights of
peoples and every individual to have a fair, democratic
and equitable international order that supports the
efforts of States to build a future that each nation
decides for itself.

We are convinced that, despite the positive
contribution made by regional and subregional
organizations, international peace and security will
continue to be threatened as long as we do not have a
common view of what are the actual threats to peace
and security.

International peace and security will continue to
be threatened in the absence of the total elimination
of nuclear weapons, which threaten the survival of the
human species. Cuba will continue to work actively in
its national capacity and as a member of other groups
of States - such as the Non-aligned Movement and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean - to
achieve the elimination and total ban on those weapons.

International peace and security will continue to
be threatened as long as there is no defined concept
of the terrorism that we are fighting - because we
cannot define terrorism as good or bad depending
on who perpetrates it. We must all commit ourselves
to combating terrorism, whatever its forms or
manifestations, wherever it takes place and whoever its
author. But in that battle, we must neither forget nor
violate the principles that underlie the Charter of the
United Nations.

To prevent conflict and maintain peace, it
is necessary to have solidarity, cooperation and
international assistance. And we must work together to
eliminate poverty, unemployment, hunger, inequalities
and the causes of those inequalities.

In our view, international peace and security can
be maintained only if we all respect the principles of
the Charter of the Organization, as well as international
law, which enshrine the principles the sovereign
equality of all States, the peaceful settlement of
international disputes, political independence, the
non-resort to the threat or use of force against any State
and non-intervention in the internal affairs of States.

Cuba will continue to contribute its modest
resources to the welfare of other peoples, especially
the most vulnerable. It will remain committed to
supporting international cooperation to achieve
sustainable, inclusive development and to the defence
of international peace and security.
