Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): My delegation would like to
extend warm congratulations to Malaysia's presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
to commend the President for convening this most
important debate on children in armed conflict. We
attach particular significance to the fact that Malaysia
is the current Chair of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We also
take note of the work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougi.

Given the horrendous threat to posed to international
peace and security by terrorism and violent extremism,
we welcome the particular emphasis at this debate on
the two thematic areas, namely, reducing the impact of
violent extremism on children, and children displaced
in conflict.

More than 65 million people have fled their homes
due to conflict and violence, and about half of those
affected are children. As Member States, we must
make it our responsibility to protect those children
forcibly displaced and to ensure their access to health
and education.

Sri Lanka commends the efforts of the Secretary-
General on his annual report (S/2016/360) on children
and armed conflict covering the year 2015. We also
welcome the briefing he gave this moring.

We continue to hear the same horrifying tale of the
increasing impact of terrorism and violent extremism
on children from Yemen to Nigeria to Syria, and from
Afghanistan to Somalia to South Sudan. We note with
great concern that children are the most significantly
affected by violent extremism and too often are the
direct targets of acts intended to cause the maximum
civilian casualties and terrorize communities. Attacks
on schools and hospitals were starkly prevalent this
past year, and documented in 19 out of 20 situations of
conflict. The increasing use of air strikes and explosive
weapons in populated areas has had a devastating
impact on schools and hospitals.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Principles - which are principles and guidelines
on children associated with armed forces or armed
groups - it is imperative that we as Member States
respond to violent extremism with a multi-pronged
approach that also addresses the root causes of poverty,
marginalization and disaffection that lead to the killing,
maiming, or forcible displacement and/or radicalization
of children. The Secretary-General has raised concerns
that current operations include the systematic treatment
of children as security threats as opposed to victims,
including the detention of children solely based on their
alleged association with armed groups or forces. It is
important that children not be detained unless they are
charged with recognizable offences, and then only in
accordance with juvenile justice standards and rules of
international law.

Sri Lanka has emerged from a nearly 30-year violent
conflict, which tore at the very fabric of our nation.
During that time, Sri Lanka witnessed the unbearable
horror of child soldiers, who were used as combatants
by non-State armed groups. Those innocent victims
were called the "baby brigade". Forty per cent of those
children were girls. Many of them were taken forcibly
from their villages or schools to serve as combatants
or in support roles, such as cooks, and porters, among
others. In the fog of war, many became the victims
of conflict.

When the armed conflict ended, in May 2009,
a total of 594 child combatants between 12 and 18
years of age surrendered. Sri Lanka considered those
children victims of the conflict and took measures to
rehabilitate and reintegrate the former child combatants
by providing education, recreational facilities and
vocational training, as well as psychological support
to help them deal with their past. The strategies
and activities included improving the physical and
mental state by spiritual, psychosocial, personality
and leadership training, followed by vocational and
technical training in order to give them the best possible
chance in life to become productive citizens.

It was important to rebuild their trust in those
who were meant to protect them, their trust in society
and their faith even in themselves. Those positive
developments undertaken by Sri Lanka led the United
Nations to delist Sri Lanka from annex 2 of the report
of the Secretary-General on child combatants in
2012. Since January 2015, with positive changes in its
Administration, Sri Lanka has been able to go further
in its endeavours to chart a path of true reconciliation
and justice.

Our national initiatives and programme on
rehabilitating and reintegrating former child combatants
have been some of the most successful projects of
that nature in recent history. However, demobilizing
children from the ranks of non-State armed groups
and their subsequent rehabilitation and reintegration
into society are riddled with complications. There is no
one-size-fits-all formula to address this issue. But in all
our actions, compassion, kindness and understanding
must serve as the common thread. Sri Lanka believes
that there are three effective methods to reduce the
recruitment of child combatants: first, political and
economic pressure on the offending party; secondly,
mobilizing resources for rehabilitation programmes;
and, thirdly, addressing the socioeconomic, political
and ideological dynamics that seduce children into
groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da'esh.

But there is more to be done. There must be an
accurate and credible listing of perpetrators of the
six grave violations against children identified by the
Secretary-General. We need to strengthen monitoring,
reporting and response to child rights violations on
the ground; implement existing United Nations action
plans with armed forces and groups listed in the
annexes to the Secretary-General's annual reports on
children and armed conflict; and unanimously call for
stronger protection of children's rights within United
Nations peacekeeping operations. As we all know,
children are the first and most vulnerable casualties
of war. It is children who are exploited by non-State
armed groups. It is children who are in the cross hairs.
And impressionable as they are, children, at a young
age, will watch, learn and shape our future on the basis
of our actions. It is in the hands of those of us who make
decisions not only to set the right example, but to do
everything in our power so that our children are armed
with books, not guns, and that they play in sand boxes
rather than hide behind sand bags.

Finally, Sri Lanka wishes to thank United Nations
agencies, in particular UNICEF and its dynamic
Executive Director, Mr. Anthony Lake, as well as our
bilateral partners for their assistance and support as we
addressed the challenges and issues of child combatants
during Sri Lanka's armed conflict. Sri Lanka stands
steadfast in its support of the children of the world
and stands ready to work with other Member States,
particularly through sharing our experiences.

