Mr. Martynov (Belarus): Belarus was among the
three States that urged, several hours ago, that an
immediate meeting of the Security Council be convened.
The President of Belarus issued earlier this morning a
statement strongly denouncing the decision of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to use military strikes
against a sovereign State.

Belarus stresses that the use of military force against
Yugoslavia without a proper decision of the only competent
international body, which is undoubtedly the United Nations
Security Council, as well as any introduction of foreign
military contingents against the wish of the Government of
Yugoslavia, qualify as an act of aggression, with all ensuing
responsibility for its humanitarian, military and political
consequences. Under these circumstances, no rationale, no
reasoning presented by NATO can justify the unlawful use
of military force and be deemed acceptable.

As a United Nations Member, Belarus is extremely
disturbed by the fact that the unlawful military action
against Yugoslavia means an intentional disregard for the
role and responsibility of the Security Council in
maintaining international peace and security.

Let us take a moment and some courage to look into
the face of truth. Ignoring the primary and principal body
for collective decision-making on maintaining international
peace and security - and, in fact, the system itself, which
was created and nurtured as a result of the Second World
War - means obstructing the system, signing it off and
effectively destroying it, thereby ignoring the lessons of the
bloodiest-ever war, which the leaders of the Member
countries, and above all the permanent members of the
Security Council, a generation ago vowed to respect.

It was said today that diplomacy failed. But will lethal
military force succeed in fine-tuning a delicate political
solution? Is a just settlement in Yugoslavia closer today
than it was yesterday?

Belarus calls for an immediate stop to the use of
force against and in sovereign Yugoslavia. It calls also for
the immediate resumption of the negotiating process on a
peaceful settlement, including through the Contact Group
efforts. Belarus also insists on restoring the Charter role
of the Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security.

We are convinced that even now, even today,
opportunities for renewing the political and diplomatic
dialogue can and must be found on the basis of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yugoslavia and of
respect for the rights of its ethnic groups.

