Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). At the outset, I
would like to convey the Movement's appreciation to
the delegation of Nigeria for convening today's open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, and for its skilled leadership
of the Security Council this month. I also wish to
express our appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry, Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General and Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing to the Council today.

Since our last debate on this matter (see S/PV.7140),
regrettably, little progress has been made towards
the long-overdue realization of a just and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine, which has been
on the United Nations agenda for more than 66 years.
Despite serious international efforts and constant,
repeated calls for a peaceful and comprehensive
solution in conformity with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Israeli military
occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands remains
ongoing, and the Palestinian people continue to be
tragically denied their inalienable rights and freedom.
Furthermore, the peace process is once again at a
dangerous impasse, with negotiations suspended due to
Israel's repeated rejectionist stance.

The failure to resolve the question and the
prolongation of the conflict, despite the clarity of
international law, including the demands made by the
Security Council, continue to damage the credibility of
our international system, undermine the rule of law and
compound conflict and human suffering.

In this year 2014, a year proclaimed by the General
Assembly as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, the Non-Aligned Movement
calls for the redoubling of international efforts to
actively support and advance a peaceful, just and
lasting solution based on the long-standing parameters
rooted in the relevant United Nations resolutions and
initiatives. In that connection, NAM. welcomes the
affirmed readiness of the State of Palestine to uphold
its international responsibilities and obligations in
accordance with the multilateral treaties to which it has
recently acceded. We stress the importance of respect
for the rule of law in any effort to achieve peace and
justice. NAM. also welcomes the recent steps towards
Palestinian reconciliation, and we emphasize that unity
is imperative for the realization of the Palestinian
people's legitimate national aspirations.

At this crucial stage, NAM. implores the Security
Council to act forthwith to uphold its Charter duties for
the maintenance of international peace and security by
tangibly contributing to a solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict - the core of the Arab-Israeli
conflict - which remains a source of grave concern
for the region and international community as a whole
and for the prospects of global peace and stability. The
Security Council cannot remain on the sidelines while
the situation continues to deteriorate and the chances for
a peace based on a two-State solution and in accordance
with the pre-l967 borders are being sabotaged by the
intransigent refusal of Israel, the occupying Power, to
abide by international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law.

In the recent period, the Movement has remained
greatly concerned, specifically about the illegal policy
being pursued by Israel, the occupying Power, against
the Palestinian people, their land and their holy sites,
about the negative impact on the ground and about the
peace negotiations. Despite the international efforts
and calls for peace, Israel has continued to behave in
a manner blatantly contradictory to the law and the
clear objectives of the peace process. Every aggressive
and provocative action taken on the ground by Israel
in violation of international law and the human rights
of the Palestinian people has undermined the goal
of resolving the core issues - the Palestine refugee
question, Jerusalem, settlements, borders, security,
water and prisoners - and finally achieving a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in all its aspects.

As a result, tensions have continued to rise, and the
gap between the hopes and expectations for the political
process and the reality on the ground remains vast. An
overview ofjust the recent period, including as reflected
in official communications conveyed to the Security
Council, reveals that, rather than negotiating in good
faith and abiding by its legal obligations, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention, Israel has in fact intensified
all of its illegal activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly its
illegal settlement colonization campaign, which is
destroying the contiguity of the Palestinian land and
threatening the two-State solution.

Israel's illegal actions have included the
continuation and escalation of settlement construction,
the construction of the wall, the confiscation of land,
the demolition of homes, the forced displacement of
Palestinian civilians, military raids resulting in the
killing and injury of civilians, the arrest and detention
of Palestinians, including children, violence and terror
by extremist Israeli settlers and religious fanatics
and the ongoing blockade of the Gaza Strip. Those
violations have worsened conditions on the ground
and cast serious doubts regarding Israel's intentions
and claimed commitment to a just peace, based on the
two-State solution and in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions.

NAM. is especially alarmed by the increasing acts
of aggression in occupied East Jerusalem, especially
in and around Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, that have resulted from provocations by
Israeli extremists. The blatant disrespect for that holy
site and its worshippers and the continued threats of
further incursions are grave acts of incitement that are
aggravating religious sensitivities and already high
tensions. Israeli Government officials continue to
recklessly fuel such tensions by encouraging extremists
to acts of provocation that threaten to ignite a religious
conflict, which would have far-reaching consequences
for the region and beyond. NAM. therefore once again
draws the Security Council's attention to those serious
matters, which threaten international peace and
security. We call for actions to halt all Israeli incitement
and provocations, as well as for respect for the sanctity
of religious sites and the rights and access of Muslim
and Christian worshippers, including Palestinians, in
the city.

NAM. must also reiterate its grave concern about
the continuation of the illegal Israeli blockade of
the Gaza Strip, which continues to inflict severe
humanitarian hardship on the Palestinian people. NAM
condemns that collective punishment of the Palestinian
people and urges the international community to
persist with its calls on Israel, the occupying Power,
to end the blockade and all illegal actions against
the Palestinian people under its occupation and to
respect its obligations under international law. If Israel
persists in its contempt for the law, the international
community must act forthwith to uphold the law and
ensure accountability.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its long-
standing solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
support for the realization of their legitimate national
aspirations and inalienable rights, including to self-
determination and freedom in their independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as a just solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III). NAM. reaffirms the role of the international
community, foremost the Security Council, in
responsibly acting to promote the achievement ofajust,
lasting and comprehensive peace that will bring about
a complete end to the Israeli military occupation of the
Palestinian and other occupied Arab lands occupied in
1967, and usher in a new era of peace and stability in
the Middle East, a role that is starkly highlighted in this
period of yet another impasse in the peace negotiations.

Lebanon has suffered from consecutive Israeli
attacks against its territory, with a heavy human and
material toll, followed by subsequent years ofoccupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese air space and to intensify its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan,
which have intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian
crisis. The Non-Aligned Movement demands once
again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of June 1967, in implementation of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In this debate, the representative of the Israeli
regime made some unsubstantiated and fictional
allegations against my country. I would like to provide
a brief reaction in my national capacity.

First, I categorically reject those allegations, such
vain efforts by him, which are not even cognizant of
what this debate in the Security Council is all about.
It does nothing but put the blame on others in order
to divert international attention from its own apartheid
policies, mockery of democracy, atrocities, acts of
brutality, violations and acts of aggression against
Palestinians and other peoples in the region, as well as
its violations against the territorial integrity of other
States in the region, in particular its recent cases of
aggression against Lebanon and Syria.

It is indeed ironic that a regime famous for its
repeated violations of internationally recognized
borders and for attacking or threatening to use force
against its neighbours and other countries - acts that
have been well documented by the United Nations
as war crimes and crimes against humanity - and,
moreover, a regime with a dark record of developing,
producing and stockpiling different kinds of inhuman
weapons, including weapons of mass destruction,
should accuse others of threatening peace and security.

I would like to reiterate the position of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, namely, to see peace and justice
prevail in the Middle East, which requires full respect
for international norms and regulations by all, without
discrimination.

