Mr. Johnston (United Kingdom): We thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
comprehensive briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/26) and Ambassador Santos for giving
us so concisely his country's crucial perspective on
recent events and on the future.

I would like to begin by associating my
delegation with the statement to be delivered later in
our debate by the representative of Slovenia on behalf
of the European Union.

I would like to join colleagues in condemning the
attacks on President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Gusmao of 11 February. As the Council has made clear,
there can be no justification for acts such as those. We
expect that the law enforcement authorities will be able
to bring those responsible to justice and that stability
will thus be maintained in East Timor.

We are encouraged by the Secretariat's
assessment that the Timorese State institutions and the
opposition have met the challenge posed by those
attacks and have responded, as Mr. Guehenno stated, in
keeping with their constitutional and human rights
obligations. We commend the people of East Timor for
remaining calm and steadfast in such difficult times for
their young democracy, and we thank the International
Stabilization Force, and particularly the Australian
leadership of that force, for coming so swiftly to the
assistance of the legitimate Government of East Timor
and for reinforcing its presence on the ground to help
bolster the security situation. My Government joins
others in wishing Mr. Ramos-Horta a full and swift
recovery. We are encouraged by what the Ambassador
and the Under-Secretary-General said this morning in
that regard.

As others have said, these attacks underline the
fact that the security situation and the wider situation
in East Timor remain fragile, volatile and vulnerable to
setbacks. So it is for the people of the country to do
everything in their power to ensure the sustained
positive trend in terms of politics, security and
sustainable economic and social development. For my
Government, that means three things.

First, efforts should continue building a shared
vision by the Timorese Government and the opposition,
and the civil society more generally, of what kind of
country Timor-Leste should be, including by building
on the multiparty discussions referred to by the Under-
Secretary-General earlier.

Secondly, there needs to be a determined effort
by the State institutions, with international support, to
build capacity and deliver reform, particularly in the
security and justice sectors. We look forward to
receiving the findings of the expert mission to be
dispatched by the Secretary-General with the aim of
carrying out a thorough assessment, in particular in the
field of policing.

Thirdly, a commitment by the Timorese
Government is needed to the full implementation of the
2008 budget now agreed by the parliament of Timor-
Leste.

This Council of the United Nations and the wider
international community are committed to help. We
heard in this Chamber over the past year, and again this
morning, a consistent message from the representatives
of Timor-Leste that the Security Council should
continue to provide them with support, including
through the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), over the years ahead.

We are very sympathetic to this message, and it is
for this reason that we support the extension of the
UNMIT mandate by 12 months. We think that Special
Representative Khare and his team continue to do an
excellent job delivering on their mandate, and we
welcome and commend South Africa's leadership of
this issue in the Council.

At the same time, we also remain mindful of an
underlying principle, which is a point that Ambassador
Santos also made this morning. That is, the goal of the
international community should be to help the people
of Timor-Leste stand on their own feet. We therefore
think we need a forward-looking and proactive
approach that seeks to move beyond stabilization and
into sustainable, national-led peacebuilding as soon as
we responsibly can.
We therefore hope that in future reports, the
Secretary-General and his team will be able to develop
a medium-term strategy, with appropriate benchmarks
aimed at achieving this end state, and that, of course, in
close and continuous consultation with the Government
of Timor-Leste.

