Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): Madam President,
allow me at the outset to congratulate you on steering
the presidency of the Council for the month of June
and for convening this important debate on the last day
of your presidency.

Since the last public meeting in the Council on
the situation of the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, definitive changes have taken
place in the region. The recent surge of violence
ensued after the kidnapping of an Israeli soldier on
25 June, and the massive military operation by the
Israeli army that followed has seriously undermined
the atmosphere of hope for peace that was built after
the elections in the Palestinian Authority and in Israel.
This deadly violence has grave implications.

Pakistan regrets the Israeli incursion into Gaza,
the total blockade of the Gaza Strip and the destruction
of Palestinian infrastructure. We are concerned over the
escalation of hostilities between Israel and Palestine
that would further impede the international efforts to
stop the cycle of violence and restart negotiations.
Pakistan hopes that the international community will
take the necessary steps to help resolve the crisis
through peaceful means.

The challenge before the international community
is three-fold: first, how to halt the present phase of
massive human sufferings and chaos resulting from the
military operations of Israeli army; secondly, how to
maintain peace between Israel and Palestinians and
resume negotiations for the lasting solution to the
problem of the Middle East; and thirdly, how to
prevent actions being taken by Israel that could
unilaterally create realities, making a negotiated
settlement based on the principle of land for peace
completely impossible.

Indeed, there are no ready answers to these
complex questions. Yet the United Nations, including
the Security Council and the Secretary-General, must
now play the central role in responding to these
challenges. It is the moral obligation of the
international community to call upon the two
Governments to heed the call of their peoples and work
constructively towards the attainment of peace.

In the context of the situation on the ground, I
would like to make the following essential points.
First, there should be an immediate cessation of
hostilities with a view to finding a diplomatic solution
to the issue of kidnapped soldiers. Secondly, efforts
should be made to resolve the present humanitarian
crisis in the Palestinian areas. In the medium term,
earnest efforts by Israel are essential to ensure that
construction of the wall is stopped, since it not only
aggravates human suffering in the Palestinian
territories but also poses a mortal danger to the peace
process. Moreover, Israel should make serious efforts
to freeze and reverse all illegal settlement activity.
Attempts to change demographics in some areas will
only further complicate the final status negotiations
and run counter to the goal of achieving peace. Israelis
and Palestinian must deepen their dialogue and
gradually move to address the final status issues. The
Security Council should actively promote this process.

The implementation of the road map offers the
most viable way forward towards sustainable peace.
Ensuring a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and with the road map, is our collective
obligation. The Vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, was
reflected in the Arab Peace Initiative and has been
embraced by the entire international community. We
must all work for the earliest possible realization of
this vision.

