Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate today. It is
clear that there is a lot of interest in the Chamber, and
that a lot of us are wrestling with common challenges,
while we all have very similar hopes and aspirations
for what might be done in this area. While I therefore
take Mr. Polyanskiy's point about how different parts
of the United Nations should remain in their own lane,
so to speak, I think that, as a number of speakers have
said, if we do not factor in as a long-term trend the
growing numbers of young people, and particularly
unemployed young people, in certain parts of the world,
we will find ourselves facing many more peace and
security challenges. I thank him for having raised that
point today. I also thank the briefers and wish to say
well done to the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth,
who I had the pleasure of meeting recently.

From our perspective, it is good to do this in
the Security Council because it touches on a very
important angle of future peace and security. Speaking
for myself, I would be very interested to have a youth
and economic development discussion in the Economic
and Social Council or the General Assembly as a
complement to what we are talking about today. If
anyone else is interested in that, I would be very keen to
have a discussion. It is very good to be able to evaluate
the impact of resolution 2250 (2015). It is fantastic that
we can hear directly from youth and civil society.

For our part, the United Kingdom welcomes
the independent progress study on youth, peace and
security (see S/2018/86), and we congratulate its authors
on its participatory and consultative methodology.
It is striking, as it has brought together more than
4,000 youth voices from all over the globe. I think
that this is not just important in itself, but it sets an
important model and high standard for future United
Nations reports. If there is any way of embedding that
consultative approach more widely, we, for one, would
definitely welcome that.

As a number of speakers have noted, more than
half the world's population is below the age of 30. That
means that young people are not just key stakeholders in
every sphere of life - from driving political change to
defending and promoting human rights to peacebuilding
and contributing to economic development - but they
also represent a key risk factor. If we do not get right
the development and encouragement of the aspirations
of young people, then it will be very difficult to keep
countries on an upward trajectory. I think, therefore,
that we should reflect on that point.

As we have also heard today, the failure to include
youth can often actually exacerbate a conflict. Too often,
conflicts emerge when people do not feel represented
by their political leaders. We have seen that in Syria,
and not only there. At the same time, in countries like
Afghanistan, and perhaps even Iran, what youth think
can often be an important indication of the potential for
reform in those societies.

In the United Kingdom we believe that enabling
young people to speak for themselves in political
processes can be the first step to taking real action. The
British Youth Council, which has 600 democratically
elected members, sits annually in the House of
Commons to debate a subject chosen by a youth ballot.
Last year, almost 1 million people participated. Many of
our countries are familiar with Model United Nations,
which does something very similar here as well as in
Geneva. Last week, London hosted the Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeting, and the eleventh
Commonwealth Youth Forum met. They pledged their
ongoing commitment to countries' efforts to build a
more prosperous, secure and sustainable future.

A number of speakers have mentioned preventing
violent extremism. It is very important that strategies
to that end - sometimes called countering violent
extremism - include youth. Young people often
understand, much more than my generation, the
dynamics and impacts of terrorist narratives on
radicalization and recruitment, and they can be involved
in promoting an alternative narrative of tolerance and
inclusion. If anyone doubts that, I invite them to get hold
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams equivalent
to Vogue, which targets a very particular segment of
young women. In its propaganda it is incredibly skilful
about getting out certain messages. Countering that,
dealing with that and putting out a positive narrative is
something to which we all need to give attention.

Supporting youth advocates goes beyond just
giving them a platform; it is about building capacity
and it means providing education to ensure that all
young people have such a chance. There is a clear case
for education, particularly girls' education. We know
that it contributes to a safer, more prosperous world.
We know it reduces conflict and increases stability.
Today 131 million girls across the world are deprived
of an education, and of the 774 million illiterate adults
in the world, two thirds are women. That is why girls'
education is one of the United Kingdom's priorities
and one of my Foreign Secretary's priorities. We will
be working with other partners to try to deliver a
minimum of 12 years of quality schooling to every girl.
That commitment to education is also why the United
Kingdom endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration last
Thursday. It is vital that our schools remain places of
safety and that they be protected from conflict.

Resolution 2250 (2015) outlined the need for young
people's voices to be heard in Government, civil society
and industry, and this open debate is a key opportunity
to reflect on our implementation of the strategy it set
out. We look forward to sharing experiences with
others to that end. I thank you again, Mr. President, for
calling this open debate.

