Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
Algerian delegation for organizing this meeting. We
welcome your presiding over this important debate, Sir,
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and we
thank Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
valuable introduction to this debate.

We endorse the platform and practical measures
formulated in Mr. Egeland's statement aimed at
addressing the challenges posed by the protection of
civilians and at enhancing the protection of those in
need.
The protection of civilians is at the core of the
Security Council's mandate to ensure international
peace and security, and humanitarian access to
civilians lies at the heart of protection response, as
Mr. Egeland reminded us in his statement. The fact that
we are meeting today to consider this issue translates
into two-fold reality - that the issue is at the centre of
international concern and that further progress must be
made in strengthening the international ability to
protect civilians in situations of armed conflict.

It is my delegation's View that the Security
Council, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should assign a more
relevant role to early-warning and conflict prevention
mechanisms. The international community should be
equipped with the instruments to translate political
will, strategic vision and operational readiness to
decisively address any threat to peace and to hold back
crisis situations from developing into those of
uncontrollable proportions. Security Council
interaction with regional and subregional organizations
should be further developed in the field of conflict
prevention. Regional organizations are particularly
well suited to work with the Security Council. They
can serve as suitable double instruments for early
warning about escalating tensions; they can provide
accurate assessments of crisis situations and engage in
preventive diplomacy with the advantage of having
first-hand knowledge of local idiosyncrasies. It is our
View that regional organizations can be fundamental
players in conflict prevention and, as Mr. Egeland
stated, they can assume great importance in providing
protection to civilians in armed conflict; it is of critical
importance that they are provided with the necessary
support to fulfil their role.

The legal framework relating to international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law
should be strengthened, and State and non-State actors
should comply with those provisions. Governments
cannot interpret these binding rules as relative norms
that can be set aside if inconvenient, since they are part
and parcel of the international legal order. The United
Nations system should be involved, with the particular
responsibility of taking appropriate and comprehensive
action to achieve universal respect for humanitarian
law.

Moreover, the international community should
demonstrate renewed resolve in fighting impunity and
in ensuring the rule of law, justice and reconciliation
through the establishment of effective and fair systems
for the administration of justice and in ensuring
accountability for atrocities and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.

In spite of the fact that primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict rests with
Governments, non-State actors should have a direct
responsibility to ensure that the basic needs and the
protection of civilian populations are met. Creating
comprehensive, integrated and coherent responses to
the needs of the civilian population remains a very
important challenge for the international community. In
that regard, we recall the Security Council's
commitment in resolution 1265 (1999) to respond to
armed conflict situations in which civilians are being
directly targeted or humanitarian assistance is
deliberately being denied.

Another issue that deserves increased attention
from the international community is the traffic in and
the widespread use of small arms, light weapons and
anti-personnel mines, owing to their disastrous impact
on the scope and the level of violence that affects
civilian populations during and after armed conflicts.
In that context, we underline the importance of the
Nairobi Declaration at the conclusion of the Summit on
a Mine-Free World.

In conclusion, we welcome the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/431), which addresses a
number of highly topical issues related to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, such as the
separation of armed elements from civilians in refugee
camps; the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel; safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel seeking to assist civilians in armed conflict;
sexual exploitation and gender-based violence in
humanitarian crises and conflict situations; the
commercial exploitation of conflicts and the
plundering of resources, the involvement and role of
terrorist organizations in armed conflict; the provision
of security, law and order in post-conflict situations;
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation of former combatants, especially
children; and the training of security and peacekeeping
forces in higher standards of respect for human rights.
Those are some of the fundamental issues that States,
the United Nations and the international community
should address in dealing with the sensitive issue the
Council is dealing with today.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
agreement with the excellent presidential statement
proposed by the Algerian delegation and agreed by the
members of the Council as the outcome of this debate.
