Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for having convened this important open debate
and for the concise concept note shared with us to guide
our discussions (S/2015/6, annex). The presence of Her
Excellency Ms. Michelle Bachelet, President of Chile,
is testament to the importance that Chile attaches to
this topic.
Since this is the first that Rwanda has taken the floor
in the Council this month, Iwish to congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We also express our congratulations to Chad for
its excellent presidency during the month of December
2014. I also wish to join previous speakers in thanking
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Antonio
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah Gbowee for their
respective briefings.

Mr. Barros Melet took the Chair.

As outlined in the concept paper, development
and peace are inseparably connected. Rwanda's recent
history has shown that those two notions have common
prerequisites to occur and to be viable. The principles
of equity, efficiency, transparency, civic engagement,
security, inclusiveness and good governance all
contribute to the creation of resilient and stable
communities. They also promote accountable and
transparent processes and institutions that are vital for
sustainable peace and development.

Regarding inclusive development, the subject of
today's discussion, Rwanda faced myriad challenges in
the wake of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi. These
included the obligation to deal with the immediate
aftermath of a devastating genocide, in which one
Rwandan out of every seven had been killed in just 100
days. There was a need to establish a climate of peace
and security for all, to build governance structures
and to promote economic and social developmen. This
process started in an extremely difficult environment
and required all Rwandans to make considerable
sacrifices to achieve successful and inclusive post-
conflict recovery.

From that experience, we have learned how
inclusive decision-making has not only strengthened
our governance structures, but also been essential in
furthering reconciliation and promoting opportunities
for positive change towards peace. In addition, the
inclusion of all previously marginalized groups, such
as women and young people, has been a cornerstone
in our strategy to build consensus and reconciliation,
which led Rwandans to a common and shared vision
of a prosperous and peaceful country. We therefore
bear witness to the importance of inclusiveness in
harmonizing the competing interests and priorities of
various segments of society, particularly in countries
emerging from conflict.

Due to our inclusive political process after the 1994
genocide, Rwanda has experienced steady economic
growth and a sharp reduction in poverty and inequality,
mainly due to various Government results-oriented
interventions, including the performance-based
financing of health services, performance contracts
between local authorities and the central Government,
the introduction of universal health insurance, an
increased share of Government expenditures in the
health sector, the introduction of 12 years of basic
education, an intensive family planning campaign and
the promotion of gender quality.

However, achieving gender inclusion and the
participatory involvement of all segments of society
is not simple, especially where social and ethnic
divisions are deep-rooted. For us in Rwanda, this has
required focused and strong leadership with a clear
understanding of our history and a vision of where we
wanted to be. It was simply not an easy task; it was
not an easy process. We believe that Governments have
a unique role to play in ensuring inclusiveness and
remain critical actors in promoting collaboration with
various stakeholders in efforts to resolve contentious
issues in a constructive manner.

In a conflict situation, we believe that the peace
process and peace agreements can offer an opportunity
to transform political settlements, including the
early consideration and participation of previously
marginalized groups. That is why all stakeholders in
the peace process, including the Security Council and
the Secretary-General through his good offices, should
ensure that those processes are inclusive and that
they incorporate broad sectors of society at varying
levels of negotiation. That will allow for the greater
likelihood of long-term peace and stability, which is
the foundation of sustainable development. The lack
of such competence would expose the whole process to
greater risk of relapsing into conflict, as was the case
in Iraq and Libya.

In countries emerging from conflict, the role of
the international community is critical in ensuring
inclusivity. National Governments often require
substantive support in strengthening their technical
and institutional capacities to address the challenge
of security and protection as well as to practice
participative and accountable governance in support of
conflict prevention. In that regard, the Peacebuilding
Commission is well placed to offer such support. We
hope that the upcoming review of the peacebuilding
architecture will identify and disseminate best practices
and models for inclusive development. Rwanda, of
course, stands ready to work with other Member States
in sharing its experience.
Allow me to quote our President Paul Kagame,
speaking at the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly in 25 September 2012:

"When we see leaders work with the people in an
inclusive manner; when development can proceed
unhindered by conflict; when regional groupings
take greater responsibility in tackling their own
issues; and when international cooperation takes
place in a spirit of true partnership, I believe
that the results will speak for themselves"
(A/67/PV.7, p. 2).

With that said, Rwanda stands ready to work with other
Member States in sharing its very humble experience.

