Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First, I would like to express our most heartfelt
condolences on the passing of Mr. Vitaly Churkin,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, a
friendly State. We will always remember him and his
positive spirit and wisdom, which we feel in every room
of the Organization. May he rest in peace.

We are not at all surprised to see that the triangle,
composed of the United Kingdom, the United States
and France, continues to pursue the same politicized
and dangerous practices within the Security Council in
order to undermine the Government of my country and
subject us and our allies to the worst forms of blackmail.
They are ready to put to the vote draft resolutions that
draw from unprofessional reports that are unable to
come to definitive conclusions and that draw on the
false, fabricated eyewitness accounts of members of
terrorist groups that are supported by those very same
countries.

We know that the majority of these terrorists reside
in Turkey, the first country to support terrorism in
Syria. It is no secret that draft resolution S/2017/l72 is

based on reports written under unprecedented pressure.
It is our impression that the missions that draft such
reports do so before having even begun their work.

The Syrian Arab Republic's position remains
unchanged with respect to chemical weapons and
weapons of mass destruction. We are against the
use of such weapons; they are unacceptable and
deeply unethical. That is why my country acceded to
the Chemical Weapons Convention, with a View to
making the Middle East a zone free of all weapons of
mass destruction.

However, despite all of our efforts, it is clear
today that the three States concerned proposed the
draft resolution (S/2017/172) simply so as to protect
Israel's nuclear, chemical and biological stockpiles.
My country's Government has on numerous occasions
warned about the threat posed by the use by armed
terrorists of such chemical weapons against civilians, in
particular groups affiliated with Da'esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and Al-Qaida. We have addressed 87 letters to
the Security Council, I repeat, 87 letters. We have also
communicated with the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
with the highest disarmament authorities, as well as
the Joint Investigative Mechanism. We also contacted
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and provided
corroborated information regarding the use, with the
support of certain Governments, of toxic chemical
substances by terrorist armed groups against civilians.

Unfortunately, these issues were not discussed or
even considered. We know that there were intentional
attempts to ignore our efforts, and that some of these
chemical substances have been burned on board vessels,
in particular United Kingdom and United States ones.

Now, what are we to do given the insistence of
those three countries on putting the draft resolution
to the vote? Our Government has repeatedly denied
having using such chemical weapons, in particular
chlorine. Our Government has tried to be as transparent
as possible and has cooperated fully with all of the
commissions and international missions that have come
to us since 2014. We have facilitated their work so as
to ensure that they could successfully conduct credible
investigations. What we saw is that terrorist groups
have fabricated certain so-called testimony regarding
the use of such chemical weapons.

My country deplores the fact that some Council
members are trying to use for political ends the reports
of various United Nations mechanisms. No logical or
scientific consideration has been given to these reports,
which should be read on the basis of the strictest
criteria, including legal and scientific criteria. We have
seen that the Joint Investigative Mechanism itself is
not complying with the tools and methods of work that
had been set out for it since the very beginning. There
is no specific, precise or objective proof regarding the
use of chlorine in particular. We can see, therefore, that
the Mechanism has worked in a deplorable manner and
lacks professionalism, and that it has failed to comply
with the strictest criteria laid down by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

Here I would cite a few examples. In some of the
Mechanism's reports, it is stated that the Mechanism
will draw upon credible, corroborated evidence. It is
supposed to specify in each case when the weapons were
used, the date, the time, the climate, the temperature,
the type of weapon used, the nature of the damage
incurred and the ensuing medical impact. However,
the mechanism drew upon eyewitness accounts that
lack all of these elements. We also note that some of
the evidence was moved to one location to another by
armed terrorist groups and that the Mechanism was
unable to analyse these practices, which are of course
aimed at manipulating the readers of such reports and
masking the truth.

Allow me, therefore, to put a very simple question
to the Council and to ask it to respond transparently.
The question, obviously, is not being posed to the
representatives of France, the United Kingdom or
the United States, because these States have chosen
to obscure reality and to further certain agendas. My
question is the following: what is the point of using
chemical weapons against a limited number of armed
persons when conventional weapons could have
achieved the same results without needing to resort
to chemical weapons? Why did we not use chemical
weapons when terrorist groups attacked airports, large
cities or military bases in numerous areas of Syria? My
answer is very simple. Syria would never have used
such weapons; it does not believe in such weapons as
they are simply unethical.

The three States concerned attempted to submit the
draft resolution to the Security Council, although it runs
counter to all ethical principles. They are not interested
in Syria or in the suffering of the Syrian people. Instead
of supporting and endorsing the political process that
is under way today in Geneva, they prefer to erect all
possible obstacles in the way of a political solution to
the conflict.

My country's Government denies all of the
accusations made in the reports of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. We remain committed to all
of our obligations, including those stemming from the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

Finally, on behalf of my country, I would like to
thank the friendly delegations that voted against the
draft resolution, the Russian Federation, China and
Bolivia, as well as the States that abstained, that is,
Egypt, Ethiopia and Kazakhstan. I thank all of those
States for upholding international law and the principles
of the United Nations, because they know that all of
this can undermine the credibility of our international
efforts and threaten international peace and security by
compounding the suffering of our peoples.

