The Secretary-General: Let me express my
appreciation to the Security Council for its work today.

I welcome resolution 1970 (2011), which the
Council has just adopted unanimously. While it cannot
by itself end the violence and the repression, it is a
vital step and a clear expression of the will of a united
community of nations.

The actions taken by the regime in Libya are
clear-cut violations of all norms governing
international behaviour, and serious transgressions of
international human rights and humanitarian law. They
are unacceptable. It is of great importance that the
Council, in response, has reached a consensus and is
determined to uphold its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

When I addressed the Council yesterday (see S/PV.6490), I noted that fundamental issues of peace
and stability were at stake across the Arab world and
that our collective challenge was how to provide real
protection and halt the ongoing violence. I urged the
Council to consider all options for action. It has now
done so in a wide-ranging resolution. The text sends a
strong message that gross violations of basic human
rights will not be tolerated and that those responsible
for grave crimes will be held accountable. I hope the
message is heard and heeded by the regime in Libya. I
hope it will also bring hope and relief to those still at
risk.
The sanctions that the Council has imposed are a
necessary step to speed the transition to a new system
of governance that will have the consent and
participation of the people. For my part, I will continue
to monitor the situation closely and remain in close
touch with world and regional leaders to ensure their
support for swift and concrete international action.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my solidarity with the people of Libya as they brave
the bloodshed and as they cope with possible shortages
of food and medical supplies and other humanitarian
impacts. As the Libyan people take their destiny into
their hands, as is their right, I hope that the new future
for which they yearn - peaceful, prosperous and
democratic - will soon be theirs.

I commend the Security Council for its decisive
action today. In the days ahead, we will look for
similarly decisive steps from the General Assembly
and the international community as a whole. Today's
measures are tough. In the coming days, if needed,
even bolder action may become necessary.

