The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council this year, I should like to extend my
very warm wishes for a fruitful new year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to extend a
warm welcome to the new members: Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa. We look
forward with confidence to their participation in the
work of the Council. Their experience and wisdom will
be of invaluable assistance in the discharge of the
Council's enormous responsibilities.

I would like to take this opportunity to express the
Council's deep gratitude to the outgoing members -
Austria, Japan, Mexico, Turkey and Uganda - for their
important contributions to the work of the Council
during their term in 2009 and 2010.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent Representative of the
United States of America, for her service as President
of the Security Council for the month of December
2010. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Rice
and her team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2006/920)

Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2010/658)


The President: I have received a letter from the
representative of Nepal, in which he requests to
participate in this meeting. I propose to invite that
representative to participate in this meeting, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
2
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Security Council, I should like
to extend an invitation under rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in Nepal.

It is so decided.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/658, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United
Nations assistance in support of its peace process.
Members of the Council also have before them copies
of a letter dated 5 January 2011 from the Secretary-
General, which will be issued as document S/2011/1.

I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.


