Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow
me, before beginning my statement, to express to the
delegation of the Republic of Korea the deep empathy
of the delegation of Senegal in these difficult
circumstances. We vigorously condemn the barbaric act
that took the life of an innocent Korean citizen. We
extend our most heartfelt condolences and sympathy.

Madam President, after welcoming your presence
here among us, I should like warmly to congratulate
you and your delegation on the outstanding manner in
which you have been presiding over the Security
Council this month and also to convey to you the
appreciation and gratitude of the delegation of Senegal
for your praiseworthy initiative in organizing, within
this forum, a public debate on the role of civil society
in post-conflict peace-building.

Despite the laudable efforts of the international
community and the deep involvement of our
Organization in conflict resolution and in pacifying
hotbeds of tension, the volatile situation in the field in
many conflict-affected countries and regions has often
promoted a resurgence of such conflicts. That is why,
more than ever, there is an imperative and urgent need
to harmonize the actions of all of the players in the
crucial phase of post-conflict peace-building, in
accordance, moreover, with one of the
recommendations contained in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003 on conflict
prevention.

Given their presence in the field, their proximity
to the players and their familiarity with political,
economic and social realities, civil society
organizations can, in a symbiotic relationship with
Governments and international organizations, play a
decisive role, at least during two stages linked to
peace-building: the phase of the creation of objectives
and the period of the implementation of such
objectives.

My delegation believes that there is a crucial need
for the United Nations and in particular the Security
Council to invite civil society organizations fully to
participate in defining transition mandates even before
peacekeeping operations conclude. The idea is to
combine the global, regional or subregional vision of
any United Nations approach and the local perspective
inherent in the activities of civil society organizations.
Such an inclusive approach would allow those
organizations to provide first-hand information on the
milieu in which they are developing and to participate
actively in the definition of objectives and peace-
building means by spelling out their areas of
preference.

Moreover, the contribution of civil society
organizations can be even more decisive in the phase of
active peace-building, since they seem to respond more
swiftly than other actors in carrying out certain tasks,
such as assistance for refugees and displaced persons
or their reintegration into their lands. However, the
assignment of such missions to civil society
organizations must be preceded by adequate financing
and by a division of tasks to be agreed upon with the
official United Nations representative in the country
concerned.

With regard to the African continent - battered
by so much violence and by so many armed
conflicts - the civil society organizations already
present on the ground are in a position to better play
their role at this sensitive stage of peace-building. That
is, they would stand to benefit from the international
community's moral, material and financial support, so
that many of them would no longer be merely passive
and powerless witnesses to unspeakable human
tragedies, but actors in the redemption of the
communities they wish to serve.

In conclusion, I should like to clarify that at this
critical stage of peace-building, active complementarity
- I would even say active solidarity and positive
cooperation - on the part of all the various players
must prevail. In that regard, the Security Council
would be well advised to lay the foundation for a
normative framework defining the responsibility of all
actors - including those of civil society - with a
view to promoting a coordinated, consistent and swift
response to the imperatives of peace-building.

