Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The fact that you have
been sitting here for three hours, Mr. Prime Minister,
demonstrates how seriously you take the issue and
how high your delegation places the issue of children
and armed conflict on your agenda. I would also like
to congratulate you on the consensual adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018), which, if my information is
correct, now has 98 sponsors. I believe that you will hit
the record number of 100 by the end of the day.
I would also like to commend the three briefers
today. Virginia Gamba has been working tirelessly
on this issue for many years and we support her. Her
mandate needs support. I also highly appreciate her
close cooperation with UNICEF. I praise Henrietta
Fore and UNICEF for the work they have been doing on
youth, in addition to the cooperation that I mentioned.

I also thank the third briefer. She offered a very
impressive demonstration of what she has gone through
in Colombia. Like my French colleagues earlier today,
I would like to highlight the need for civil society
initiators, of which there are many in Colombia.
Germany has been trying to help to promote the process
in Colombia. One of our project partners is Benposta,
which is a charity that houses former child soldiers and
adults affected by violence. Through contributions to
the United Nations Post-Conflict Multi-Partner Trust
Fund for Colombia, Germany is supporting two projects
that seek to reintegrate young former combatants of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia and to
prevent new recruitment.

While Germany aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union, I
should like to make four brief points.

First, we commend the Secretary-General and his
annual report (S/2018/465), which is a key document
and tool for implementing the children and armed
conflict agenda. While there have been some positive
developments - we heard from the representative
of Cote d'Ivoire about what happened in his country,
while the Sudan and other countries have adopted
action plans - overall, when we look at the message
conveyed by the report, it is rather devastating.

The Prime Minister of Aruba, representing the
Netherlands, said earlier that what we are witnessing
is eroding respect for humanitarian law. Like others,
she was shocked by the figures that you, Mr. President,
mentioned at the beginning of your statement. Thus,
there is much work to do, and it must remain on the
agenda of the Security Council, which also leads
to something that was noted earlier by our French
colleague, and that is the importance of raising public
awareness by having the discussion here. As the
representative of Ethiopia, among others, said, we have
to include child protection in armed conflict in country
resolutions and mandate child protection advisers in
missions. In all mandates of peacekeeping operations,
we must keep children and armed conflict on the agenda.
I would also like to highlight one point that has been
made by several speakers. We have to underline and
work on accountability. We have to prevent impunity
for those who commit grave violations of human rights
in that context.

Secondly, and something Ms. Gamba also
highlighted, there are many non-State actors and
parties involved in conflicts across borders. We
therefore totally support the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General's efforts to work across borders
with regional organizations, because we believe that
in doing so she can receive joint responses to respond
to cross-border challenges, for instance through joint
prevention strategies, joint standards for training and
joint responses to reintegration needs.

Thirdly, we support Sweden's focus on prevention.
That is key. The reintegration of former child soldiers
is part of a strategy to resolve conflicts and preserve
peace, which means that reintegration programmes are
key. They need to include gender aspects in order to
be effective for boys and girls alike. We also share the
View that funding for reintegration must be predictable,
sustained and flexible. Germany has supported long-
term projects focusing on vulnerable groups in society,
including former child soldiers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Fourthly, effective prevention goes beyond
reintegration programmes and needs to focus on
education. Earlier, my British colleague highlighted the
need for and underlined the right to education and what
we are trying to achieve with Sustainable Development
Goal 4. Education is also key to prevention. In 2011 and
2012, when Germany last sat on the Security Council,
we made children and armed conflict a top priority of
our time here. We commit to keeping it on the agenda
when we are a member of the Council next year and the
year after. We are committed to further strengthening
the link between child protection and prevention. We
see prevention as a cross-cutting issue in the Council's
work. We will continue the discussion that our Swedish
friends have started and use the momentum from this
year's debate and the upcoming high-level meeting on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace to keep the topic
on the agenda.

