Let me first thank the President of the Security Council for organizing today's debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his inspiring briefing. Today's debate is indeed more than necessary as the Gulf is in the grip of growing tensions. It is the responsibility of the Security Council to address the issue with a view to preventing any escalation and conflict there that would be dramatic for the region and for international peace and security. We must also aim for lasting stability by contributing to building a regional security architecture. Belgium is a founding member of the European Union (EU) and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Accordingly, my country encourages all regional approaches based on dialogue, cooperation and, ultimately, integration, and on the defence of common interests and values. This idea is not new for the Gulf region or the wider Middle East, but it is now time to put it into practice. To that end, three guidelines seem to me important. First, the countries of the region suffer from a cruel lack of mutual trust, which thwarts any joint initiative to build a common future. Trust is not something that can be decreed at a major conference; rather, it is built up, step by step, with very concrete actions, admittedly modest at the beginning, but with the potential to create a virtuous circle. The first focus of any initiative should therefore be the development of concrete confidence-building measures between countries that want to move forward. I am talking in this regard about concrete steps in very circumscribed areas where the abstract notion of common interests could be translated into tangible benefits for all, including, for example, projects in water management, environmental preservation, energy transition and economic diversification, and joint initiatives in the field of health, quality tourism and cultural heritage preservation. Secondly, regional ownership of these initiatives is a key element. There is no point in trying to impose turnkey models, even if they are motivated by the best of intentions. This does not mean that countries outside the region have no role to play; on the contrary, outside countries can support confidence-building measures in a very concrete way and share their experiences. Indeed, Belgium believes that the EU, and other actors as well have a historical experience of regional integration and cooperation that can be a source of inspiration. The OSCE, too, in the wake of the Helsinki process, which the Secretary-General has mentioned several times, has built up a remarkable inventory of confidence- and security-building measures. Let us make use of these rich resources. Thirdly, the United Nations has an assistance role to play in this project, as the Secretary-General has just underlined. The United Nations can, through its institutional resources and the shared values of the Charter, support preventive diplomacy efforts and thereby help to bridge national divides. Another aspect that cannot be avoided is the overarmament of the region. Ultimately, disarmament and non-proliferation in the conventional and non-conventional fields must become a common objective. In this respect, Belgium supports the Iranian nuclear agreement. My country joins its European partners and the majority of the members of the Security Council in defending the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with conviction. The JCPOA is one of the great successes of nuclear non-proliferation, dialogue and diplomacy. Since its entry into force, the Plan of Action has made it possible to guarantee the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian programme, which is also why Belgium regrets the United States withdrawal of from it and the reimposition of unilateral sanctions, on the one hand, and the increasing non-compliance by Iran with its commitments, on the other hand. We reject any less-for-less approach. Still in the field of security, my country believes that putting an end to the conflict in Yemen, an important point also mentioned by the Secretary-General, could represent a building block in the gradual establishment of a future regional structure for dialogue and cooperation. We therefore call for a real political commitment by all parties to a joint declaration that would pave the way for peace and for greater cooperation and mutual trust in the region. In conclusion, I would like to mention two principles that should guide our action: dialogue and cooperation. Only through dialogue and cooperation can we develop a common political vision. These are certainly not easy principles, but they are indispensable for moving forward.
