I thank Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. I would like to start on a positive note and acknowledge the allocation of state- and county-level Government portfolios. However, in general, the thorough reports from the Panel of Experts (see S/2020/342) and the Secretary-General (S/2020/1180) make for grim reading. The implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan has mostly stalled and the deadlines for military unification and Government institutions are not being taken seriously enough. The economic reforms and the establishment of key transitional justice institutions, such as the hybrid courts, have not been implemented and the Upper Nile still has no Governor. We continue to hope that one will be appointed, which will make local mediation efforts easier. We remain very disturbed about the continued extensive involvement of heavily armed civil defence groups in subnational violence and about its impact on civilians. We are afraid that the violence will continue in the dry season, which begins as soon as next month. The continued increase in civilian abductions, including of women and children, especially by the National Salvation Front and other armed elements, remains a major concern. Political actors are increasingly manipulating violence at the local level, and that in turn prolongs the national conflict. In the light of the horrendous human rights violations, we continue to support the sanctions and the territorial arms embargo. The allegations claiming that the arms embargo is detrimental to the ability to equip a unitary army and therefore to the prospects for peace are misleading, as the embargo includes provisions for exceptions. For us, the importance of accountability cannot be stressed enough. It should also be vital to South Sudan to stop the cycle of violence and create conditions that enable its people to feel the dividends of the peace agreement. We therefore encourage South Sudanese authorities to promote local accountability initiatives in compliance with international humanitarian law standards. The overall humanitarian situation in the country remains dire and has worsened in the rainy season. Heavy rains have displaced many and the food security situation has deteriorated. Sadly, humanitarian access has also deteriorated, mainly owing to the ongoing hostility directed at humanitarian workers. We call on the Government of South Sudan to help us deliver humanitarian aid, as it is a matter of life and death to so many. Sadly, UNMISS has experienced an exponential increase in denials of access for its patrols. We call on the South Sudanese authorities not to obstruct the peace process but to help it achieve its ends. Last but not least, I want to thank the Panel of Experts, the staff of UNMISS and David Shearer for their tremendous work in a very testing environment.
