Ms. Del Ponte (spoke in French): I, too, wish to
thank all members of the Security Council for their
comments and assessments, and in particular for the
message I have received from some that Karadzic,
Mladic and Gotovina must be tried in The Hague. Of
course, it does me, my colleagues and the entire
Tribunal good to hear such a message.

President Meron answered all the questions and I
have nothing to add, other than two important points. I
note that Serbia and Montenegro intends to resume
cooperation, and I do mean "resume" because, as I
have reiterated since December, we have had none at
all. The intention is a good one and I await immediate
results. The situation is urgent. Belgrade can begin its
cooperation forthwith. Of course, I need an
interlocutor, since Belgrade has been unknown to me
until now.

Secondly, with respect to the transfer of cases,
when President Meron refers to cases under rule 11 bis,
these are cases in which we already have indictments. I
have about 100 cases in which I still have no
indictment or in which I was prepared to issue one but
did not do so after the Security Council adopted its
resolution. These are so-called mid-level cases, but
nevertheless involve defendants or suspects who are
guilty of very serious crimes. We are considering
transferring those cases to national judicial authorities.
We are currently working with the Belgrade Prosecutor

on the transfer of a very important case on which I
have already prepared an indictment, which I have not
submitted, and the Belgrade Prosecutor has agreed to
take on that case.

This will be a test. It will be a test with Belgrade,
and it will be a test with Croatia. We eagerly await the
beginning of work by the Special Chamber in Bosnia
and Herzegovina: beyond the ll-bis cases - on which
indictments exist - there are many other files on
suspects, containing sufficient evidence to bring them
to trial.

This is all to say that we remain firmly against
impunity for the perpetrators of these crimes.

