Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): I would like to begin
by thanking the French delegation for its leadership in
March and congratulate it on its successful presidency.
I wish every success to Germany during the month of
April. Let me also thank our briefers for their insightful
introductory remarks.

Today's meeting is of particular importance for
Poland. Poland has pursued its membership in the
Security Council with three main priorities - first,
strengthening international law; secondly, promoting
the protection of civilians in armed conflict; and,
thirdly, advocating for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Poland had the privilege of presiding over
the Security Council's work in May of last year. We
organized two high-level open debates - on upholding
international law within the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security (see S/PV.8262)
and on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
(S/PV.8264). Both debates focused on international
humanitarian law.
Today's briefing constitutes the continuation of the
Council's efforts to talk about the situation of those
affected by conflicts and work out ways to relieve
their suffering. Allow me to share a few comments
regarding my country's perspective on three challenges
for international humanitarian law - implementation,
development and partnership.

First, Poland strongly supports the implementation
ofinternationalhumanitarianlaw,inparticularregarding
the strengthening of the protection of civilians. The
goal of minimizing the suffering of the victims of wars
and conflicts cannot be reached without safeguarding
humanitarian aid. International humanitarian law
serves those who are affected by atrocities. It must also
be an effective tool for those who provide humanitarian
assistance. For that reason, we decided to join the
political declaration on the protection of humanitarian
and health workers in conflict. We will continue our
efforts to enhance the protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel.

As we all know, international humanitarian law is
one of the areas of international public law with the
greatest number of multilateral treaties. The great
codifications that emerged in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries in the form of The Hague and
Geneva Conventions were among the most significant
law-making initiatives in modern international law. It is
said that each new Geneva convention appears one war
too late. Newer and newer conflicts proved that there
were a number of gaps and inconsistencies relating to
the Conventions, which forced a natural regulatory
reflex - the need to engage in codification efforts
after the end of each conflict to amend and supplement
existing treaty regulations.

While respecting the heritage oftreaties, we need to
think progressively. For example, the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians have set out a framework
for all Member States to improve the capacity of peace
operations to protect civilians and could be considered
a code of conduct to be followed by all involved in
peacekeeping operations.

We believe that a comprehensive awareness of basic
rules flowing from international humanitarian law,
such as the protection of civilians in armed conflicts,
should be spread among all State and non-State actors.
Awareness-raising activities in that regard are therefore
essential at both the national and international levels.
Activities in the areas of education, training and media,
including social media, are particularly important in
today's world.

Secondly, when it comes to the development of
international humanitarian law, Poland is strongly
committed to the strengthening of international
humanitarian law, as reflected in our activities. Since
the beginning of the intergovernmental process to
strengthen respect for international humanitarian law
eight years ago, Poland has supported the establishment
of a stand-alone forum of States to enable a discussion
on international humanitarian law on a regular basis
and the sharing of best practices among States in
its implementation and dissemination. Despite the
commitment of numerous States, consensus on that new
international humanitarian law compliance mechanism
has not been reached. We call on all States to support
that initiative.

Thirdly, close cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) provides
a good example of partnership in the service of
international humanitarian law. Poland signed a
memorandum of understanding with the ICRC in the
area of humanitarian assistance and international
humanitarian law. At the national level, we have
been engaged in a partnership with the Polish Red
Cross, including in the field of education. Every year,
Polish authorities organize a five-day annual course
with the Polish school of international humanitarian
law. The course is intended for different groups of
recipients - students, professional commissioned
officers and members and volunteers of the Polish Red
Cross and other non-governmental organizations. The
Professor Remigiusz Bierzanek competition, another
Polish initiative, grants awards to the best papers on
international humanitarian law and provides students
and graduates in law, international relations and similar
disciplines an opportunity to present their work to a
wider community of specialists. And, next June, we
will organize the Warsaw Humanitarian Expo 2019.
We hope to have all stakeholders on board while
coordinating efforts with a view to achieving the
worldwide observation of humanitarian law. The Expo's
Humanitarian City will be a platform for representatives
of non-governmental organizations, international
institutions and academia to explore issues related to
the legal obligations of humanitarian actors.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate that upholding
and strengthening the principles of international
humanitarian law remain core obligations of the United
Nations and its Member States. Poland will continue
its engagement in that regard for the remainder of its
membership in the Security Council and beyond.

