Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for the initiative of
the United States in convening today's open debate on
one of the most important crises of today: the outbreak
of Ebola in West Africa. Given the significance of
Council resolution 2177 (2014), adopted today, Japan
was one of its co-sponsors.

In the current difficult circumstances, I would like
to express Japan's deepest sympathy to the families of
the ever-growing number of victims of Ebola and to the
people and the Governments of the countries affected,
especially Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. These
three countries are all in a post-conflict stage and are
now at the crucial juncture of consolidating peace
and ensuring long-lasting stability. In this regard, we
are aware of the importance of preventing a public-
health crisis such as this outbreak from turning into a
peacebuilding crisis.

It is therefore important to coordinate our actions
at the international level to rapidly address this global
health crisis. To that end, Japan is very grateful to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership in
mobilizing and scaling up the support and commitments
from the international community to overcome this
crisis. I would also like to pay tribute to the efforts of
the many health-care workers who are laboring under
very difficult conditions on the ground.

I would like to share with the Council Japan's
response to this emergency.

First, regarding our financial and in-kind
contributions, we have so far provided $5 million for
West Africa, including Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
in cooperation with the World Health Organization
(WHO), and here I thank Dr. Chan; UNICEF; the World
Food Programme; and the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. My Government
dispatched Japanese medical doctors specialized in
infectious diseases to Liberia and Sierra Leone four
times through the WHO Global Outbreak Alert and
Response Network.

Most recently, Japan decided to provide 20,000
infection protection suits for health-care workers in
Liberia and Sierra Leone. According to WHO, this
equipment is very much needed on the ground. We hope
that these contributions will help reduce the number
of infections among health-care workers. We remain
ready to provide more.
Secondly, Japan is ready to provide a new
medication to cope with Ebola. The use of the
medication known as T-705, or Favipiravir, is expected
to be effective as a post-exposure prophylaxis against
Ebola. This medicine is an experimental drug developed
by two Japanese companies: Toyama Chemical and
Fujifilm Corporation. We are working with WHO,
pharmaceutical companies and other countries so that
this medication can be put to use as soon as possible.

Thirdly, over the long term, we will continue to
support African countries' own efforts to improve their
resilience against public-health crises. Strengthening
Africa's social and economic resilience is one of the
priorities of Japanese policy towards Africa through
the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, otherwise known as the TICAD process.

Providing comprehensive strategic assistance aimed
at strengthening the disease-prevention and detection
capacities of Africa is one of the primary objectives of
TICAD. An excellent example is the Noguchi Memorial
Institute for Medical Research, in Ghana. It is one of
the most important medical research institutions in
West Africa, capable of conducting laboratory tests for
the Ebola virus.

In closing, I join other speakers in expressing
our hope that this Ebola outbreak will be quickly
brought under control. I would like to reiterate Japan's
determination to take an active role in combating this
global threat.

