Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like, first
of all, to express our appreciation at seeing you this
morning, Mr. President, as you preside over this very
important and timely meeting of the Security Council.
I congratulate the Egyptian delegation for organizing
today's debate on a troubling issue of great concern for
the international community.

We also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of New Zealand and the Deputy Ministers of Malaysia,
Spain and Japan. We thank the Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson for his timely briefing and we
also thank Mr. Crown and Mr. Afifi for their very
insightful briefings, given the very important role
their organizations play in the fight in which we are all
engaged.

We welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/6, on threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts, and commend the
Egyptian delegation for the efforts deployed that have
led us to its adoption by the Council this morning.

The ability acquired by terrorists to conquer and
administer territories is one ofthe most disturbing facts
in today's international reality. By exploiting religious
beliefs, ethnic differences and political ideologies to
legitimize their actions, the terrorists have divided
nations, recruited followers and taken hold of vast
territories. They are, avowedly, intent on building
States, based on the most obscure irredentism.

The principal consequence of such a development
has been the spread of violent extremism across vast
regions of the world with a message of totalitarian
intolerance of religious, cultural, social and racial
diversity, posing an immense challenge to the
universal values of peace, justice and human dignity,
as proclaimed by the United Nations, and provoking a
humanitarian crisis of catastrophic proportions.

It is against that backdrop that the international
community is applying renewed determination and
seeking the most suitable ways to counter this new
brand of violent radical extremism and terrorism
through in-depth studies of the phenomenon, refined
operational tools to counter the threat, and international
cooperation as a key to our success. Angola, as Chair
of the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region and in partnership with the United Nations,
organized in mid-February 2015 a regional seminar
on terrorism, aimed at the pacification and resolution
of conflicts in the Central African region, where
disturbing signs of the terrorist threats are making
inroads. Angola has also participated in meetings of
the Southern African Development Community, which
recently adopted a strategy to combat terrorism in the
southern African region. These actions highlight the
Angolan Government's commitment to contributing
to the creation and implementation of mechanisms to
combat the terrorist threat.

Violent extremism originates and thrives in specific
contexts, with a number of clearly identified situations
as its drivers. Radicalization and violent extremism find
fertile ground poverty, unemployment, corruption and
disrespect for fundamental human rights. The political
and economic exclusion of ethnic and social groups,
marginalization, impediments to public freedoms, poor
governance, the culture of impunity, repressive policies
and discrimination are some of the fundamental drivers
exploited by violent extremists.

Another powerful driver, consistently invoked in
their narratives, is the issue of unresolved conflicts,
permitting extremists to exploit deep-rooted grievances
arising from oppression or its remnants and foreign
intervention. Such grievances, deeply entrenched in the
ideology of violent extremist, impose the urgent need
to resolve long-standing conflicts and put an end to
deceptive narratives of revenge and hatred.

The most outrageous feature of today's violent
extremism is the exploitation of religious belief in
order to divide nations, suppress religious, cultural
and ethnic diversity, and perpetrate despicable crimes
in the name of religious homogeneity. In presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/6, which we have adopted
today, the Security Council notes how terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Al-Qaida craft distorted narratives based on
the misinterpretation and misrepresentation of religion
to justify violence and recruit supporters and foreign
terrorist fighters.

The Secretary-General, translating the deep
concern of the international community, presented to
the General Assembly at its current session his Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, as and when
conducive to terrorism. Angola supports the Plan and
is ready to participate in the work necessary to make
it implementable. The Plan of Action acknowledges
the need of concerted action in addressing terrorism
beyond law enforcement, military or security measures
by placing special emphasis on prevention, in
particular through social and economic development,
good governance, human rights and humanitarian
concerns, the rule of law, combating discrimination,
marginalization and exclusion.

The agenda to prevent violent extremism emphasizes
the impact of action at the local, national and regional
levels in a mutually reinforcing process with an all-
of-United-Nations approach. In that connection, this
meeting of the Security Council constitutes a valid
contribution to the implementation of the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action, which we again welcome.

The Deputy Secretary-General this morning
clearly reminded us of the particular role that young
people have to play in our deliberations. Youth is
a fundamental element in this process. It is among
young people, mostly the disenfranchised and poorly
educated, that violent extremism thrives and is the
main recruitment base for the contingent of foreign
terrorist fighters. Accordingly, it is crucial to raise
young people's awareness of preventing violent
extremism and terrorism by securing their integration
in decision-making processes, engaging in dialogue
among generations, their participation in their
respective communities, stepping up the struggle
against poverty social marginalization, and enhancing
education on respect for human rights, diversity,
peaceful coexistence and tolerance.

The participation in our meeting of Mr. Mohi
El-Din Afifi and Mr. Steven Crown is very welcome
indeed, given he pivotal role that their respective
organizations can play in the successful implementation
of the Secretary-General's Plan of Action and the
presidential statement that we have just adopted.
The ideological debate on preventing and actually
countering terrorism is a vital component in the area
of information technologies in order to effectively
challenge and demystify the narratives propagated
by violent extremists and terrorists. As the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism states, the United
Nations plays a central role in uniting the international
community and giving coherence to its efforts in
preventing and countering violent extremism and
terrorism.

The Security Council, through the mandatory
powers entrusted to it by the Charter of the United
Nations, must play a crucial role in leading the
international community in this decisive struggle to
uphold the principles and purposes of the Charter and
the universal values ofpeace, justice and human dignity
that violent extremism and terrorism are challenging in
a way unprecedented since the founding of the United
Nations.

