Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): We thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening this important
open debate on the topic "Maintenance of international
peace and security: Reflect on history, reaffirm the
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations".

As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, Papua New Guinea
will celebrate its fortieth year of independence and
membership in the Organization. When we joined,
on 10 October 1975, our country committed "to the
maintenance of peace throughout our region and the
world and to our undertaking to uphold the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations". Indeed, that
commitment has been reaffirmed time and again by
our leaders at successive general debates at the General
Assembly. It will continue to be maintained along with
the reaffirmation of our commitment to the rule of
law and support for the principle of non-interference
in the internal affairs of sovereign States, as noted in
Article 2, paragraph 7 of the United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, we support the initiative by France
on restraint in the use of the veto in relation to mass
atrocities. However, we would further propose that
this very important issue be discussed in the General
Assembly in order to garner the widest possible support
for the initiative from the States Members of the United
Nations.

We strongly support the statement in the Chinese
delegation's concept note that countries

"big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are all
equal members of the international community, and
they are all entitled to participate in international
affairs on an equal footing." (S/2015/87, annex, p. 3)

That reaffirms Article 2, paragraph 1, of the United
Nations Charter, which underlines the sovereign
equality of all States Members of the United Nations.
We thank all Member States, as we reaffirm this
important principle. In that regard, I would especially
refer to the statement made this morning by the
Foreign Minister of New Zealand, who noted the fact
that we - in this context I think he was referring to
the Council - "should listen to the United Nations
membership, including the smaller members, which
are often not heard". He further said that "we should
hear their disappointment and their frustration" (supra, p. 8). We submit that hearing all voices would indeed
enhance the concept of win-win cooperation, which
today's debate seeks to promote.

Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan underlined
the important nexus between development and security
when he stated that there can be no security without
development and no development without security,
along with the recognition of the importance of human
rights within that context. As we move towards the
adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, we
must also ensure the continued implementation of
the Millennium Development Goals as an important
component of the sustainable development goals.
Development has to be a critical part of the proposal
on win-win cooperation. To recognize that would be a
reaffirmation of the "beautiful vision set forth in the
Charter" (supra, p. 4), as noted earlier by the Foreign
Minister of China.

Part of the development paradigm must recognize
the need to address the serious adverse impacts of
climate change. This issue has been raised by the
Pacific small island developing States in the context of
threats to their sustainable development and ultimately
their existence. To that end, the Pacific small island
developing States proposed the resolution entitled
"Climate change and its possible security implications"
(General Assembly resolution 63/281), which the
Assembly adopted in 2009 and which notes the link
between security and climate change. Paragraph 1 of
that resolution invites

"the relevant organs of the United Nations, as
appropriate and within their respective mandates,
to intensify their efforts in considering and
addressing climate change, including its possible
security implications".

Along with the need to respect and recognize the
planet's limits, we recognize the nature of climate
change to be a threat multiplier, with the potential to
aggravate certain existing threats to international peace
and security. In that regard, among other important
issues, in 2011 the Security Council expressed in a
presidential statement its concern

"that possible security implications of loss of
territory of some States caused by sea-level-rise
may arise, in particular in small low-lying island
States." (S/PRST/2011/15, p. 2)

The United Nations is the only global institutions
that provides each Member State an equal voice. Today's
debate has strongly reaffirmed that proposition.

In conclusion, during his recent visit with the
Pacific island developing States leaders in Fiji, President
Xi Jinping reaffirmed, "we shall be good partners of
win-win cooperation and common development" and
added that China would continue to provide support
and assistance to the Pacific small island developing
States, and for that we are all grateful.

