Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would first
like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for his comprehensive briefing, and to warmly welcome
Mr. Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaci and thank them for their statements
this morning.

Jordan commends the Government of Kosovo's
continued efforts since its formation to deal with the
numerous challenges facing the country. It has worked
to demonstrate that it cares about development and
has made important decisions in areas such as the
integration ofjudiciary structures and in passing a law
criminalizing the actions of Kosovars who participate
in foreign armed conflicts. That definitely represents a
step in the right direction for reform and development,
and we encourage the country's authorities to pursue it.

The changes that Kosovans aspire to for a better life
for themselves and their children will require a greater
degree of committed, shared action on the part of all
the parties in Kosovo. The continuing emigration, legal
or illegal, out of Kosovo, will require the country's
decision-makers to focus on the needs, particularly the
economic needs, of that sector of society, in order to
begin to deal with all the problems that hinder Kosovo's
economy. It is also vital to foster a genuine sense of
citizenship in their country in every resident of Kosovo,
something that cannot be achieved until every citizen
possesses equal rights and responsibilities without
discrimination of any kind. We urge the Government of
Kosovo to guarantee that issue for all and to strengthen
reconciliation among all of Kosovo's communities.

The rule of law is the cornerstone of every modern
and democratic country, and the establishment of the
authority of the State and the rule of law throughout
Kosovo is an important factor in the country's stability
and security. In that regard, Jordan welcomes and
supports the efforts the Kosovo authorities have
made in that area in conformity with international
law and international humanitarian law, and affirm
the importance of the work of the United Nations
Interior Mission in Kosovo in helping the authorities
to strengthen the rule of law. We are also pleased
with the action on creating a specialist court to try
cases investigated by the European Union Special
Investigative Task Force, which should help Kosovo to
turn the page on a part of its past.

We are concerned about the events in northern
Kosovo in which the central authorities' power has been
challenged by local communities in various areas in that
region and about the continued ethnic tensions there.
We urge the Kosovo authorities to maintain contact and
conduct dialogue designed to arrive at an understanding
that will ensure that a healthy atmosphere prevails
within a united State. We encourage them to institute
a programme of social reforms so that all members of
society can live together in peace. We encourage the
European Union and the country's regional partners to
help the Government in its efforts to achieve its goals
in northern Kosovo.

Stability and security in the Balkans in general
can be achieved only through good neighbourly,
healthy, established relationships between every
country in the region. In that regard, we welcome the
positive developments in Kosovo's relations with the
Governmentsoftheregion,particularlyintheresumption
of a high-level dialogue with Serbia. We reiterate the
importance of promoting the implementation of the
April 2013 First Agreement of Principles between the
two countries. We also encourage every country in the
region to strengthen its common efforts and action in
every area, particularly in the security, economic and
social fields.

The growing recognition over time of Kosovo as a
State is a true testament to the country's position within
the international community, and Jordan therefore
encourages that community to facilitate and to refrain
from undermining Kosovo's integration into all the
relevant international organizations and forums as long
as Kosovo continues to fulfil the requisite conditions.

In view of the stability of the situation in Kosovo, we
support extending the period covered by the Secretary-
General's reports on the work of UNMIK.

Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
to the Head of UNMIK and his team for their efforts to
implement the Mission's mandate.

