Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
This resolution constitutes the world community's
demand that Iraq disclose and destroy its weapons of
mass destruction. On 12 September, President Bush
came to the General Assembly seeking to build an
international consensus to counter Iraq's persistent
defiance of the United Nations. Over a decade ago,
after evicting Iraq from Kuwait, the Security Council
determined that peace and security in the Persian Gulf
region required that Iraq, verifiably, give up its
weapons of mass destruction. The Council reached that
decision because of Iraq's record of aggression against
its neighbours and its use of chemical and biological
weapons. For 11 years, without success, we have tried
a variety of ways, including diplomacy, inspections and
economic sanctions, to obtain Iraqi compliance. By this
resolution, we are now united in trying a different
course. That course is to send a clear message to Iraq
insisting on its disarmament in the area of weapons of
mass destruction and delivery systems, or face the
consequences.

The resolution we have just adopted puts the
conflict between Iraq and the United Nations in context
and recalls the obligations on Iraq and the authorities
of Member States to enforce them. It begins by
reference to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990
and the international community's response. It recalls
that the ceasefire ending the 1991 Gulf war was
conditioned on Iraq's disarmament with respect to
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, together
with their support infrastructures; ending its
involvement in, and support for, terrorism; and its
accounting for, and restoration of, foreign nationals and
foreign property wrongfully seized. In addition, the
Council demanded that the Iraqi Government stop
oppressing the Iraqi people. Iraq has ignored those
obligations essential to peace and security.

The resolution confirms what has been clear for
years: that Iraq has been and remains in violation of
disarmament obligations - "material breach" in
lawyers' language. The Council then decides to afford
Iraq a final opportunity to comply. As a means to that
end, the resolution then establishes an enhanced,
strengthened inspection regime. The resolution gives
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) a new,
powerful mandate. Its core is immediate and
unimpeded access to every site, including presidential
and other sensitive sites, structure or vehicle they
choose to inspect and equally immediate and
unimpeded access to people they wish to interview. In
other words, anyone, anywhere, any time. And the
resolution gives UNMOVIC and the IAEA the power
to do their work properly and to ensure the verifiable
destruction of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and
associated infrastructure and support programmes.

Let us be clear: the inspections will not work
unless the Iraqi regime cooperates fully with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA. We hope all Member States
now will press Iraq to undertake that cooperation. This
resolution is designed to test Iraq's intentions: will it
abandon its weapons of mass destruction and its illicit
missile programmes or continue its delays and defiance
of the entire world? Every act of Iraqi non-compliance
will be a serious matter, because it would tell us that
Iraq has no intention of disarming.

As we have said on numerous occasions to
Council members, this resolution contains no "hidden
triggers" and no "automaticity" with respect to the use
of force. If there is a further Iraqi breach, reported to
the Council by UNMOVIC, the IAEA or a Member
State, the matter will return to the Council for
discussions as required in paragraph 12. The resolution
makes clear that any Iraqi failure to comply is
unacceptable and that Iraq must be disarmed. And, one
way or another, Iraq will be disarmed. If the Security
Council fails to act decisively in the event of further
Iraqi violations, this resolution does not constrain any
Member State from acting to defend itself against the
threat posed by Iraq or to enforce relevant United
Nations resolutions and protect world peace and
security.

To the Government of Iraq, our message is
simple: non-compliance no longer is an option.

To our colleagues on the Security Council, our
message is one of partnership: over seven weeks, we
have built international consensus on how to proceed
towards Iraq, and we have come together, recognizing
that our collective security is at stake and that we must
meet this challenge, as proposed by President Bush on
12 September.

To the Secretary-General, Mr. Blix, and Mr. El-
Baradei: We urge you to make full use of the tools
given to you in this resolution, and we pledge our full
support. And we urge every Member of the United
Nations to offer you all assistance possible.

To the Governments and peoples of the Arab
world, including the people of Iraq: the purpose of this
resolution is to open the way to a peaceful solution of
this issue. That is the intention and wish of my
Government. When the Baghdad regime claims that the
United States is seeking to wage war on the Arab
world, nothing could be farther from the truth. What
we seek, and what the Council seeks by this resolution,
is the disarmament of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction. We urge you to join us in our common
effort to secure that goal and assure peace and security
in the region.

President Bush asked the Security Council to take
on the challenge posed by Iraq. He asked that it find
Iraq in material breach of its ongoing obligations, that
it establish an enhanced inspection regime as a means
for obtaining the disarmament of Iraq in the area of
weapons of mass destruction, and that it make clear
that the most serious consequences for Iraq would
follow continued defiance. This resolution
accomplishes each of these purposes. Moreover, it does
so as a result of intense and open discussions with our
Security Council partners. In this process, different
views about the shape and language of a resolution
were fused into the common approach we and our
British partners wanted to create.

This resolution affords Iraq a final opportunity.
The Secretary-General said on 12 September - and he
repeated it again today - that "If Iraq's defiance
continues, the Security Council must face its
responsibilities" (A/57/PV.2, p.3). We concur with the
wisdom of his remarks. Members can rely on the
United States to live up to its responsibilities if the Iraq
regime persists with its refusal to disarm.

