Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We take
note ofthe presentation ofhis report (S/2013/646, annex),
to which we listened with concern, given the relative
lack of progress achieved in the period under review.
We should like to make five observations.

We reaffirm our firm support for the Dayton
Agreement and for the defence and preservation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is critically important, in our view, for
political leaders and the international community to
continue to focus on recognizing the balance achieved
by the Dayton Agreement and the political structures
subsequently put in place. In that regard, we remain
concerned by the negative rhetoric of certain leaders
who continue to attack the accords and to question
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular because their words are
accompanied by efforts to undermine and, in some
cases, to interrupt the functionality of the Federation
and its institutions.

Secondly, we welcome the first census completed
since 1991. We consider it important to take into account
the large number ofdisplaced persons in the aftermath of
the war. The census also contributes to better economic
and social planning. The significant progress made in
unblocking the naming ofjudges to the Constitutional
Court of the Federation is also good news. In addition,
we welcome the proposed constitutional reform put
forth following the governmental crisis of 2013. We
will closely follow that process and we support changes
aimed at making the Federation more functional and
efficient.
Thirdly, we note the ongoing situation in Mostar,
where it has been impossible to elect local authorities
since last year because of non-compliance with
the decree issued by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court. At the same time, we are
concerned by the problem with respect to the
assignment of citizen identification numbers due to the
failure to implement the ruling of the Constitutional
Court. The greatest impact of that situation has been on
newborn children, and it has led to large-scale protests.
Both instances reveal a greater problem identified in
the report, which is the persistent failure to implement
decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court. The failure to comply with the final, legally
binding decisions of that Court represents a violation of
a key provision of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace.

Fourthly, we deeply regret that during the reporting
period the authorities ofBosnia and Herzegovina did not
achieve a single concrete advance concerning the list of
goals established by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council as a prerequisite for closing
the Office of the High Representative. We will keenly
await the results of the next meeting of the Council on
4 and 5 December, which we hope will come up with
specific recommendations on the path to follow.

Fifthly, we recall the application of the judgement
of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of
Sejdic- Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stress the
importance of protecting the rights of ethnic minorities
and, hence, of movement on this important commitment.

Finally, we congratulate Mr. Inzko on his work
and efforts to resolve challenging matters. We believe
that the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization need to maintain their presence in the
country for the time being. Likewise, respect for the
General Framework Agreement for Peace and for the
relevant resolutions of the Council is an indispensable
precondition for achieving long-term stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

