Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and
Ms. Brandt ofUNICEF for their particular presentations.
We commend Sandra Uwiringiyimana for so bravely
sharing her experiences; and we acknowledge Forest
Whitaker's very real contribution to the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign.

The report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2014/339) makes solemn and disturbing reading.
Globally, armed conflicts continue to take a significant,
disproportionate and grave toll on children; that should
be of alarming concern to every single United Nations
Member State. New Zealand therefore urges State
and non-State actors to stop violations and to hold
perpetrators to account. We remain concerned by the
number of persistent perpetrators, and repeat our call
for the Secretary-General's annual report to detail how
long each persistent perpetrator has appeared on the
list.

There has been some good progress towards ending
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
We commend the work of the Special Representative's
Office and other partners, and alongside Morocco we
acknowledge those Governments and non-State actors
that are progressing action plans to end that practice.
Nonetheless, engagement with non-State actors must be
intensified further, given that they are the majority of
those recruiting and using children in armed conflict.

We welcome the strengthening of partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, but more work remains to be done there
as well. Effective action to eliminate violations against
children must start at the national level. We must give
priority to developing a culture that deplores the direct
involvement of children in conflict, and condemns all
violations against children. The United Nations itself
must foster that culture, particularly on the front line.
As a first step, New Zealand calls for mandatory child
protection training for all United Nations peacekeepers
that will stay with them throughout their military
service and should be a key influence on culture and
attitudes after they return home.

New Zealand condemns the intentional targeting
and military use of schools, teachers and students. It
is unacceptable that any child should be denied his
or her right to education, and no family should ever
fear sending its child to school. Likewise, hospitals
and medical facilities must not be targeted or used
for military purposes. New Zealand's Defence Force
operates under a structured framework around the use
ofschools, all underpinned by core principles, including
the protection of civilians and children, and respect for
children's rights to education.

New Zealand endorses the development of the
Lucens Guidelines and encourages other States do
likewise. We stress the need to address violations
and abuses against children in all mediation efforts
and peace agreements. Mandates for all relevant
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
should include robust child protection provisions, and
child protection advisers should be deployed to any
conflict that severely impacts children.

Issues such as reintegration, as mentioned earlier by
the representative of Uruguay; forced suicide attacks,
as mentioned just a moment ago by the representative
of Afghanistan; abductions; casualty reporting; the
impact of explosive weapons with wide-area effect; and
overall accountability measures, among others, also
deserve attention and further consideration.

New Zealand is committed to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. It will only be with
a shared sense of that duty that we will bring an end
to the unconscionable violations against those whom
Indonesia earlier described as a blessing from God.

