Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph 24 of resolution 1970
(2011), of 26 February 2011, I have the honour to report
to the Security Council on the work of the Committee
established by that resolution. The report covers the
period from 3 March to 6 June, during which time the
members of the Committee met three times in informal
consultations. At the outset, I would like to highlight
the Committee's activity relating to the implementation
of resolution 2146 (2014).

Following a request from the Permanent
Representative of Libya to the United Nations on
26 April, on 27 April the Committee added a vessel
attempting to illicitly export crude oil from Libya to
a State on its sanctions list. Prior to the designation,
the Committee had written to the Member States
concerned to seek additional information on the vessel.
The reported State of destination, Malta, and the flag
State, India, responded in a fully cooperative manner,
on 27 and 29 April, and on 3 May, respectively.

After the designation, the vessel returned to Libya
and offloaded its cargo at Zawiya port. Promptly
thereafter, pursuant to a delisting request submitted
by the flag State on 9 May, and having received an
indication from the Permanent Mission of Libya to the
United Nations that it had no objection to the vessel's
delisting, the Committee removed the vessel from its
sanctions list on 12 May. That was the first application
of resolution 2146 (2014), involving the cooperation
of Member States and Committee members and the
assistance of the Panel of Experts.

I would now like to provide a snapshot, in
chronological order, of the other activities of the
Committee during the reporting period.

In informal consultations on 3 March, the
Committee discussed the final report (see S/2016/209)
and recommendations of the Panel of Experts submitted
in accordance with resolution 2213 (2015). Since the
report is publicly available, I will not summarize its
findings. In general, the report was well received. The
main issues raised by Committee members during
the discussion of the final report included reported
violations of the arms embargo and how to enhance
the implementation of that measure, the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters to Libya, the loss of value of certain
frozen assets and how to avoid such occurrence, the
targeting of individuals that can be subject to sanctions
as per the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and the Panel's limited access to Libya. Of the 26
recommendations, the Committee agreed to take
follow-up action on 4 and agreed to revert to 10 at a later
stage. One recommendation, pertaining to designation
of individuals, first requires action by a sponsoring
Member State. Another recommendation, pertaining
to the adoption of an implementation assistance notice
on the assets freeze, first requires the lifting of a hold
by a Committee member. Yet another recommendation
concerning the management of expert groups was
deemed as falling outside the Committee's mandate.
The remaining nine recommendations were addressed
to the Security Council.

On 15 March, the Committee approved a
notification, submitted by the United Kingdom under
sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 19 of resolution 1970
(2011), in relation to the assets-freeze measure after
the hold placed by a member of the Committee was
lifted. On 31 March, the Council adopted resolution
2278 (2016), which extends the mandate of the Panel
of Experts until 31 July 2017. Subsequently, on 6 April
and 16 May, the Committee received from the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs proposals for
experts to serve on the extended Panel. The Committee
approved five experts on 28 April, and a sixth expert
on 23 May.

Following up on a recommendation contained in
the final report of the Panel of Experts, the Committee
updated some existing entries in its sanctions list
on 1 April, and issued a corresponding press release
and note verbale to all Member States. On 27 April,
the Committee received a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations, in
relation to the final report of the Panel of Experts.
The Committee also received a letter from the Panel
of Experts on 28 April, reporting a possible transfer
of military materiel to Libya in violation of the arms
embargo. On 23 May, the Committee received a request
for guidance from Egypt on the assets-freeze measure,
to which it responded on 3 June.

Finally, the Committee met twice in informal
consultations on 3 June, the first time to hear a
presentation from the newly appointed Panel of Experts
on its programme of work under the extended mandate,
and the second time in follow-up on a recommendation
contained in the final report of the Panel, namely, to
hold a joint discussion with the Sanctions Committee
on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and Al-Qaida. During the first discussion, the Panel
informed the Committee of its intended areas of priority
and focus, and the Committee members provided their
feedback. In the second discussion, following brief
interventions by both the Panel of Experts and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
Committee members emphasized the added value of
cooperation and information-sharing between the two
expert groups to enable the Security Council to gain
a comprehensive View of the threat of ISIL and other
terrorist groups in Libya. Committee members agreed
that a second joint meeting in which the two expert
groups would jointly brief the two Committees would
be useful.

