Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on Afghanistan. I also wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
his statement.

Thanks to the efforts of the Afghan Government
and people, the overall transition of Afghanistan in
recent years has proceeded smoothly, and remarkable
progress has been achieved in peace and reconstruction.
Afghanistan has taken important steps towards the
full realization of the ultimate goal of an Afghanistan
governed by Afghans.

Currently, the situation in Afghanistan is at a critical
juncture of its transition. A stable and prosperous
Afghanistan where all ethnic groups live together in
harmony requires long-term efforts on the part of the
Afghan Government and people, as well as sustained
support and assistance by the international community.
I wish to stress the following four points.
First, the 2014 presidential and provincial elections
represent an important milestone in the Afghan
political process. China welcomes the efforts made and
the progress achieved by various parties in Afghanistan
in preparing for the 2014 elections. We hope that the
Afghan people will continue to pursue dialogue and
consultations as a way to appropriately address their
differences and ensure the success ofthe elections, so as
to lay down a sound foundation for the transformation
of the country.

Secondly, China supports the peace and
reconciliation process led by the Afghan Government.
We hope that the Government will listen carefully
to the views of the people and the various political
factions, expand the basis of reconciliation and achieve
greater progress. We support the High Peace Council in
continuing to play a positive role in promoting national
reconciliation, and we welcome the assistance provided
by Pakistan and other regional States.

Thirdly, peace and stability represent the basis for
national reconciliation and economic development in
Afghanistan. The security situation of the country still
remains fragile, and China is concerned by the large
number of civilian casualties. Any act causing innocent
civilian casualties is unacceptable. All parties should
comply with international humanitarian law and other
relevant international law and fulfil their responsibility
to protect civilians.

The transfer of responsibility for security to the
Afghan National Security Forces has entered the fourth
stage. The parties concerned in transferring security
responsibility to the Afghan Government should take a
responsible approach and proceed in an orderly manner
and attend to enhancing the capacity-building of the
Afghan army and police.

Fourthly, there is a need for increased assistance
and continued support for the Kabul process. The
parties concerned should effectively implement their
assistance commitments and, in accordance with the
priorities set forth in the Afghan National Development
Strategy, support Afghanistan in enhancing its capacity
to achieve economic and social development by itself.
China supports Afghanistan in enhancing cooperation
with other regional States on the basis of mutual respect,
equality and mutual benefit.

China supports the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in continuing
to play a central role in coordinating international
assistance for Afghan peace and reconstruction.
China welcomes resolution 2096 (2013), adopted by
the Security Council today, on the extension of the
Mission's mandate. China is in favour of providing
adequate resources to the Mission to implement its
mandate. During the transition period, Afghanistan's
national institution-building and its capacity for self-
governance will continue to increase. China hopes that
UNAMA will continue to engage in full consultations
with the Afghan Government on the implementation of
its Security Council mandate.

China has always been committed to good
neighbourly relations with Afghanistan. It attaches
importance to, and takes an active part in, the peace
and reconstruction process of that country. We will
continue to provide assistance to Afghanistan to the
best of our abilities and play a constructive role for the
early realization of peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan.

