Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the Dominican Republic's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. I also thank you for organizing this debate
on the important topic of the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I would also
like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov
for his comprehensive and detailed briefing.

As we enter the year 2019, I wish to recall that
we are now in the seventy-first year of this long-
drawn-out process and the denial of the right to self-
determination for the people of Palestine. While we
appreciate the commitment of the Security Council, the
United Nations and all interested parties in helping to
resolve the matter, one is left to ponder the unthinkable
question: Is it conceivable that, in another 29 years, it
will have taken us 100 years to not do what is right and
just? We must redouble our collective efforts to work
more diligently and with more determination to bring
the conflict to an end and to assist the two peoples
of Israel and Palestine to come together and live side
by side in peace, harmony, stability and dignity. The
time has come for us to move with more urgency to
deliver to the Palestinian people their legitimate right
to independence and nationhood.

This month marks 10 years since Israel's first major
military assault on the Gaza Strip. Two further major
conflicts have taken place since then, and repeated
outbreaks of violence have ensued. Most recently,
the end of last year saw one of the worst outbreaks
of violence. We once again take this opportunity to
thank the United Nations and Egypt for intervening
to de-escalate tensions, therefore preventing yet
another conflict.

Those recurrent conflicts and outbreaks ofviolence
have had a devastating effect on Gaza and its 2 million
inhabitants. The economic and humanitarian situation
remains dire. Nevertheless, thanks to funding provided
by the State of Qatar, a number of positive developments
have materialized. The United Nations was able to
import fuel to operate the Gaza power plant and, as a
result, the daily availability of electricity has increased
to more than 11 hours, benefiting homes, schools,
businesses and hospitals. I am sure that development
is welcomed by all residents, after approximately two
years of electricity being limited to four hours per day,
or fewer. Another positive outcome is the noted 40 per
cent increase in piped water supply, thereby almost
fully meeting water demands for household purposes.
We hope to see further positive developments as
2019 progresses.

As we enter a new year, secured and stable funding
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
should remain a concern and a priority. We call on
the international community to continue availing the
required resources to sustain the important services
provided by UNRWA for the year ahead of us.

In his report to the Security Council in December
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
Mr. Mladenov informed us yet again that no steps had
been taken by Israel to implement that all-important
resolution (see S/PV.8429). Settlement activity
continued. During the reporting period from September
to December 2018, plans for about 2,200 housing units
in settlements in the West Bank were advanced or
approved by the Israeli authorities. Most of them were
advanced in East Jerusalem. The demolition and seizure
of Palestinian properties also continued unabated.
Those actions are illegal under international law and
represent an impediment to peace and the two-State
solution. Namibia reiterates its firm support for the
General Assembly resolution on the status of Jerusalem
(General Assembly resolution 72/15), which states
categorically that Jerusalem is a final-status issue to
be resolved through negotiations in line with relevant
United Nations resolutions.

Global support for Palestine was reaffirmed
in the General Assembly in December 2018 with
the successful adoption of a resolution entitled
"Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East" (General Assembly resolution 73/89). One week
ago, at its hand-over ceremony, the Group of 77 and
China firmly restated its support for Palestine as it
became the Group's Chair for the year 2019. We look
forward to working closely with Palestine this year.

To conclude, Namibia reiterates its calls on the
Israeli Government to cease its settlement expansion
and destruction of Palestinian homes and infrastructure.
We further reiterate the call for Israel's complete
and unconditional withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. We
should harness reconciliation as a tool to overcome
great societal barriers and work on mechanisms to
address and heal the wounds caused to the Palestinian
people many decades ago. Therefore, a return to the
negotiations table to ensure a two-State solution, with
both living side by side, is the only solution.

I remind Council members that that was the
decision taken by the Council with the adoption of
resolution 181 (1947), which called for the creation
of two States to exist side by side. The Council has
yet to fulfil the commitment made in that landmark
resolution. The two-State solution must be based on the
pre-1967 borders, in accordance with international law
and United Nations resolutions. It is the only way to
ensure peaceful relations between Israel and Palestine.

