Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): The presence
in the Council today of Secretary Hammond confirms
the United Kingdom's strong commitment to Somalia.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General's Chef de
Cabinet, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kay and Ambassador Tete Antonio for their

briefings, and Prime Minister Sharmarke for his
statement.
New Zealand has had a considerable involvement
with Somalia and the Somali people during the past
25 years. A good number of Somalis came to New
Zealand as refugees in the 1980s and 1990s and have
settled in our country. The last time we served on the
Council in 1993 and 1994 coincided with the high point
of the United Nations peacemaking efforts through the
United Nations Operation in Somalia II and then the
sad collapse of those efforts as Somalia descended into
a state of lawlessness that made the continued presence
of peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel untenable.
It was a sad and difficult time for the Council and for
the United Nations as a whole, for Africa and, most of
all, for the Somali people.

Thanks principally to the efforts of the African
Union (AU) and the countries of the region, acting
through the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and with the support of the United Nations,
Somalia is now in a better, if still difficult situation.
There is much that can rightly be celebrated - not
least the fact that there is in place a functioning Federal
Government of Somalia and Government security
forces that, together with the AMISOM. troops, have
managed to push back Al-Shabaab and loosen its hold
on much of the country. We commend the bravery of the
Somali and AMISOM. troops and pay particular tribute
to the willingness of Ethiopia and Kenya to continue to
lead the fight against terrorism in the Horn of Africa.
Thankfully, as we have heard, piracy is no longer the
perennial threat off Somalia's coast that it used to be.

However, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/702) highlights the many difficulties that still
have to be addressed across a wide spectrum, ranging
from the basic need to establish security and stability
across the whole ofthe country, to putting in place sound
and representative governance structures, to re-igniting
economic development and to ensuring respect for the
rule of law and human rights. It is clear that Somalia
has some distance to go in its transition to again being
a fully functioning State.

It is essential that the Security Council and the
wider United Nations system continue to support
Somalia, the States of the region and the African Union
throughout the process. Important measures have
been taken in the past few months to put that support
on a firmer basis. We note in particular the steps to
harmonize the mandates of AMISOM. and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
following the joint United Nations-AU benchmarking
review of AMISOM. and the recasting of the United
Nations support operations for AMISOM. and UNSOM
through resolution 2245 (2015), which we have adopted
today.

The Council will need to continue to pay close
attention to the situation in Somalia in the coming years.
Despite the many other pressing issues on its agenda,
the Council cannot afford to see Somalia slip back into
anarchy and violence. As the past 20 years have shown,
that would be a disaster for the whole region, as well
as for the people of Somalia. On the ground, there will
need to be practical measures to improve coordination
as recommended in the benchmarking review, in
particular, the proposed High-level Partnership Forum
and the trilateral memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations, the AU and the troop-
contributing countries. We urge the newly appointed
heads of AMISOM, UNSOM. and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia to make relationship-
building and cooperation between their organizations
key priorities.

We also urge other States in the region to continue
to support Somalia's process of national rebuilding.
They are central to progress on federalism and to
long-term political stability. They need to be part of
stabilization and service delivery in the areas recovered
from Al-Shabaab. The development of a truly national
Somali National Army requires their support for the
implementation of the Guulwade Plan and for the long-
term development of the Army.

At the political level, the Somali National
Consultative Forum and next year's elections will
be important milestones on Somalia's path back to
nationhood. Somalia's leaders at both the national and
regional levels have vitally important roles to play.
Their focus must be on the good of the country and of
the Somali people and not on their personal or clan self-
interest. It was the pursuit of those narrow interests that
led Somalia to national disaster in the 1990s. In that
regard, the levels of corruption in Somalia are a real
threat to stability and to economic and political progress.
The non-payment of Somali soldiers is a continuing
example of that, and one that will undoubtedly affect
security both in the short term and the long term. We
welcome the Federal Government's efforts to tackle
corruption, including by investigating the non-payment
of soldiers, and urge it to continue those efforts.

It is almost 25 years now since Somalia last
knew peace. Through the courage, determination and
sacrifice ofthe Somali leadership and people, AMISOM
contributors and other international partners, we now
have the real possibility of a different Somalia - one
of unity, stability and prosperity. The Council must
continue to play its part in making this a reality.

Finally, let me thank Nicholas Kay for his signal
contribution to Somalia's recovery.

