Indonesia regrets that the Security Council failed to adopt draft resolution S/2020/852, on the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration (PRR) of terrorists, owing to a non-concurrence vote by a permanent member of the Council. As a country that has been a victim of, as well as on the front line of the fight against terrorism, Indonesia fails to understand why, when the world continues to be besieged by the grave threat of terrorism to international peace and security, an important initiative that has added value in addressing this serious threat has not enjoyed acceptance in the Council, owing to the incomprehensible view of one. The draft resolution is intended to provide clear guidance for Member States to develop and implement comprehensive PRR strategies, construct a strong prosecution aspect, provide clear and practical rehabilitation and reintegration elements by developing long-term methods to counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism. It is also aimed at encouraging a proactive whole of Government approach and recognizing the role that can be played by families and civil society organizations, religious leaders, including urging full participation and the leadership of women. The draft resolution calls upon Member States to address conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, including by preventing radicalism and encouraging close collaboration, capacity-building and sharing experience with prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration measures, including criminal investigation, joint investigation and preventing radicalization in prisons. The draft resolution also calls on member States to develop risk and assessment tools, standard methodology and oversight mechanisms. PRR itself is an integral part of a comprehensive approach in addressing the threat posed by terrorists. This approach is instrumental in the overall counter- terrorism effort and, therefore, should be one of the priorities of the Security Council. Without comprehensive prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration measures, there are significant risks that terrorists may fall into endless cycle of recidivism. A PRR draft resolution, if adopted, would become a key tool for the Council and all member States of the United Nations, as well as the United Nations system, to establish a comprehensive and long-term strategy in countering terrorist acts and violent extremism conducive to terrorism and preventing the recurrence of terrorist acts. Therefore, the Council's failure to adopt this important draft resolution not only paralyses our collective efforts to confront the threat of terrorism but, most important, also sends a damaging signal that the Council, for the first time, is not united in the fight against the scourge of terrorism. As a matter of fact, Indonesia's initiative on a PRR draft resolution enjoys the overwhelming support of almost all Council members. This is a clear and strong testament to the value and substance that it offers. While the majority of members concur with this important initiative, regrettably there is a member of the Council that has an opposing view on what is best for the world and on how the Council should move forward. The wisdom of the many seems to be disregarded. Our collective endeavour to achieve a meaningful Council resolution on PRR should not end here and now. It is our view that in future this important issue will continue to gain the respect and support of all members of the Council, noting that what is at stake is the safety and security of humankind. Let it be known that the world would have been safer had this draft resolution been adopted, and yet we lost a valuable opportunity by not doing so today.
