Mr. Maurtua (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. Minister for Foreign
Affairs, for the manner in which the Philippines is
carrying out its role as President of the Security
Council, which involves this initiative to discuss the
role of civil society in conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

In the last decade, the nature of conflict has
varied substantially. We are no longer dealing with
conflicts between nation-States, but rather with armed
domestic conflicts within States. Since the fall of the
Berlin Wall, more than 33 civilian conflicts have
started or have been reactivated, leaving close to 5
million dead, 17 million refugees and serious
humanitarian crises. Today, several of these domestic
armed conflicts occupy a large part of this Council's
agenda and have warranted the deployment of complex
peacekeeping operations.

For Peru, the role of civil society - that is,
organized non-governmental social actors such as
NGOs, unions, business associations, academic groups,
student and religious groups, among others - is
fundamental in both the prevention of domestic armed
conflict and their contribution towards peacemaking
and national reconstruction efforts. The need to have a
civil society whose primary role is the prevention of
armed conflict is undeniable.

Since in this debate we are confining ourselves to
the prevention of conflict and the role of civil society, I
will focus my comments on three subjects: first, the
conditions that lead to such conflicts; secondly, the
action of civil society in the prevention of conflict; and
finally, phenomena that threaten collective security.

As has been recalled at the current High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly, security,
development and respect for human rights converge in
the prevention of conflicts - that is to say, it is the
precarious levels of life and the exclusion affecting a
great part of the population, particularly in the
countries with the lowest indices of human
development, that become a threat to security and
where the majority of conflicts that we face today have
their origin. Therefore, it is no coincidence that the
majority of these conflicts take place in the African
continent.

This is why we regard as very positive Council
resolution 1625 (2005) of 14 September, which
reaffirms the need to adopt a strategy for the
prevention of conflicts that takes into account the basic
causes of these conflicts and that pays special attention
to building the preventive capabilities required in
Africa.

Work on development policies, including
building their own national capacities, is the primary
preventive action those countries require. Thus, we
need a new multilateral partnership for collective peace
and security that tackles the various adverse factors
that developing countries face, such as education,
health, trade, investment, technology and foreign debt,
among many others.

There are various ways civil society can and
should contribute to conflict prevention, in relation to
situations at risk of turning violent and to the
transformation of the conditions that create those
situations.

Civil society has the duty to warn of situations
where political violence is imminent. It must fight for
public freedoms, the freedom of expression and the
construction of legitimate and democratic institutions
that ensure the rule of law and good governance. It
must keep watch on transparency in the public
administration's use of resources, which are often
scarce. It must be uncompromising with respect to
corruption and be an active agent for denouncing the
illegal traffic of small arms and light weapons and
transnational organized crime.

Civil society must also be an agent of alternatives
for scientific and technological development in order to
optimize the management of natural resources. It must
support preventive diplomacy and mediation, including
through the peaceful settlement of conflicts, when it is
entrusted with those tasks. Through the action of local
and international non-governmental organizations, civil
society also has an active role to play in helping to
mobilize the international community's resources and
to guide the best use of international cooperation,
among other tasks.

In the end, when civil society does not contribute
to conflict prevention, when its capacities are not
called on or when its voice is silenced, it can end up
caught in the problem of confrontation and polarization
that generates violence, while the social fabric that it
represents and in which it functions is torn apart. When
there is no space in which civil society can act, the risk
of an escalation of violence grows exponentially. That
is why the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
future Peacebuilding Commission, maintains contact
with civil society, not only for settling conflicts and
laying the foundations for the national reconstruction
of failed States but also for the prevention of such
conflicts.

Thus, a number of practical mechanisms are
needed so that those bodies remain informed of the
situation of civil society through other actors, rather
than exclusively through dialogue with government.
Those contacts could include prestigious NGOs such as
Doctors without Borders, Care International and
Amnesty International and, above all, contacts with
national civil society, with local NGOs that are part of
the society in which a violent conflict is emerging.

Regrettably, in the outcome document of the
High-level Plenary Meeting, the focus on prevention is
limited. It is therefore appropriate to encourage the
mobilization of civil society in the prevention of
conflicts. It is not only a question of avoiding violent
conflicts that exacerbate poverty and
underdevelopment, displace millions of people, destroy
property and infrastructure and leave social scars that
are very difficult to heal. It is more a human and, of
course, economic issue. It is a question of providing
resources for the development of societies before those
funds later have to be spent on costly military
operations and colossal reconstruction efforts, which
are not necessarily successful.

Finally, I want to refer to potential conflict areas
that some sectors of civil society have repeatedly
brought to the attention of States. One such area is
environmental degradation, which has exacerbated the
destructive potential of natural disasters and, in some
cases, has even provoked such disasters. Another is
that of limited resources such as water. Peru, a highly
diverse country whose topography encompasses the
ocean, an arid coast, the Andes and the Amazon, is
very concerned about such conclusions, which are
based on studies that need to be expanded and
furthered rather than hidden or watered down.

The report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565) considered that
environmental degradation and the destructive nature
of natural disasters constitute a threat to global
security. Therefore, with the support of civil society,
we must continue to carry out a strategic, shared vision
of sustainable development whose three dimensions -
economic, social and environmental - are given
adequate consideration.

Peru aspires to join once again in the work of the
Security Council next January, after more than two
decades. If that comes to be, Peru will make the
problems I have mentioned and the important role of
civil society relevant elements in its approach to the
complex situations on the agenda of this noble Council.

