The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia,
document S/ 1997/ 135.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1997/17, which contains the
text of a letter dated 8 January 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of a letter dated 6 January 1997 and
its appendices from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ethiopia addressed to the President of the Security
Council, concerning the High-level Consultative Meeting
of the Somali factions held at Sodere, Ethiopia.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia
dated 17 February 1997 (S/1997/135).
"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia, bearing in
mind respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Somalia, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It
reiterates that full responsibility for achieving
national reconciliation and for restoring peace rests
with the Somali people.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the efforts of regional and other interested States,
as well as those of international and regional
organizations, particularly the Organization of
African Unity, the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development, and the League of Arab States, to
promote a direct political dialogue and facilitate a
broad-based political settlement in Somalia.

"The Security Council calls upon all Somali
factions to cease immediately all hostilities and to
cooperate with the regional and other efforts for
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia,
including the Sodere (S/1997/17) and Nairobi
(S/ 1997/ 135, annex l) initiatives.

"The Security Council encourages all States to
contribute generously to the appeals of the United
Nations to ensure continued relief and rehabilitation
efforts in Somalia, including those aimed at the
strengthening of civil society. It also encourages
States to contribute to regional mediation efforts for
Somalia.

 

"The Security Council reiterates its call upon all
States to fulfil their obligations to implement the
embargo imposed by resolution 733 (1992) on all
deliveries of weapons and military equipment to
Somalia. In this context, it calls upon all States to
refrain from any actions which might exacerbate the
situation in Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses again its
appreciation for all United Nations agencies and other
organizations and individuals carrying out
humanitarian activities in Somalia. It calls upon the
Somali factions to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of all humanitarian personnel and to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian relief to the
Somali people, including through the opening of the
airport and harbour of Mogadishu.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to continue his consultations with
the Somali parties, regional States and organizations
on the role the United Nations can play in
supporting the peace efforts, including on specific
options contained in his report (S/l997/135). It
requests the Secretary-General to continue
monitoring the situation in Somalia and to report to
it in an appropriate manner on those consultations
and developments in the situation generally.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
