Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we would like to thank the delegation of Ukraine
for bringing this item to the attention of the Security
Council, and also for the presence of Mr. Vadym
Prystaiko, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine. We would also like to thank Mr. Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
Ambassadors Apakan and Sejdik for their briefings.

Our country has been following with concern the
recent events in eastern Ukraine, as well as the recent
ceasefire violations. We regret that, two years after
the conflict began, hostilities have again intensified
in recent months, and we are concerned by the reports
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
with respect to the presence of heavy weapons, tanks
and artillery systems on both sides of the contact line
in the security zone in eastern Ukraine. In that regard,
we believe it is crucial to increase efforts and step up
dialogue in order to ensure the effective implementation
of the Minsk agreements. We understand that is the
appropriate way to find a political and peaceful solution
to the conflict. In that spirit, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2202 (2015). We urge
the parties to comply with their obligations under the
agreements and thereby achieve the objective of the
ceasefire.

Similarly, Uruguay calls upon the parties to
ensure the effective protection of human rights of
the residents of the entire region, in particular the
territories of Donetsk and Luhansk. We believe that
it is crucial for the parties to the conflict to respect
international law and international humanitarian
law in all circumstances. That is essentail in order to
address the situation of internally displaced persons
and persons who require humanitarian assistance, in
particular in terms of protection, continuous supply
of water and food, emergency supplies and other
critical services. It is also crucial to guarantee access
to humanitarian organizations to the affected areas,
and also to guarantee the free and safe circulation of
civilians through the contact line.

Uruguay recognizes the important work done by the
Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE in Ukraine,
and we believe that it is essential that the Mission be
allowed access to all areas of the conflict zone in order
to fulfil its mandate.

Lastly, my country hopes that the challenges in
implementing the Minsk agreements can be overcome
and that existing differences can be settled exclusively
through peaceful means, through dialogue among
the parties and full respect for international law and
democratic values.

