Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Thank you, Mr.
President, for your timely initiative to address this
important subject. It is a particular pleasure for me to
speak at this meeting, presided over by the Prime
Minister of Romania, in the presence of distinguished
representatives of regional and subregional
organizations from all continents.

The topic of this meeting - cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
stabilization processes - goes right to the heart of
Germany's political philosophy. Ever since the Federal
Republic of Germany was founded 55 years ago, its
foreign policy has been based on two principles:
regional integration and international multilateralism.
These principles served us well in the years when
Germany re-emerged from the darkest years of its
history; they served us well as we pursued, achieved
and consolidated our national reunification; and they
will guide us in living up to the responsibilities that we
are prepared to assume within the United Nations.

Regional integration and multilateralism - the
two pillars of peace and security - can best join forces
and generate mutual benefit on the basis of
complementarity, as enshrined in Chapter VIII of the
Charter, with the United Nations at the centre of the
international security system.

As a member of the European Union (EU),
Germany has reaffirmed its commitment to a
cooperative and effective multilateralism. Indeed, the
EU Security Strategy, adopted in December 2003,
enshrines the objectives of enhancing stability, the rule
of law and good governance and of tackling both new
and old threats to international peace. The European
Union promotes a commitment to a more responsive,
rule-based international order through, inter alia, the
strengthening of international justice, including by
means of the International Criminal Court.

In the context of the statement made by Mr. Feith,
who spoke on behalf of Mr. Solana, the High
Representative for the EU's Common Foreign and
Security Policy, let me highlight one element that
illustrates the practical benefits of the EU approach to
effective multilateralism. I am referring to the recently
concluded strategic partnership agreement between the
United Nations Development Programme and the
European Commission on conflict zones and
democratic governance. This new partnership, the first
of its kind - although more are to follow - between
the European Commission and other United Nations
agencies, is also a step closer to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, because stabilization
is not only a post-conflict task, but also an everyday
development effort.

As the purpose of today's meeting is to identify
new methods of cooperation and interaction between
the United Nations and regional organizations, I would
like to put the spotlight on two particular elements:
first, complementarity between the United Nations and
regional actors; and secondly, some very significant
recent developments in Africa.

On the first point - complementarity -
stabilization efforts cover a wide range of activities and
are not confined to the post-conflict phase, as you, Mr.
President, have rightly pointed out in your non-paper.
For each of these activities in the different stages of
post-conflict stabilization, one actor - whether the
United Nations or a regional organization - will offer
a comparative advantage. The situations in the Balkans,
in western Africa and in Haiti all make this point.
Bringing together the right partners at the right moment
is a daunting challenge.

Division of labour can be successful only if three
conditions are met. First, all relevant actors -
institutional and inter-governmental, from within and
outside the United Nations system - must be
involved. Secondly, one actor - normally the United
Nations, but potentially a regional organization - must
take the lead in integrated planning and coordinated
implementation. Thirdly, funding problems must be
resolved.

To optimize each actor's input, enhanced
cooperation among regional organizations, as well as
between those organizations and the United Nations,
and - notably - increased exchange of information
and dialogue, are essential. The channels of specific
and regular communication may vary according to the
needs of the particular stabilization process. We agree
with the Secretary-General that the practice of high-
level meetings between the Secretariat and heads of
regional organizations is welcome. Germany supports
the idea of increasing such meetings. If they are well
prepared, and if they produce meaningful, practical
results, they may be an important contribution towards
a coordinated and consistent multilateral approach to
crisis management and peace-building.

My second spotlight is on important and
encouraging institutional developments in Africa.
Indeed, the African Union is now endowed with its
own conflict prevention mechanism and, since March
2004, with its own Peace and Security Council.
Recently, the Economic Community of West African
States announced its decision to create robust special
task forces. Those are tremendous leaps forward. They
nurture hope for particularly effective cooperation
between the United Nations and African regional and
subregional arrangements. It is in the interests of the
international community to strengthen the capabilities
of these African mechanisms.

A test case for such cooperation and interaction is
the humanitarian crisis currently being experienced in
the Darfur region of Sudan. With the deployment of
120 monitors to the crisis region and, potentially, of
300 peacekeepers, the African Union has assumed an
important engagement in crisis management. The
United Nations and the African Union will very soon
be able to assess the extent to which the agreement
between the Sudanese Government and the Secretary-
General has been implemented with regard to
disarming the Janjaweed, stopping the killing and
pillaging and allowing humanitarian access. On the
basis of that joint assessment, we will calibrate our
future course of action without delay. We look forward
to close cooperation with the African Union in this
regard.

Another encouraging development in Africa is the
African Union's increasing preparedness to prevent or
mediate conflicts. The series of African mini-summits
is a case in point. The forthcoming summit in Accra on
29 July regarding the situation in Cote d'Ivoire will be
of particular relevance. We all hope that it will generate
serious commitments.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
means to achieve, and the conceptual underpinning for,
a multilateral division of labour for peace and security

are already in place. What is now needed is the
political will to make good use of the possibilities.

