Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing and for her twenty-second
report on the situation in Darfur, submitted to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005),
in which the Council determined that the situation
in Darfur constituted a threat to international peace
and security and thereby referred the situation to the
International Criminal Court. Ten years have passed
since the decision was adopted, with the international
community remaining deeply concerned over the
situation in Darfur, which is characterized in the report
as an escalating conflict between Government forces
and rebel armed groups, intercommunal disputes, a rise
in criminality and banditry and widespread violence,
all of which have had an extremely negative impact on
the civilian population.

The Security Council, through resolution 2228
(2015), expressed serious concern at the continuing
deterioration of the security situation in Darfur, calling
into account those responsible for violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Faced with a
lack of cooperation on the part of Sudanese Government
with the Court and the Government's refusal to hand
over high-ranking officials indicted by the Court, the
Prosecutor in her report looks into measures adopted
by the Security Council to date to obtain the Sudan's
compliance with its obligations arising from the Rome
Statute. The Office recalls that the Security Council
has seemingly not adopted any measures to enforce its
decision, undermining the Council's credibility and the
mechanism and purpose of situation referrals by the
Council to the ICC.

The lesson to be learned from the referral of high-
ranking officials ofthe Sudan to the ICC is that there is a
high risk of failure when attempts are made to politicize
the international criminal justice system by making it
a tool for reaching political ends, as typified by that
specific Security Council referral to the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, the Republic of Angola,
as a member of the African Union, supports the African
position concerning the case of the International
Criminal Court against Omar Al-Bashir of the Sudan,
an acting and elected President.

We wish to recall the decision taken at the
African Union Summit held in June, which, inter
alia, requested the suspension of all proceedings
against President Omar Al-Bashir, urging the Security
Council to withdraw the referral of the Sudan's case
to the ICC. The refusal of the Security Council to act
on the request has compelled the African Union to
reserve its cooperation with the ICC. In that regard, we
support the decision of the Republic of South Africa
to respect the entitlements, privileges and immunities
due to the President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir,
during his stay in Johannesburg to attend the African
Union Summit. We note that other African countries
mentioned in the report - namely Mauritania, South
Sudan, Algeria and Ethiopia - have complied with the
African Union decision.

In that regard, we appeal to the Security Council
to consider the African Union request for a more
constructive relationship with the ICC, while Angola
will continue upholding the African Union's stand
on that issue and advocating dialogue and peaceful
solutions to the disputes in Darfur, Sudan, and
elsewhere. We fully agree with the ICC Prosecutor that
the victims of Darfur deserve tangible justice and that
they deserve to see justice served. We are convinced
that the people of Darfur will receive justice only when
a just and lasting peace is attained in Darfur. We hope
that the current initiatives of the Sudanese Government
will bear fruit conducive to peace, reconciliation and
justice.

