Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Secretary-
General Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu for their informative
briefings. I also appreciate Azerbaijan's initiative in
organizing today's meeting. The growing complexity
and multifaceted nature of recent conflicts highlights
the need for more vigorous and coordinated cooperation
and interaction between the Security Council and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation(OIC).

Many countries, from the Maghreb to the Levant,
now face daunting nation-building challenges following
the so-called Arab Spring. Social contracts may yet
emerge in many countries, but we are worried to see
that fundamentalism and extremism tend to fill the
vacuums created by political turmoil and transition.
Therefore, reaffirming genuine Islamic peace and
stability has become a significant task central to our
pursuit of international peace and security, human
rights and development. The fulfilment of that task
undoubtedly will serve global interests. We also believe
that this can be most effectively undertaken by the OIC
in close cooperation with the international community.
In the same vein, we believe that it is very timely for us
to take stock of the progress made in the cooperation
between the two organizations and to exchange views
on the way forward.

Since the OIC adopted its new Charter, in 2008,
it has worked closely with the United Nations in
restoring peace and security in various regions - inter
alia, Afghanistan, Somalia and Darfur. We commend
the OIC office of humanitarian affairs in Somalia for
helping those in need of humanitarian assistance. The
International Contact Group on Afghanistan meeting,
held in Jeddah in 2011, highlighted the essential role
of the OIC and its member States in the process of
Afghanistan's transition into a stable, democratic and
prosperous country. On the Sudan, we commend the
support of the OIC financial institutions in helping the
country to overcome its economic difficulties.

Combating terrorism is another important area in
which the OIC contributes to the work of the United
Nations. While we commend the joint efforts thus
far, we hope that the close cooperation between the
OIC and United Nations organizations will be further
strengthened in diverse areas. In that regard, the
biennial joint meeting between the Secretariat and
the OIC provides a good opportunity to fine-tune
coordination and cooperation at the institutional level.
In that respect, we underscore the utility of the matrix
of activities within the framework of United Nations-
OIC collaboration, adopted in May 2012. We look
forward to the report on more concrete activities to be
presented at the next general meeting, in 2014.

In steering the way forward for closer cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIC, certainly
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
should be a guide post. At the same time, I would like
to mention the recommendations made by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon in his previous reports under the
agenda item "Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations."

First, the respective roles of the United Nations and
the OIC should be further elaborated with regard to the
scope of cooperation between the two organizations.

Secondly, cooperation between the two
organizations should be further encouraged on the
basis of the guidelines established through previous
high-level meetings of the Security Council. Those
include the primary responsibility of the Council
in international peace and security, and the need for
consistency and impartiality on the part of the United
Nations and its partner organizations.

Thirdly, it would be very useful if the OIC clarified
its own comparative advantage, not just vis-a-vis
the United Nations but also alongside other relevant
regional and subregional organizations. For instance,
we believe that the OIC could play a distinctive role in
promoting dialogue among civilizations. As the OIC 10-
year programme of action stresses, intercivilizational
dialogue based on mutual respect and understanding
and equality among peoples is a prerequisite for
international peace and security. We are confident
that the OIC can make valuable contributions to the
maintenance of international peace and security by
building on its areas of strength.

Lastly, I join others in thanking Azerbaijan
for drafting the presidential statement just adopted
(S/PRST/2013/16).

