Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the President of Togolese Republic and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Togo, the Secretary-
General and all of the Ministers for their participation
in this high-level debate.

I associate myself with the statement to be made by
the Observer of the European Union.

Terrorism is a major threat for the African continent,
in the Sahel, Nigeria and Somalia. It is a serious threat
for regional stability and, beyond that, for international
peace and security. It is therefore at very core of the
Security Council's action.

In the Sahel, the scourge grew out of problems
of governance, drug trafficking and the status of
communities. The intervention of French and African
forces has reduced the threat but residual elements
remain. In Somalia, the situation is still fragile.
Al-Shabaab controls a large part of the territory,
and terrorist attacks regularly target Government
authorities. In Nigeria, Boko Haram continues to pursue
its attempts to destabilize the Government.

The phenomenon is constantly evolving. The porous
borders, linked to technological advances and progress
in communications, finance and transportation, have
fuelled relationships between terrorist networks and
criminal groups operating internationally, thus making
the fight against terrorism even more complex.

France has made the fight against terrorism
in Africa one of its priorities. Our commitment in
Mali since 11 January, in conjunction with Malian
armed forces and African forces of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali, is the clearest
sign of that fact. In that respect, I would like to pay
tribute to the commitment of the Economic Community
ofWest African States and the African Union. I welcome
in particular the mobilization of African contingents,
namely, Togolese contingents, which were so swiftly
deployed in Mali.

In January, Mali could have become a State run by
terrorists. The situation was obviously unacceptable,
not only for Malians themselves but for all the States in
the region and beyond the region, that is, for all of those
who could one day be affected by terrorism, in Africa,
in Europe or elsewhere. That is why France, at the
request of the Malian authorities, intervened alongside
Malian forces and African forces. The northern towns
were retaken, terrorists were thwarted and the territorial
integrity of the country was restored.

The adoption of resolution 2100 (2013) confirmed
the unanimous support of the international community
for the stabilization of Mali and the action of France and
African States to counter terrorist groups in the region.
Today, Mali is able to continue its political process,
namely, through the holding of elections. That is crucial
because 4 let us make no mistake about it 4 in the
fight against terrorism, politics is also a weapon.

The fight against terrorism in Africa and the
world remains, above all, a collective responsibility
that requires more than ever the mobilization and
coordination of all stakeholders concerned. I am
thinking first of all of the States of the region, which
have the primary responsibility to prevent and combat
all of the forms and expressions of the phenomenon.
In that regard, we urge all African States to join the
relevant sectoral agreements to combat terrorism and
strengthen mutual cooperation, in particular in the
Sahel.

African regional organizations are particularly
concerned by the scourge that has lodged itself on the
continent. But it is also up to them to provide solutions.
The African Union was therefore able to take up the
initiative against Al-Shabaab and has shown great
determination against the terrorist groups in Mali.
Today, several subregional organizations have acquired
the tools to fight the financing of terrorism, such as
the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa, whose representative's
presence in the Chamber today I welcome.

The European Union also contributes to efforts to
combat terrorism in Africa. It is not only Africa that
the scourge destabilizes; the consequences of terrorism
are also felt throughout the world. Therefore, through
its efforts in Africa, Europe is participating in ensuring
its own security.

Of course, the United Nations must also play a role.
The Organization has acquired the relevant tools to
carry out the fight. First of all, it has adopted a Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, but it has also set up
Sanctions Committees supported by the United Nations
structure, which remind terrorists on a daily basis that
we are not lowering our guard.

All of those efforts should be coordinated in order
to have a maximum impact. It is only collectively that
we manage to effectively fight terrorism in Africa. It is
a major challenge, and we do not have the right to fail.

Before concluding, allow me to express my
condolences to the Government and people of Turkey
who have been struck by terrorism.

