Mr. Heumann (Israel): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important debate. I would
also like to express my appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his briefing and to the Chairs ofthe counter-
terrorism committees for their briefings this morning.

Yesterday. the citizens of Israel woke up to learn
that another horrifying terror attack had taken place
in Jerusalem. Two Palestinian terrorists stormed a
synagogue, attacked the Jewish worshippers and
barbarically murdered five people and injured many
others. Three victims were dual Israeli-American
citizens and the fourth was Israeli and British. The
attack reminded us that terrorism does not distinguish
between nationalities. Terrorism is on Israel's doorstep,
but if nations continue to look the other way, terrorism
will soon be on their doorsteps also.

In the past 14 years, the rate ofglobal terrorist attacks
has increased fivefold. I want to repeat that - there
are five times more terrorist attacks today than there
were 14 years ago. The international community can
no longer afford to be indifferent. Radical extremism
is on the rise and we are losing ground. In order to
defeat terrorism, we must attack its roots, namely,
its ideology, its sponsors and the evolving ways in
which terrorist groups recruit, operate and grow.
We cannot defeat terrorism unless we confront the
violent ideology of incitement. People do not become
terrorists in a vacuum. In the Middle East, hate-fuelled
incitement fills schools, mosques and the media. That
is particularly evident in Palestinian society.

In the past month, there have been six terror
attacks in Israel, in which 11 people have been killed
and dozens more injured. Every one of those attacks
has come in the wake of inflammatory statements made
by the Palestinian leadership, which celebrates attacks,
glorifies murderers and publishes cartoons encouraging
more terror attacks. Countering incitement is one of the
most effective counter-terrorism tools at our disposal.
We must promote education that teaches peace instead
of hate and tolerance instead of violence.

We cannot defeat terrorism while States continue
to sponsor and harbour terrorist groups. Iran is
terrorism's primary sponsor, financier and trainer. Its
proxies - Hizbullah and Hamas - have dispatched
hundreds of suicide bombers, planted thousands
of bombs and fired tens of thousands of rockets at
civilians. Iran's fingerprints can be found on terror
attacks from Argentina to Bulgaria and from Thailand
to India. In Syria, Iran has sent Shiite fighters from
Lebanon and Iraq to fight alongside the brutal Assad
regime. Directing this network is Qassem Suleimani,
the chief of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard's Quds
Force.

Also in our region, Qatar is lending financial aid
and weapons to countless terrorist groups and providing
a base for top terrorist leaders. In recent years, the
Sheikhs of Doha have funnelled hundreds of millions
of dollars to Hamas in Gaza. Every one of Hamas'
rockets and terror tunnels might as well have had a sign
that read: "Made possible through a kind donation from
the Amir of Qatar".

We cannot defeat terrorism unless our counter-
terrorism efforts evolve to meet the changing threat. In
recent years a new phenomenon has emerged in which
terrorist groups are overrunning nations and taking
control of vast areas of territory. Hamas, for example,
violently expelled its political opponents before taking
control of the Gaza Strip. Hizbullah has taken root in
southern Lebanon and amassed over 100,000 weapons
stored in densely populated civilian neighbourhoods.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) has
gained control of tens of thousands of square miles of
Syria and Iraq. By taking over vast oil fields, the terrorist
group has turned itself into a multimillion-dollar
enterprise and uses its newfound wealth to purchase
weapons and recruit new fighters. Terrorist groups
like ISIS are attracting jihadists from all over the
Middle East and as far away as Europe, Asia and the
United States. Many of those foreign fighters are now
returning home equipped with radical ideologies,
military expertise and dangerous aspirations.

Israel welcomes the adoption of resolution 2178
(2014), which addresses the threat of foreign fighters,
and resolution 2170 (2014), which reinforces the need
to curtail the financing ofterrorism. But that is just the
first step. We must match our intentions on paper with
tangible actions on the ground, beginning by countering
the evolving threat of terrorism with creativity and
flexibility. Every day Israel uses its counter-terrorism
expertise to keep its citizens safe. Despite the threats
that surround us, we will never lose sight of what we are
fighting for - freedom, tolerance and the rule of law.
The struggle that we face today is the same struggle
that the rest of the civilized world will face tomorrow.
Every nation has a stake in the outcome.

As we near the end of 2014, I think about all the
lives torn apart by terrorism. Tears and sorrow have
touched every part of the world. As we approach the
new year, let us commit to standing together and
prevailing together so that 2015 will be a more peaceful
year for all people.

