The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

My Government welcomes the adoption of resolution
999 (1995) extending the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) for a period
of up to six months. UNMOT is a small mission, but one
to which we attach great importance. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank its members for doing an excellent
job under difficult conditions.

UNMOT, as the Secretary-General notes in his report,
plays a key role in containing the conflict in Tajikistan. It
does so by monitoring the cease-fire. At the same time, it
provides vital support for the peacemaking efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Ambassador Pr'riz-
Ballon.

My delegation welcomes the fact that, after a long
period of stagnation, dialogue between the Tajik parties has
finally resumed. We would like to thank the Special Envoy,
Ambassador Piriz-Ballon, as well as the observer countries
for their contribution to the results achieved in the recent
meetings at Kabul and Almaty. These results, though
modest, represent badly needed progress. The parties must
understand that the United Nations role, and UNMOT's
presence in particular, depend not only on a cease-fire but
also on a viable political process aimed at national
reconciliation and the promotion of democracy.

Germany remains concerned at the continued
fighting on the Tajik-Afghan border. As the
Secretary-General points out, this fighting involves the
parties as well as Russian border forces. Against this
background, we have taken careful note of the recent
statement of the Foreign Ministry of the Russian
Federation recognizing the validity of the cease-fire
agreement for the Russian forces in Tajikistan.

We believe that a United Nations presence in
northern Afghanistan, as requested by both parties, could
contribute to a lessening of tensions in the border area.
Clearly, the attitude of the relevant Afghan authorities on
this issue will be crucial. We hope that the
Secretary-General will be able to persuade them of the
utility of such a presence.

Reporting to the Council in August 1993, the
Secretary-General observed that the situation in Tajikistan

"contains the seeds of a major threat to peace and
security for Central Asia and beyond." (5/26311, para. 35)

My Government believes that that assessment remains
true. That is why we encourage the Secretary-General to
intensify his efforts with regard to a political settlement.
My Government is ready to lend its full support to these
efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.
