Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
welcoming His Excellency Foreign Minister Salahuddin
Rabbani to the Council, and I appreciate his statement.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing.

We are pleased to have seen some progress in
Afghanistan on electoral preparations and related
assessments, including the announcement of
parliamentary and district council elections for 7 July
2018. At the same time, Afghanistan continues to face
profound and numerous challenges. The seriousness
of the situation in Afghanistan warrants enhanced
performance by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in support of the efforts
of the National Unity Government towards peace and
stability. The Afghan people and the world also look to
the United Nations for vital support for the country's
development and institution-building.

With this in mind, we welcome the Secretary-
General's strategic review as a useful guide for the
Council's deliberations. The Council now needs to
undertake serious discussions on how to incorporate
these recommendations into UNAMA's mandate. That
would be an excellent opportunity to adapt UNAMA's
mandate to current realities on the ground. As the lead
country in the Council on Afghanistan, Japan looks
forward to an intensive and interactive discussion
among Council members on these and related issues.

As the Secretary-General has noted in his report
(S/2017/783), there was no major progress on the peace
process during the current reporting period. Japan
therefore takes note of the expanded role envisioned for
UNAMA as an impartial mediator for the peace process.
The United Nations can make a major contribution
in this area, but the National Unity Government and
regional actors must work to create an environment
conducive to making reconciliation possible.

We are aware of various regional and international
initiatives in support of the peace process that are
currently being discussed. We were encouraged by
bilateral discussions between the leaders of Pakistan
and Afghanistan in June to build regional confidence.
We hope that these and other initiatives will yield
substantive and positive results, with the participation
of all key countries.

Above all, the peace and reconciliation process
must be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, putting the
interests of the Afghan people first. The strategic
review's proposal for United Nations support to
greater unity and cohesion within the National Unity
Government is therefore particularly important. The
Secretary-General has noted some recent improvements
in achieving consensus, but much more is needed. As
Japan has noted in previous briefings, the Afghan
people urgently require their Government to overcome
factional rivalries to meet the country's pressing
security and development neds. It is essential that
credible parliamentary and district council elections be
held as currently scheduled and under secure conditions.

In this vein, I would also like to underline the
importance of efforts to improve security in the country.
The Council and UNAMA have issued countless
press statements condemning the horrifying attacks
on civilians. The unfortunate reduction of diplomatic
and development actors in Afghanistan following the
31 May terrorist attack was perhaps inevitable, but it
has had a negative impact on both international efforts
and the people of Afghanistan. We look forward to
enhanced security and a restored international presence
as soon as possible.

We have much work ahead on Afghanistan. The full
implementation of resolution 2344 (2017) will be vital,
as will the continued and productive engagement of the
international community and all stakeholders. Japan
reiterates its commitment to supporting Afghanistan
and to the enhanced performance of UNAMA.

