Mr. Casardi (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Lithuania, Poland and Slovakia associate
themselves with this statement.

The European Union remains deeply concerned by the
continuing violence in Burundi and hopes that the spirit of
reconciliation can be renewed in the country. The Union
will continue to support the efforts undertaken by the
United Nations to resolve the crisis and welcomes
regional efforts, in particular the action undertaken by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU),

The European Union emphasizes that it is willing to
assist in the recovery of Burundi, in particular by
supporting the specific measures to promote peace and
reconciliation between the various groups due to be
implemented by the Burundi authorities, as provided for
in the Convention of Government. The Union would point
out that only political solutions will enable a permanent
end to be put to the conflict in that country. We believe
it is an absolute priority to search for every available
negotiating channel.

At this stage, coordinated action is needed by the
international community to relaunch political dialogue and
break the cycle of violence and instability. We reiterate
our support for the idea of an increased and active
international presence in Burundi that is both political and
humanitarian. In this regard, the role of personalities from
Africa and other regions acting as mediators or facilitators
is crucial.
In Burundi there are moderate forces open to
dialogue that should be encouraged. The more radical
forces should be persuaded that dialogue is the only
viable option. They must be warned that the international
community is ready to adopt adequate measures to
prevent the country from plunging into chaos and anarchy
and measures against those individuals who refuse
peaceful dialogue.

There is a need for a gradual approach to the
deepening of the crisis in Burundi. At this moment the
mediation and facilitation action of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, of the
Organization of African Unity, of the European Union
and of political personalities must be supported with
every means possible. We are convinced that these
actions could also benefit from increased pressure on the
parties.

The draft resolution that the Security Council is
ready to adopt reflects, in our opinion, the need to send
a strong warning signal to the protagonists of the crisis:
that the Security Council is ready to examine and
eventually impose concrete measures to contain the
deterioration of the situation and prevent a further
destabilization of the country.

 

The European Union reiterates its belief in the need to
call for a conference on the Great Lakes Region, under the
aegis of the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity, in order to find comprehensive answers to the
problems of the entire area. I wish also to point out that the
European Union is in the process of appointing a special
envoy for the Great Lakes region in order to increase its
presence and contribute even more to the search for a
peaceful and long-lasting solution to the many problems
affecting the region.

