Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his comprehensive briefing on his
trip to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
Uganda. The humanitarian situation in those States
continues to be very complex and requires continued
comprehensive international cooperation. Major
changes in the humanitarian situation in those countries
and in other countries on the continent can take place
only with the effective long-term settlement of the
conflicts with the help of the United Nations, the
African Union, African subregional organizations and
other interested parties.

A successful solution to humanitarian problems in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
the problem of refugees and internally displaced
persons, will depend to a significant extent on the
peace process going forward, and in particular on the
effective implementation of the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants.

With the help of the United Nations and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Congolese
parties must continue to work towards a political
settlement, in particular within the context of
preparations for the important second round of
elections. Of course, responsibility regarding the
humanitarian crimes that have been committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as in other conflict
zones in Africa, remains an important element of any
long-term comprehensive settlement.

The signing of a ceasefire agreement between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army, with the facilitation of the government of South
Sudan, offers prospects for a final settlement of the
conflict in the northern part of the country and for an
easing of the situation of the population in that region.
We need full and strict compliance with this
agreement, and the situation in that country must be
permanently stabilized. We view as a step in the right
direction the Government of Uganda's plan for a
gradual easing of the humanitarian situation in the
north of the country. At this crucial point for reaching a
settlement, the international community must provide
wide-ranging support and encouragement, including
financial support, so that the comprehensive
programme for the rehabilitation of northern Uganda
can be carried out successfully.

We trust that, as they gather momentum, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Central Emergency
Response Fund will help improve the humanitarian
situation in Africa and promote the successful
rehabilitation of African States recovering from
conflict. The Russian Federation, for its part, will
continue to do everything possible to promote the
solutions to these challenges.

