Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank, for their presence here and for their
briefings, Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora Citaku, Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo. I would of
course also like to commend the work of Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as well as that of all members of his Mission.

Almost three years after Kosovo's independence,
the institutions of this young country continue to be
consolidated. Democracy is under way. The vote, on
2 November, of no confidence in the Government has
led to the organization of early parliamentary elections,
which are expected to take place on 12 December. We
see that the political climate is allowing everyone to
express himself. We therefore hope that the elections
will permit democratic institutions to be strengthened
even further. In that context, we regret the calls to
boycott the elections. We urge everyone to support this
democratic process, in the interests of all the
communities of Kosovo.

Since our last debate, the General Assembly has
adopted a resolution (General Assembly resolution 64/298) that acknowledges the consequences of the
advisory opinion handed down by the International
Court of Justice (see A/64/881), requested by Serbia,
with regard to the question of the conformity with
international law of the unilateral declaration of
independence by the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of Kosovo.

In taking note of this opinion, according to which
the declaration of independence of 17 February 2008
did not violate any applicable rule of international law,
the General Assembly therefore brought closure to a
debate that had weighed heavily on the political life of
both countries. Serbia received an answer to the
question it had asked. A chapter has been closed and a
new one, of dialogue between the two States, must now
begin.

The European Union has offered to facilitate
dialogue between the Republics of Serbia and Kosovo,
and the General Assembly has welcomed this initiative.
It should begin as soon as possible, and should touch
on various subjects that directly concern the lives of
the peoples by promoting cooperation between the two
countries.

For its part, Serbia continues to make progress on
the road to European rapprochement. On 25 October,
the 27 Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the European
Union decided to entrust to the European Commission
the examination of Serbia for candidacy for Union
membership. France, which has strongly supported this
positive development, welcomes this development.

On the ground, as the Secretary-General notes in
his report (S/2010/562), the situation is relatively calm.
Although we welcome the improvement in the general
climate, France strongly condemns all violence,
whoever the victims and perpetrators may be. It is
important that the Kosovo authorities, supported by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
pursue the perpetrators of these crimes and step up
their efforts in this area.

Kosovo must continue to focus on its
fundamental priorities and to make progress towards
establishing the rule of law and good governance for
the benefit of all its communities. We hope that this
will be the chief goal that the next Government sets
itself.

France will continue to pay great attention to the
situation in Kosovo and to promote dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo and their joint and shared European
future.

