Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to express our gratitude to Ms. Patricia O'Brien for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
modalities for the establishment of specialized Somali
anti-piracy courts (S/2011/360), which we consider a
good basis for creating instruments to counter piracy
activities off the coast of Somalia.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned over piracy off the coast of Somalia. It
poses a threat to international peace and security as
well as to international navigation and the safety of
commercial maritime routes. The capacity-building
measures for Somali State institutions, in addition to
reinforcing sovereignty, should have a significant
positive impact on the fight against piracy.

The international community and Somalia should
continue to work in a coordinated manner in order to
strengthen the Somali security sector. We welcome the
ongoing activities of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia in that regard. We also
encourage the international donor community to
provide the necessary assistance for counter-piracy
efforts.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report on the modalities for
establishing specialized Somali anti-piracy courts,
either in Somalia or on the territory of another State in
the region. The basic parameters for introducing such
specialized courts, or new sections within existing
courts, should be strengthening the rule of law in
Somalia and creating a long-term solution for counter-
piracy activities.

We note with interest the imprisonment of
convicted pirates and the trials that have been
conducted by Somali courts, particularly in Puntland
and Somaliland, as well as by other States in the
region. Prosecuting financiers, facilitators, leaders and
planners of piracy is crucial to addressing this issue.
Establishing specialized anti-piracy courts, either
in Somalia or on the territory of another State in the
region, would require that the Transitional Federal
Institutions adopt the necessary constitutional and
legislative bases, including considering the
compatibility of both options with the relevant
provisions of the 1960 Constitution of the Somali
Republic and the 2004 Transitional Federal Charter for
the Somali Republic.

We are concerned about the fact that the criminal
and procedural codes across Somalia are critically out
of date, containing numerous inconsistencies and
deficiencies. We therefore encourage UNDP and
UNODC to continue their assistance in the preparation
of necessary legislation for processing pirates, but we
have to bear in mind that such a process is possible
only with national ownership. To that end, we
encourage the Transitional Federal Institutions to speed
up the process of drafting and adopting a constitution.

Whichever option for establishing specialized
anti-piracy courts is found most suitable, we have to
consider the shortage of adequate courtrooms,
correction facilities and other necessary infrastructure,
both in Somalia and on the territory of other States in
the region. In both cases, the specialized anti-piracy
courts or new sections within existing courts would be
part of the Somali judicial system. Due to the limited
number of qualified legal professionals in Somalia, the
training of judges, prosecutors, defence lawyers and
other professionals should be maintained and, if
possible, accelerated. We welcome the activities of
UNDP and UNODC in that regard.

Modalities of international expertise and
participation in the work of the anti-piracy courts, or
new sections within existing courts, should be arranged
in close consultation with the Somali authorities. We
welcome the recommendation of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Legal Issues Related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia that international
expertise be drawn from the Somali diaspora. We take
note of the statement of the Somali authorities, as well
as those of other regional States, particularly Tanzania,
regarding possible establishment of an extra-territorial
Somali court.

We also commend the efforts of Operation
Atalanta of the European Union Naval Force Somalia,
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Coalition
Maritime Forces and States acting in their national
capacities in cooperation with the Transitional Federal
Government, other States in the region and one another
to suppress piracy and protect vessels transiting
through the waters off the coast of Somalia. We also
commend the African Union and the troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia for their important
role and hard work in stabilizing the situation in

Somalia. Finally, we welcome the efforts and hard
work of the Contact Group for Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, with its four supporting working groups, as
an effective international cooperation mechanism in
combating piracy.

