Mr. Roman-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first time that my delegation addresses the
Security Council this year, I would like to take this
opportunity to warmly welcome the new
non-permanent members of the Council and to wish
them every success during their term. We reiterate to
them Peru's commitment to make a solid contribution
to the vital task of maintaining international peace and
security, which is the primary goal of this United
Nations organ.

Today's debate is focused on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies. In his report (S/2011/634*), the Secretary-
General judiciously outlines a number of fundamental
aspects to be addressed in that regard, such as security
sector reform and civilian protection, placing particular
emphasis on the most vulnerable groups, such as
children and women, as well as the need to bring to
justice the perpetrators of international crimes.

As is well known, Peru was affected by domestic
terrorism and political violence during the 19805 and
19905. That triggered a process of internal reflection
and reform, as well as the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission. Judicial proceedings have
also been carried out to try the perpetrators in
accordance with due process. Now that nearly two
decades have passed since the violence ended, we
continue to adopt measures that enable us to provide
care and make reparations to the victims.

Strengthening the rule of law is undoubtedly a
fundamental prerequisite if we are to truly speak of
inclusive societies. If we fail to strengthen the rule of
law, the living conditions of our peoples and the
institutional structures of the State, as well as proper
administration, will be undermined. That, in turn, can
have an impact by jeopardizing international peace and
security.

Furthermore, we must reaffirm our commitment
to the fight against impunity, in terms of both national
and complementary international actions. In that
regard, we wish to underscore the work accomplished
by the international tribunals established by the
Security Council and the work of the International
Criminal Court. In that context, we must ensure that
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes that affect
the international community as a whole are duly tried
and punished. As part of that task, the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court establishes the
fundamental role to be played by the Security Council.
All States must unambiguously adopt respective
measures with regard to the provisions of the Rome
Statute and the Charter of the United Nations in order
to respond to requests for cooperation and assistance
and to execute the arrest warrants issued by the Court.

I would like to address two fundamental aspects
in the field of strengthening the rule of law at the
international level, namely, the obligation of States to
refrain from the threat or use of force and the central
role of peaceful dispute settlement mechanisms. In
order to preserve future generations from the scourge
and consequences of war, States are compelled to
refrain from having recourse to the threat or use of
force in any manner that is incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations. That obligation means
that States are to resolve their disputes, including
territorial disputes, by peaceful means in order to avoid
jeopardizing international peace and security.

In that regard, we must underscore the work of
the International Court of Justice, as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations system, to resolve
disputes between States. The General Assembly has
reiterated that point in several resolutions and in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States.

Moreover, given the ongoing situations of
conflict, in particular those arising from the arms race,
the General Assembly adopted resolution 37/10 by
consensus on the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, in which it stated
that the referral of a case to the International Court of
Justice should not be deemed an unfriendly act
between States. The General Assembly subsequently
adopted the Declaration on the Prevention and
Removal of Disputes and Situations Which May
Threaten International Peace and Security and on the
Role of the United Nations in this Field (General Assembly resolution 43/51). That resolution calls for
States to act so as to prevent in their international
relations the emergence or aggravation of disputes or
situations, in particular by fulfilling in good faith their
obligations under international law.

With regard to the International Court of Justice,
there are two factors that that this Council must always
bear in mind. On the one hand is recognition of the
Court's contentious jurisdiction, and on the other, the
recognition of and full compliance with its rulings.
There is no doubt that those two factors, especially the
second, are a clear way of gauging the contribution and
commitment of States to the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as to the other
purposes of this Organization.

We should highlight that States are obligated to
implement the decisions of the International Court of
Justice in all disputes to which they are parties. That
was one of the main objectives that the General
Assembly entrusted to States in the framework of the
United Nations Decade of International Law, from
1990 to 1999, one of the principal objectives of which
was the promotion of ways and means for the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States, including
recourse to the International Court of Justice and full
and unequivocal respect for and compliance with its
rulings.

The Secretary-General's report entitled "An
Agenda for Peace" (S/24111), presented to both the
General Assembly and the Security Council,
recommended that all Member States accept the
general jurisdiction of the Court without reservation
before the end of 2000. However, to date only 66
States, including Peru, have submitted statements that
they recognize the compulsory jurisdiction of the
Court - although in a number of cases they have done
so with reservations. We therefore call on all States that
have not done so to recognize the Court's jurisdiction
as soon as possible.

It is worth stressing that the ideal framework for
the full implementation of the rule of law is
democracy. We tend to distinguish between measures
intended to strengthen the rule of law on the
international level and on the internal level. However,
it is clear that that is an artificial dichotomy and that
actions have effects on both levels.

We recognize that many States are facing a
serious economic crisis, but that situation cannot be
used as a pretext for not carrying out or applying
measures to strengthen the rule of law. Such measures
constitute a mechanism that makes it possible to reduce
economic costs, to legitimize the actions of the State
and, more importantly, to prevent the loss of innocent
lives. International cooperation, at its various levels
and in its various methods of operation, must guide
those activities. To that end, we must strive to better
coordinate and streamline initiatives in this field in
order to use resources as efficiently as possible.

We wish to conclude by recognizing the efforts
that have been made in this undertaking by the Rule of
Law Assistance Unit and the Rule of Law Coordination
and Research Group. We look forward with optimism
to the high-level meeting to take place next September
alongside the general debate.

