The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Georgia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chkheidze
(Georgia) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, contained in document S/ 1995/657.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia of 9 August 1995 (S/ 1995/657) pursuant to its
resolution 993 (1995).

"The Security Council notes there has been little
overall progress in achieving a comprehensive political
settlement and that a stalemate exists with respect to
the return of refugees and displaced persons.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the efforts of the Secretary-General and those of
the Russian Federation in its capacity as facilitator
aimed at achieving a comprehensive political
settlement of the conflict, including on the political
status of Abkhazia, respecting fully the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia.
The Council renews its call to the parties, in
particular the Abkhaz side, to reach substantive
progress in the political negotiations as a matter of
urgency.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned at the continued obstruction of the return
of the refugees and displaced persons by the Abkhaz
authorities, which is totally unacceptable.
Reaffirming its resolution 993 (1995), the Council
reiterates its call to the Abkhaz authorities to
accelerate the return process significantly, to
guarantee the safety of all returnees and to regularize
the status of spontaneous returnees, in accordance
with internationally accepted practice and in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

"The Security Council welcomes the continuing
close cooperation and coordination between
UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force in the
performance of their respective mandates. It reminds
the parties of their obligations to cooperate fully
with UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force and
to ensure the safety and freedom of movement of all
UN and CIS personnel.

"The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the decision of the Secretary-General
regarding the resident Deputy to his Special Envoy.
The Council also supports the Secretary-General's
efforts with regard to the establishment of a human
rights monitoring mission in the area. It encourages
the Secretary-General to continue his consultations
with the parties to this end."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/39.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

