Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me also join others in
expressing our deep condolences to the Government
and the people of the United States on the passing away
of former President George Herbert Walker Bush. He
will be remembered as a great diplomat, who sat in
this Chamber, and a courageous statesman who, par
excellence, exceeded any measurement of dignified
leadership of our time.

We thank Cote d'Ivoire for organizing this debate
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We are very
pleased, Mr. President, to see presiding over this
important meeting. It is a demonstration of your very
real commitment to this issue, as the leader ofa country
that has successfully managed to build and sustain
peace. We are also very pleased to see Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union (AU)
Commission, with us here today, and thank him for his
statement on the African perspective on this topic, to
which we fully subscribe. We also thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for his remarks and the
reforms that he is advocating.

It has been rightly emphasized time and again
that peace, security, development and human rights
are inextricably linked. We therefore require closer
collaboration among United Nations organs and other
stakeholders to build peace and inclusive societies. It
is absolutely essential to have coherence in policy and
operations across the whole United Nations system.
We must do away with all institutional fragmentation.
Only then will we be able to ensure that peacebuilding
and sustaining peace are placed at centre of the United
Nations work and activities. That is exactly what the
Secretary-General's reform aims to address. When
it becomes operational, hopefully next month, it will
undoubtedly strengthen our ability to deliver effective
and efficient operational support in the field. It will
be particularly valuable in those complex security
situations where both peacekeeping and special political
missions are deployed.

Equally, an important element will be to fully utilize
the potential role of the Peacebuilding Commission
to convene, link and advise with principal organs of
United Nations. We need to scale up the Commission's
contribution to make sure that it promotes an integrated,
strategic and coherent approach. It is also encouraging
to note the comprehensive advice that the Commission
provides to the Security Council on regional and
country-specific issues. We welcome the Secretary-
General's reform in that regard, which underlines
the hinge role of the Peacebuilding Support Office
in linking peace and security with development and
humanitarian efforts.

My country believes that, in order to achieve our
aim to sustain peace, we must enhance partnerships
with other stakeholders. That should include regional
and subregional organizations, international financial
institutions, national Governments and various civil
society and private organizations. We should make that
active across the whole spectrum of the conflict cycle,
including prevention, peacekeeping, special political
missions, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Complementing the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the African Union's peacebuilding efforts
on the continent are in line with the implementation of
the AU Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
Framework, as well as the African Solidarity Initiative.
We also hope that the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security will play its relevant role in further
strengthening that cooperation for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace in Africa. Similarly, we welcome the
signing of the African Union-United Nations Framework
for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development between the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission. We certainly hope that, together
with the Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, that will offer a comprehensive guide
for United Nations and African Union cooperation in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
There is a crucial need to strengthen the synergy
between the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the African Union to address some of the difficult
peace and security challenges that we continue to
face, whether with regard to mission transition, early
peacebuilding, reconstruction efforts or other areas. In
that regard, we welcome the Peacebuilding Commission
and the AU Peace and Security Council annual joint
consultative meeting in New York in July. In addition,
we would suggest that it is time for such meetings to be
institutionalized and regularly scheduled.

Let me emphasize that peacebuilding and sustaining
peace must ultimately be the responsibility of national
efforts. It must be owned nationally and inclusively.
Sustaining peace requires the involvement of the
Government, the private sector and civil society. The
success of C6te d'Ivoire's transition in peacebuilding
shows how it can be done. That has been an exemplary
case. The role of the United Nations and international
partners must always be to help build regional, national
and local capacities to sustain peace. Building the
necessary confidence among Member States will
provide the means to facilitate the implementation
and operationalization of this new approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

I would like to take this opportunity to call on
members of the Council to fully support the initiative
on African-led peace support operations, which we
believe is an integral part of our efforts to strengthen
collective security through peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. We have no doubt that that will be
welcomed and successful.

