Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on an issue that is of the utmost importance for the
international community. The attention paid over past
few weeks to the draft resolution - which proposes to
bar the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) by non-State actors - indicates clearly that
the stakes are very high for many States. We consider
this debate to be an opportunity for the United Nations
general membership to present its viewpoints on this
draft resolution, which, if it is adopted, would have far-
reaching legal and political implications.

While associating my delegation with the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, I
should like to summarize the views of my Government
on the draft resolution before us as follows.

The proliferation of WMD is a serious threat, and
the prospect of non-State actors acquiring such
weapons is all the more threatening to the whole
international community. Thus, we wholeheartedly
support all efforts that are aimed at dealing with this
potential menace and that are undertaken within the
parameters of international law.

The United Nations, as the sole universal body,
has an important role in addressing this serious threat.
The growing risk of linkage between terrorism and
WMD prompted the General Assembly, in operative
paragraph 1 of its resolution 57/83, to recognize the
threat and, accordingly, to call upon "all Member
States to support international efforts to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery". The present Security
Council initiative should therefore be considered to be
a step along those lines.

We understand that the Council, in taking this
initiative, intends to fill a gap in the non-proliferation
regime by means of a binding resolution. However, a
number of serious and valid questions arise as to
whether the content of the draft resolution fairly and
adequately addresses the issue at hand, whether the
Council's present action is consistent with the letter
and spirit of the United Nations Charter, and how the
existing gap - which indeed should be addressed -
can be filled when the resolution overlooks the
universality of existing international WMD instruments
and neglects to require States non-parties to nuclear,
biological and chemical weapon treaty regimes to
accede to those important treaties.

The United Nations Charter entrusts the Security
Council with the huge responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, but it does not confer
authority on the Council to act as a global legislature
imposing obligations on States without their
participation in the process. The draft resolution, in its
present form, is a clear manifestation of the Council's
departure from its Charter-based mandate. We believe
that the Council's success in securing an environment
of non-proliferation depends greatly on the ability of
its own actions to inspire sincere cooperation by States.
This open Council meeting is an opportunity for the
draft resolution's sponsors to take on board the views
and concerns of other States in order to foster
international cooperation aimed at collective and
meaningful action against terrorism and proliferation.

A major deficiency in the proposed draft
resolution is its silence regarding the imperative of
disarmament, as well as its failure to acknowledge the
linkage between non-proliferation and disarmament.
The cosmetic and rhetorical reference to disarmament
in the draft resolution's preamble cannot and should
not be interpreted as a substantive provision addressing
the important issue of disarmament. Such negligence is
in stark contrast to General Assembly resolution 58/48,
which emphasized the urgent need for progress in the
area of disarmament and non-proliferation in order to
help to maintain international peace and security and to
contribute to global efforts against terrorism. The draft
resolution before the Council, by ignoring the issue of
disarmament, not only undermines its significance and
thrust aimed at fighting the potential threat of terrorists
armed with WMD, but also weakens its effective
implementation.

As recognized in existing international WMD
instruments, efforts to prevent access to such weapons
should not hamper international cooperation to promote
the use of materials, equipment and technology for
peaceful purposes. To our regret, a provision
addressing this key area has not been incorporated into
the operative part of the draft resolution. We believe
that a fair and balanced draft resolution cannot and
should not fail to acknowledge this inalienable right of
Member States as it obligates them to shoulder heavy
responsibilities and complex commitments.

The proposed resolution contains certain concepts
and definitions that are either inadequately elaborated
or inconsistent with the terms and definitions embodied
in existing international instruments on nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons. A clear example of
that deficiency is the definition given for the means of
delivery, which fails to refer to fighters capable of
delivering such weapons. That can be rectified in the
final draft of the resolution.

In our view, the draft resolution's enforcement
clauses are subject to various interpretations. The
monitoring mechanism also needs to be further
elaborated and clarified. Hence, language should be
included in the text that would, in effect, remove the
ambiguity from those vital provisions, thereby
preventing suspicion and misinterpretation.
Alarmingly, the current state of international affairs
teaches us the following crucial lesson: the follow-up
on and monitoring of such a resolution cannot be left to
the subjective interpretation of individual States. We
need common and sound understanding on the part of
all States to ensure their faithful implementation of the
resolution, irrespective of their status with regard to
international WMD treaties. Obviously, if the proposed
draft resolution were not of a mandatory nature, that
concern would be easy to address.

The draft makes no reference to initiatives on
WMD-free zones, which are of great importance for
many regions. We believe that that issue - particularly
the need to establish the Middle East as a WMD-free
zone - should be incorporated into the draft.

Last but not least is the question of urgency. It
appears that the draft resolution will be acted upon in
the near future. That would satisfy the domestic
constituencies of certain States. However, we share the
view of those who believe that the draft resolution
must not be fast-tracked. The issues that it addresses
are extremely important and highly controversial.
Comprehensive consultations between sponsors and
interested States are not only desirable but imperative.
Let us not miss this solemn opportunity; let us not
squander it in a hasty and inconclusive process.

