Mr. Pereyra Plasencia (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome your presence here today, Sir,
to guide our debate, and we commend Denmark for the
excellent job that it has been doing in presiding over
the work of the Security Council. We also welcome
your initiative to convene this open debate on the rule
of law and the maintenance of international peace and
security. We also welcome the participation of Judge
Rosalyn Higgins, President of the International Court
of Justice, and thank her for her valuable statement. We
would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs, Mr. Nicolas Michel, for his
contribution to the debate.

The rule of law must prevail both nationally and
internationally. At the international level, the rule of
law means respect for international law, in particular,
respect for the Charter of the United Nations. Ensuring
that States behave in accordance with international
standards guarantees stability and predictability in the
international system and is a fundamental element in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
For that reason, the Security Council should always act
within the framework of international law when it
takes decisions.

The presence here today of the President of the
International Court of Justice reminds us of the pivotal
role that that principal organ of the United Nations
plays in the maintenance of international peace and
security and of its contribution to the achievement of
the fundamental purposes of the United Nations by
means of the peaceful settlement of legal disputes
among States. It is extremely important that the
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice be
universally accepted if it is to continue to carry out its
vital work.

With regard to societies that have experienced
civil conflict, the international community has fully
recognized the importance of restoring the rule of law
as a vital basis for lasting peace and sustainable
development and for ensuring their economic and
social viability and stability. In such cases, above and
beyond the urgent need to re-establish the full power of
the State, far-reaching changes are required. These
should be reflected in legal, judicial, police and prison
reforms, and, above all, in the dissemination of a
culture of respect for human rights and of tolerance.

The challenge is enormous. It means leading
towards tolerance and the rule of law those societies in
which social exclusion is deeply ingrained and in
which the social compact has not been respected or has
been destroyed by political, ethnic or religious conflict.
Such work requires a long-term, sustained commitment
on the part of national authorities and their societies,
ownership of the process by those societies and
effective cooperation on the part of the international
community.

As regards the tasks of the Security Council, in
particular concerning the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, we support the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General in paragraph 64 of his report on
the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict societies (S/2004/6l6).

One particular aspect that we wish to highlight is
the need to combat impunity. That is essential, because
it is not possible to establish the foundations for lasting
peace and a democratic society where impunity exists.
It is vital that we punish those who committed crimes,
promote national reconciliation and help to prevent the

resurgence of conflict in the future through deterrence.
Until such a time as the national system for the
administration of justice is re-established, or in cases
where that system is facing serious difficulties, other
mechanisms should carry out those tasks. The Security
Council has recognized the need for legal mechanisms
to contribute to the achievement of international peace
and security. It created the International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, it
referred the Darfur situation to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, and it recently approved
the transfer of the former President of Liberia, Charles
Taylor, to The Hague, where the Special Court for
Sierra Leone will be making use of the premises of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

Peru is firmly committed to combating impunity,
and it recognizes the important work being done by the
ICC in this regard. The Security Council must continue
to support the Prosecutor in the investigation under
way concerning the crimes committed in Darfur and
ensure that the Sudan cooperates promptly and
properly, in keeping with the Council's relevant
resolutions.

Likewise, the Security Council should provide
the firmest possible support on the ground for the
apprehension of the five leaders of the Lord's
Resistance Army for whom an arrest warrant has been
issued by the ICC. Their arrest and subsequent trial at
the ICC will help the Council in fulfilling its task of
re-establishing international security and peace in the
region.

In order to ensure the efficient functioning and
credibility of the Security Council's sanctions regimes,
it is essential to address the concerns that have been
expressed concerning their application in the case of
individuals and the need to have more consistent
procedures with respect to human rights and, in
particular, respect for due process.
The sanctions Committee created pursuant
resolution 1267 (1999) is currently carrying out a
review of its procedures for placing individuals and
entities on its consolidated list and for removing them
from it. We commend the efforts being made in this
process by the current Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, Permanent Representative
of Argentina, in order to ensure that our deliberations
are productive.
