Ms. Mogherini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
bringing this discussion within the United Nations
framework. That is a step the European Union
appreciates.

It is time for the international community and for
all of us to take a step forward. It is time, we believe,
to leave behind the divisions of the past. Today we
are here to discuss two top priorities for all of us: the
political solution of conflicts in the Middle East and
North Africa and the fight against terrorist groups such
as Daesh and Al-Qaida's affiliates.

For too long these two priorities were perceived as
conflicting goals. For too long we discussed whether
to prioritize the political processes or the fight against
Daesh and terrorism. These divisions over the years
have weakened our action on both tracks. They weaken
the international community. I believe we can now

finally be ready to move on. I believe we are now
finally ready to realize that these two goals can only
go hand in hand and that they are, and have to be, our
real focus while we mobilize at the same time all the
humanitarian support needed to respond to the urgent
needs of the symptoms of this crisis, starting from the
humanitarian situation of the huge number of refugees
that are hosted in the region and in Europe.

The two top priorities are fighting terrorism and
finding political solutions to the main crisis - starting
from the two key ones, the one in Libya and the one
in Syria. It is absolutely necessary to address the
military dimension of the threats posed by Daesh and
Al-Qaida. The European Union in itself is not directly
involved in the anti-Daesh military campaign. But, as
members know, a number of our member States are;
and the European Union itself as such is concretely
working on some complementary dimensions of this
collective effort, in full cooperation with our regional
and international partners.

That means, for instance cutting offthe supply lines
of terrorist groups. We have provided more than 1,300
intelligence leads on foreign fighters and other terrorists
in Syria and Iraq. We are assisting our partners on
criminal justice issues and in improving their capacity
to investigate and prosecute foreign fighters. We are
supporting the different security agencies in Iraq to
better share information and coordinate their efforts.

We are working on another crucial element, namely,
stabilizing liberated areas. That also means building
a future for the territories liberated from Daesh. The
European Union has launched the first concrete action
to remove mines and improvised explosive devices in
the Iraqi regions freed from Daesh. Together with the
United Nations Mine Action Service, the European
Union is coordinating the work on booby traps.
Our action is aimed at helping people return to
their homes once their homes are safe and at starting to
rebuild their communities and countries. The European
Union is engaged in very concrete terms on the ground,
but we all know very well that, in this aspect of the
fight, military power will not be enough to defeat
Daesh. Military might alone will not solve the crisis,
either in Syria or elsewhere. In Syria it is urgent to start
the process leading to a peaceful, inclusive political
transition.

International and regional Powers must take on
their responsibility in that respect. Different regional
and international actors have substantial influence on
the Syrian parties. It is time now to bring them all to
the table for serious, substantial negotiations inside the
United Nations-led framework.

Let us focus on the way forward. Let us be united
and concrete. If we, the international community,
cannot manage to do it, and to do it in a united way,
how can we think we can unite the region and the actors
in Syria on a common agenda that can defeat Daesh
and bring peace and democracy to the country? That is
the question. That is why the European Union supports
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy. We are working
together with Mr. Staffan de Mistura and his team in a
very active way to start the process start and advance
with strength and a sense of urgency. We actively
support his work and actively support his proposal on
the working groups and on a contact group on Syria.

All regional and international Powers should put
their rivalries aside and find ways to cooperate on a
common agenda built on a collective interest in security,
peace and democracy. Only in a more cooperative
regional environment can we hope to build peace in
Syria and defeat Daesh. That is true for reconciliation
processes not only in Syria but throughout the Middle
East and North Africa.

In Iraq and in Libya we need a Government of
national accord to start not within weeks but within
days to stop the internal divisions, to fight Daesh and
to begin rebuilding the country. Daesh has nothing to
do with the history of Libya. It built its strengths on the
civil war and the divisions among factions and militias.
Unity among Libya's actors and factions is the most
effective and the only weapon against Daesh. Daesh
needs to ally with local militias to keep control of the
ground. Where it does not manage to find allies, Daesh
is easier to eradicate. It is politics that holds the key to
its defeat.

Conflicts only strengthen terrorist groups. That is
what war does. Conflicts are powerful and probably
the most powerful source of radicalization. Think of
the conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
including the most recent flare-ups. That is why the
European Union believes that relaunching the Middle
East peace process and achieving results both for the
Israelis and the Palestinian people could send a very
powerful message of reconciliation to the whole region
and far beyond that, to the world.

For those reasons, we have decided to work together
with our partners in the Quartet to hold a principals'
meeting here today in New York and to invite Jordan,
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the League of Arab States
to work together in a regional framework. The whole
region has an interest in this, and leverage to put an
end - hopefully a happy one - to this conflict.

The key is political will and unity among the
regional international players. But we know that the
current crisis is not only political, it is also cultural.
Over past years and decades too many forces have bet
on the rise of sectarianism, with the disastrous results
that we all see. That trend must be reversed. We need
to help communities stick together, and not tear them
apart. We need inclusive societies and democratic
political processes. All communities and minorities
must be granted security, freedom and the right to
contribute to their country's public life, if we want
resilient and strong societies across the region.

Only democracy and inclusiveness bring about
stability, and they are the most powerful weapons
against terror. Too many times we are faced with a
narrative opposing democracy and security. That is
a false dilemma. We know that very well in Europe.
A society can be stable and safe only when it is fully
democratic.

The region and the world need a new order, and
this crisis might be an opportunity. There might be
differences among us. There have also been differences
around this table this morning. But as Foreign Minister
Steinmeir mentioned just a few interventions ago, there
are also many things on which we can unite. We have
differences also on how a new order in the region and in
the world should look, but I believe there is something
on which we can all agree. The only alternative to a new
world order, and a new regional order, is chaos. That is
the enemy we are fighting today - perennial conflict,
constant instability, global disorder - our common
enemy is chaos. At this seventieth anniversary of the
foundation of the United Nations let us join forces, as
we did successfully in the Iranian deal negotiations. Let
us all choose cooperation over conflict. Finally, let us
build a cooperative world order. Europe is ready.

