Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank the Chilean delegation for organizing this debate,
which gives us the opportunity to delve more deeply
into a subject of great importance.

We endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union.

Despite more than half a century of experience of
the United Nations and other organizations in
preventive diplomacy and peacekeeping, only very
recently have we begun to understand the critical role
that we must play in post-conflict situations, the
strengthening of the rule of law and the administration
of justice, and the follow-up and facilitation of the
entire process of national reconciliation. The task of
strengthening and broadening the mandates of
peacekeeping operations is no doubt part of that trend
and we must continue to work in that direction by
including in our mandates, in an increasingly
systematic way, elements of human rights, the rule of
law and the facilitation of national reconciliation
processes.

In the context of reconciliation efforts, the
rebuilding of the rule of law and the subsequent
consolidation of institutions are priorities. Without
them, it is impossible to guarantee security in any way,
impunity remains the rule and economic activities are
seriously disrupted. In such conditions, consolidating a
political process is even more complicated and cannot
succeed in the long term.

It is essential to focus efforts on such tasks before
attempting to step up the reconciliation process, for
instance, through the holding of general elections.
Without due prior stabilization of the situation,
elections can prove to be ineffective and sometimes
even counterproductive. In any event, the involvement
of the United Nations will differ in response to each
specific case. It can vary from accompanying,
supervising and even assuming the functions of a
justice system through the post-conflict transition
process, as in Timor-Leste, to helping a State through a
stage of convalescence to restore its mechanisms of
law and consolidate its national institutions.

It must, however, always enjoy the will of the
people most directly affected. Indeed, as the Secretary-
General said in the debate on justice and the rule of
law, the United Nations must hope to guide, not direct.
In cases where circumstances do not permit at the
outset, responsibility must be shifted at the proper time
to local actors, whose role should always be central.

It is also necessary to settle accounts with the
past so as to be able to face the future with greater
confidence. That requires elucidating the truth of what
has occurred, providing opportunities for victims to
express themselves and closing the doors on impunity
for those who have committed extremely grave acts
that are offensive to humankind. There are various
mechanisms to that end, the most innovative and
demonstrably useful of which is the constitution of
mixed tribunals. It is worth looking more closely into
that mechanism. In any case, and whatever system is
adopted, the task will be enormously difficult, since it
will require striking a balance between the necessary
application of justice and the search for national peace
and reconciliation.

In carrying out such tasks, the Council will need
to be most mindful of the specificities of each
particular situation, of whether or not there existed a
genuine rule of law within the State before a conflict,
and of the prevailing legal system in order to ensure
that the mandates it confers are clear and unequivocal.
To facilitate that task, it may be useful to prepare a
compendium of model practices for use by the United
Nations in each post-conflict situation. Undoubtedly,
such practices will need to be flexible and adaptable to
the specificity of each situation.

Finally, we stress the role that falls to the
International Criminal Court. The international
community now has an independent and impartial
forum to render justice in the most serious cases of
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in situations where, in keeping with
the principle of complementarity, national penal
systems are unable to address the matter in a genuine
and effective way. Beyond the specific cases that are
submitted to its jurisdiction, we are certain that the
Court will contribute to establishing guidelines for
penal justice and respect for the rights of accused and
victim alike that will serve as guidance for all States in
the area of crimes against humanity. In that way, the
International Criminal Court will contribute through its
work not only to the achievement of justice and the
effectiveness of human rights and humanitarian
standards, but also to strengthening peace and security
throughout the world.

