Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Kai
Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
briefing. I would also like to welcome the presence of
our colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, at this meeting.

The reports are clear. The situation in
Afghanistan is still of great concern both at the security
and political levels and in the economic field. Despite
the unprecedented mobilization of the international
community in support of the efforts of the Afghan
Government, peace and stability remain elusive. The
Security Council was able to become fully aware of
that during the important mission that it conducted
there in November 2008. The boldness and brazenness
of the insurgents and the resurgence of suicide attacks
are challenges that need to be met, particularly at a
time when the country is preparing to undertake
presidential and provincial elections. As the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/135) notes, the number
of incidents compared with the previous year increased
by 42 per cent in December 2008 and by 75 per cent in
January 2009, which is a negative trend, not to say the
opposite of what is sought by the efforts of the
international community to restore peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
The question is how credible, uncontestable
elections can be organized when insecurity and fear
risk excluding from the process a significant part of the
population as no census has been held. The Afghan
political class should, therefore, act as quickly as
possible to organize and above all achieve national
reconciliation, including by strengthening political
dialogue. For its part, the Afghan Government has
already committed itself to that approach by
establishing a dialogue with those moderate insurgents
who are ready to respect the Afghan constitution,
renounce violence and accept the rules of democracy.

We highly welcome those noble efforts. We
should encourage the Government in its struggle
against corruption, the real cancer at the heart of the
political and economic governance system, which will
hinder any recovery effort until it is removed. We must
also congratulate the Government on its decision to
organize elections on 20 August, although such a
decision was not easy given the high stakes. In that
regard, we welcome the technical assistance of the
United Nations and of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
strengthening of international troop levels to boost the
capacity of the Afghan forces to secure the electoral
process and make possible a dialogue with the
opposition in a climate of trust.

The economic situation in Afghanistan equally
deserves special attention. We advocate maintaining a
cohesive approach in implementing the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy. While still modest, the
progress recorded in reducing poppy cultivation - a
key element of the Strategy - and the prospects for
the agricultural sector are encouraging. We call on
donors, as well as international partners, to mobilize
additional funds to help meet the challenges in priority
sectors such as agriculture, energy and infrastructure.
However, appropriate steps must be taken to ensure
that that assistance benefits the development and the
well-being of the people ofAfghanistan.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is still
an issue of concern. We welcome the measures already
undertaken to tackle it, including the establishment of a
new United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Afghanistan, supported by a
humanitarian action plan that will soon be operational.
Likewise, we once again urge the international
community to step up its mobilization to help the
Afghan people overcome the food crisis and to
alleviate their suffering.

The other major concern remains the continuing
human rights violations, in particular extrajudicial
executions and sexual violence and discrimination
against women and girls, whose status remains
vulnerable. We call for more rigorous implementation
of the Action Plan for Peace, Reconciliation and
Justice.

Lastly, it is worth noting the significant asset that
international and regional cooperation represent for
Afghanistan. That is demonstrated by the agreement
with Uzbekistan on the provision of electricity and by
the forthcoming Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference, to be held in Islamabad in April, which
will consider Afghanistan's various priority projects. In
terms of political cooperation, we welcome the new
vision adopted with Pakistan to fight against extremism
and terrorism, and we note the need to establish a
dialogue with opposition groups.

Regarding UNAMA, we reiterate its crucial role,
which must be to restore peace and stability in
Afghanistan. That is why, for it to carry out its mission
successfully, we are in favour of extending its mandate,
as recommended by the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our belief in the
primary role that the United Nations must play in
restoring peace in Afghanistan and in ensuring its
economic recovery and national reconstruction.

