Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General and the Head of the Delegation of
the European Union. It is also very good to have our
Iranian colleague with us.

We welcome the Secretary-General's eighth report
(S/2019/934) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2014) and we offer our thanks to the Secretariat for
its continued professionalism and its support to the
Secretary-General in enabling the production of
the report.

When I spoke to the Council in June, I said that
the United Kingdom remained committed to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan ofAction (JCPOA) (see S/PV.85 64),
and that commitment stands. The JCPOA is critical to
the wider global non-proliferation architecture and vital
to our national security and the shared security of our
partners and allies. We believe it is the best means for
averting a nuclear-armed Iran. As we have said before,
we regret the decision by the United States to leave
the JCPOA and reimpose sanctions on Iran. We have
said that at our most senior levels and on the public
record, and we understand the impact this has had in
Iran and on the Iranian people. Our commitment to the
JCPOA and its instruments, including the procurement
channel, is evidenced by our work as co-Chair of the
Arak modernization project and with our E-3 partners
on the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges.
We therefore deeply deplore Iran's decision to reduce
compliance with the JCPOA. We made our concerns
clear at the Joint Commission on 6 December. Iran's
actions are extremely serious. They are hollowing out
the non-proliferation benefits of the nuclear deal and
not all of them are reversible.

As the United Kingdom, we have made clear our
determination to find a way forward and to address
Iranian non-compliance through the JCPOA, including
the dispute resolution mechanism. That is not a step
we want to take, but Iran's actions are leaving us little
option other than to respond within the parameters of
the agreement. Should we be forced down the path of
triggering the dispute resolution mechanism, we would
do so in order to find a diplomatic way forward with
the aim of protecting the agreement. Iran faces a stark
choice. It can either continue down this damaging path
or take immediate steps to get back into compliance
and rebuild international confidence.

Turning to ballistic missiles, in November the
E3 -France, Germany and the United Kingdom-wrote
to the Secretary-General regarding Iran's development
and testing of ballistic missiles and related technology.
Over the past year, Iran has tested the Shahab-3
medium-range ballistic missile, unveiled the Burkan-3
medium-range ballistic missile and attempted to
launch the Safir satellite launch vehicle. All of these
actions are inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015). Iran argues that the provisions
in resolution 2231 (2015) are not legally binding. It has
also taken issue with the E3's use ofMissile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR) categories to define nuclear-
capable missiles.

We should be clear. The definition encapsulated
in the MTCR is the most objective, widely accepted
standard of nuclear deliverability in the world. It is
internationally recognized and observed by States that
seek to prevent the proliferation of ballistic-missile
technology capable of carrying weapons of mass
destruction. For many States, it is incorporated into
their national legislation. The purpose of the provisions
in annex B, paragraph 3, is to give the international
community confidence that Iran is not developing
technology capable of serving as a means of delivery
for a nuclear weapon. In undertaking the activity
described in the E3's communications to the Security
Council, Iran is not providing this confidence.

Turning to regional activity, during the last
year there has been a continued increase in Iran's
destabilizing activity around the Middle East, including
activities that are inconsistent with resolution 2216
(2015) and other resolutions. In May and June we saw
attacks on commercial shipping near Fujairah and
in the Gulf of Oman. A thorough United Kingdom
assessment concluded that both attacks were almost
certainly the work of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps. Likewise, the Corps was almost certainly
responsible for May's attack on the Yanbu pipeline,
near Afif. In September we witnessed a large-scale
drone and missile attack against Aramco oil facilities
in Saudi Arabia. That was a reckless, destabilizing and
completely unacceptable attack affecting more than
5 per cent of the world's oil and gas production.

As the United Kingdom, France and Germany
have made clear, we are confident that Iran bears
responsibility for that attack. The Houthi claim of
responsibility is implausible for a number of reasons,
not least the scale, sophistication and range ofthe attack.
We note the Secretariat's continued efforts to collect
and analyse information on the weapons used in the
14 September attack, and we welcome the Secretariat's
observation that the number of impact points at the oil
facilities was consistent with the figures provided by
Saudi Arabia and inconsistent with Houthi statements.
We look forward to hearing the Secretariat's findings
in due course.

Iran has also transferred missiles to a number
of armed groups, in violation of several Council
resolutions, including resolutions 2231 (2015), 2216
(2015) and 1540 (2004). The latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/934) details concerning
evidence regarding the transfer by Iran into Yemen of
unmanned aerial vehicles and optical sights for rocket-
propelled grenade launchers. Such proliferation is
destabilizing for the region and escalates already high
tensions; it should stop.

Current tensions in the region remain deeply
concerning, further escalation is in no one's interest. I
want to once again call for de-escalation dialogue and
full respect for international rules.

I note the interest of some members of the
Council and of Iran in resolution 598 (1987), about
regional dialogue. At the right time, and if genuinely
intentioned, this may be able to play a useful role, but I
think both timing and intent are critical ingredients if
any initiative along these lines is to get off the ground
in the right way.

We continue to hope that Iran will take steps to
regain the confidence of the international community
and assume its rightful role as a prosperous, responsible
Power constructively engaged in the region. We respect
the Iranian people. We have deep respect for Iran's
civilization and the achievements of its past, but I urge
Iran not to undertake any more actions that would take
it further beyond JCPOA limits and instead to work
closely and in good faith with other participants to
implement its commitments fully and to help reduce the
escalating tensions in that region of the world.

