Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. O'Brien and Ms. Hoff for their briefings.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela expresses
its concern about the humanitarian situation in Syria.
We pay tribute to the efforts of humanitarian agencies
that carry out extraordinary and noble work to assist
millions of Syrians in spite of high levels of risk in
such a raging conflict. We are pleased to hear that
humanitarian agencies were able to send 28 lorries
to the Duma area yesterday. We also welcome the
news that the funds to continue humanitarian aid for
approximately 2.8 million people have been procured.

Humanitarian aid must be balanced, effective
and impartial. Therefore we believe that, although
the humanitarian situation in Aleppo requires the
international community to provide an immediate
response, we also must bear in mind that assistance to
other parts of the country has continued, despite the
difficulties posed by the armed conflict.

Terrorism is the cause of the humanitarian
catastrophe in Syria. The acts caried out by groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
the Al-Nusra Front and their allies are a threat to
international peace and security, which is why they
must be combated in strict adherence to international
law. In the case of Aleppo, the humanitarian pauses
offered by the authorities as of 18 October were blocked
by militants of Al-Nusra Front and partner groups.
Those groups prevented civilians from evacuating
the affected areas. Recently we have observed that in
eastern Aleppo people are rising up against the terrorist
groups, which not only use them as human shields but
also deny them the little food there is.

In the light of what is happening, why has the so-
called moderate opposition not clearly and tangibly
decoupled itself from those terrorist groups? It seems
they are not so moderate as they present themselves
to the international community. It is evident that
complicity between the terrorist groups in eastern
Aleppo and the so-called moderate opposition is a
serious obstacle to peace in Syria. There is an ongoing
threat of ISIS in Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. Both regions
present a real threat tothe delivery of humanitarian aid.
Denying the civilian population access to humanitarian
aid has become part of the daily practice of ISIS and
the Al-Nusra Front. Those terrorist groups and their
partners have become looming threats to peace and
stability in the region. We must counter their influence
with all available and necessary measures, while strictly
adhering to international law
We would like to raise a similar concern about the
destruction of basic infrastructure and services, such
as hospitals, water distribution services and electricity
substations. As Ms. Elizabeth Hoff of the World Health
Organization pointed out a few minutes ago, before
the war broke out Syria had one of the most advanced
health-care systems in the Middle East. However, owing
to the war, which has raged for six years now and which
has been financed from abroad, the health-care system
lies, unfortunately, in ruins. We therefore call upon the
parties and those who have influence on the parties
to resume political negotiations as swiftly as possible
without attaching preconditions to the aforementioned
resumed negotiations so that we can work towards a
solution to the conflict, which has caused so much
suffering to the people of Syria. The prolongation of
the conflict will only cause more suffering and more
destruction for the Syrian population.

