Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and
Lacroix for their comprehensive briefings.

Poland aligns itself with the position of the
European Union with regard to the status of the
Golan Heights. We consider the Golan Heights to be a
territory occupied by Israel. The annexation of territory
by force is illegal under international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as resolution 497
(1981) of 17 December 1981. That resolution, which was
unanimously adopted, states that

"all the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, continue to apply
to the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since
June 1967".

Poland believes that a settlement of the question of
the Golan Heights should occur only as a result of
negotiations between the parties to the conflict, in line
with international law.

I would like to express Poland's full support for
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) in fulfilling its mandate and to underscore
its critical role in ensuring long-term stability in the
region. I want to focus my intervention on two issues,
which are violations of the ceasefire and the need to
enhance the mission's capabilities.

We are deeply concerned about the continued
military activity in the area of separation, including the
presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment, firing
into and across the area of separation and the crossing
of the ceasefire line. We are particularly alarmed by the

repeated instances of firing of anti-aircraft missiles,
surface-to-air missiles, rockets and heavy machine guns
on the Bravo side, as well as by the increased presence
of Syrian armed forces within the area of separation.
All of those activities constitute clear violations of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, pose a threat to
the maintenance of the ceasefire and affect the security
of UNDOF personnel. I would like to stress once again
that the parties must respect the terms of the Agreement
and refrain from maintaining a military presence in the
area of separation or taking other actions that could
endanger the ceasefire. It is vital that they cooperate
closely with UNDOF and maintain their liaison with
the mission in order to prevent any escalation.

We commend the mission's efforts to intensify its
operations in the area of separation and the actions
undertaken to ensure a limited return to operations
on the Bravo side, despite the challenging security
conditions. As we await the re-establishment of the
mission's presence across the whole area of separation,
it will be crucial to ensure that the parties facilitate
the enhancement of the mission's capabilities and
enable it to conduct its operations without any
administrative restrictions.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the work of all the civilian and military
personnel of UNDOF and the Observer Group Golan,
carried out under very challenging circumstances, and
to underscore the primary importance of assuring the
safety and security of United Nations personnel.

