Kenya commends Indonesia for convening us to exchange views on this critical issue, including the informative briefings from the various briefers. The threats of transnational terrorism and organized crime to international peace and security are interlinked. Understanding this dynamic and complex confluence is an important first step in designing appropriate measures to prevent, detect, deter or deny the perpetrators their respective capabilities. Today's deliberations will afford Member States the opportunity to consider the crime-terrorism nexus and derive insights on how to enhance existing policies and legislative frameworks at the national, regional and international levels. Kenya has taken several measures to address this two-fold threat. The Government has prioritized this issue and intensified national efforts to counter terrorism and combat organized crime. Terrorism tends to benefit from proceeds and networks of organized crime. The Kenyan Government has therefore consolidated and strengthened existing counter-terrorism and organized crime-related legislative frameworks and enacted new ones, including the Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act, the Prevention of Organised Crime Act, the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Security Laws Amendment Act. These laws have collectively proved successful in prosecuting terrorist and organized criminal actors. We have also taken steps to strengthen and promote multiagency cooperation through training and joint operations. Kenya has established the Border Management Agency Control Unit to proactively enhance border security and management operations to combat cross-border security threats throughout the 34 border-crossing points while improving legitimate trade and travel with neighbouring countries. International cooperation in countering the financing of terrorism is critical. Kenya is a member of the Eastern and Southern Anti-Money Laundering Group, an Associate Member of the global Financial Action Task Force (FATF) that is mandated to set standards and promote the effective implementation of legal, regulatory and operational measures to combat money-laundering, terrorist financing and other related threats. In line with the FATF recommendations, in March 2019 Kenya established the Task Force on National Risk Assessment on Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing in order to implement extensive measures to avert and diminish the threats emanating from crime-terror linkages, which impact the integrity of the international financial system. Despite these measures, the evolving coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has presented new dynamics and challenges in combating terrorism and organized crime. Regrettably while Governments are focused on combating COVID-19, terrorist groups like the Islamic State, Al-Qaida and their affiliates, including Al-Shabaab, have seized the opportunity to stage attacks. We are also witnessing the phenomenon of so-called lone actors capitalizing on the pandemic circumstances to recruit individuals among vulnerable groups in the society. The Secretary-General has also noted that the pandemic presents opportunities for cybercriminal networks to thrive when law enforcement agencies are stretched in their monitoring capabilities. In conclusion , my delegation recognizes the transboundary nature of the crime-terror continuum and calls on Member States to deepen partnerships, collaboration and the sharing of relevant information in order to effectively address the problem, and to strengthen the Council and relevant United Nations entities to ensure Member States implement the relevant resolutions.
