Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
would like first of all to extend its congratulations to
Ambassador Baali and the Algerian delegation upon
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We would also like to express our appreciation
and thanks to the successful American presidency last
month under the able leadership of Ambassador
Danforth.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sabliere for leading the
Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region and
for presenting its report. The mission reaffirmed the
Council's commitment to peace and security in that
important region. I would like to take this opportunity
to make the following comments and suggestions:

First, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the main challenge now is to continue to support the
peace process. There have been some justifiable
expressions of skepticism. Efforts should continue to
ensure that the Transitional Government begin to
function as a unified national Government and that the
parties therein abide by their commitments, especially
with regard to elections, security sector reform and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
militias.

Second, effective efforts have to be made to
disarm local and foreign armed groups, like the Mayi-
Mayi, and the Hema and Lendu militias, as well as the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe, which remain outside the
political process. Political measures to ensure a smooth
transition need to be accompanied by a strengthening
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo's national
institutions and their capacity to exert State authority
throughout the country.

Third, regional stability is crucial in order to
protect and promote the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Pakistan attaches
the highest importance to respect for the principles of
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity for
all States. International borders are inviolable. In the
absence of actual external military aggression, the
threat or use of force across international borders
cannot be justified. As the Security Council's
presidential statement has declared, Rwanda should
withdraw without delay any forces that might be in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and exercise
restraint in its actions and pronouncements. At the
same time, the problem for regional security posed by
the ex-FAR/Interahamwe also needs to be addressed. In
that regard, we suggest the development of a more
effective strategy to disarm and repatriate those groups.
The Tripartite Commission, as well as the Joint
Verification Mechanism between Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be more
effectively utilized in that context.

Fourth, the transitional process in Burundi,
despite the challenges to it, is moving forward in the
right direction. The international community must
support that adequately. However, the threat posed by
FNL (Rwasa), and its cross-border links with other
extremist forces, as testified to by the Gatumba
massacre, will have to be addressed in a
comprehensive manner.

Fifth, the deployment of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi (ONUB) and the ongoing build-
up of United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo should
contribute to improving mutual confidence between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi and thus enhance security and stability in the
region. Pakistan has contributed a brigade to MONUC
for the South Kivu area. That is in addition to our
contribution of a mechanized infantry battalion for
MONUC's Ituri brigade. A Pakistani battalion has also
deployed with ONUB in Burundi's Cibitoke Province
across the Democratic Republic of the Congo border.
The deployment of Pakistani units on both sides of the
Burundi-Democratic Republic of the Congo border
will, in our View, considerably enhance coordinated
United Nations peacekeeping action in the region.

Sixth, the illegal exploitation of natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a root
cause of the complex threats to peace and stability in
the region. As one of our colleagues on the Council's
mission privately observed, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is "too big, too rich and too weak". The
illegal exploitation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's resources motivates the militias and funds
their campaign of violence and pillage. But the major
profits of such illegal exploitation often end up in
coffers far removed from the Great Lakes region. Until
that rape of the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
resources is stopped, it will be difficult to promote
peace, security and prosperity in that unfortunate
country. Until then, corruption and conflict will
continue in the region. That issue has to be addressed.
The Security Council - or if the Council cannot act,
some other United Nations organ - should follow up
on the Kassem report and investigate and identify those
involved in the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and those who finance or profit from that, thus
enabling the international community to end that
unfortunate legacy that has afflicted the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other nations for so long.

Seventh, peace and development are indivisible.
The consolidation of peace in the region requires
sustained international commitment, particularly from
the donor community, to support economic and social
development in the region. Without that, conflict may
be a recurring feature in the Great Lakes region.

Finally, we need to ensure ways and means to
realize the objectives and decisions of the recent
summit conference on the Great Lakes to promote
comprehensive peace and prosperity. In particular, it is
essential to put in place effective regional mechanisms
for the peaceful settlement and resolution of disputes in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

