Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
first like to associate myself with previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Osorio for his excellent work at the head
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). In the past three
months, the Committee, supported by its Panel of
Experts, has participated further in the implementation
of Security Council resolutions related to the Iranian

nuclear programme, in particular by promoting a better
understanding of the sanctions regime, pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and others, and in reminding
States of their obligations stemming from those
resolutions. We welcome that work and encourage the
Committee to continue along those lines.

The quarterly report presented to the Council by
the Committee again highlights alarming violations of
the resolutions associated with the Iranian nuclear
programme, despite the many appeals from the
international community for those commitments to be
respected. Togo has always advocated the principle of
general and complete disarmament in all its aspects.
We express our grave concern about those serious
violations and urge States to fully honour all
commitments undertaken.

While Iran cannot be denied the right to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, that right should
not extend to permission to acquire nuclear weapons.
As Iran is a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, in our opinion
it should respect its commitments and work to reassure
the international community of its willingness to
cooperate and, above all, to engage in direct
negotiations with the P5+1.

To date, the attitude of the Iranian authorities, as
represented by their public statements, has had little
effect in allaying suspicions as to the real nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. Moreover, the latest report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, of
24 February, notes serious concerns with respect to the
Iranian nuclear programme. That information suggests
that Iran has undertaken activities towards the
development of a nuclear explosive device. Such a
situation, lest we forget, jeopardizes regional and
international peace and security.

Military activities linked to the so-called civil
programme should not include nuclear-related
activities. We believe that the only guarantee of
reassuring the international community today as to the
true intentions of Iran is for that country to allow
access to all sites, equipment and documents associated
with its nuclear programme.

In paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), the
Panel of Experts is requested to make
recommendations on actions that the Council, the
Committee or Member States could consider taking to
improve the implementation of the measures under
consideration. It goes without saying that the
implementation of the sanctions regime requires good
knowledge of best practices in the field. In that respect,
it is troubling that the final report of the Panel of
Experts has yet to be communicated to the Council due
to objections raised by certain Member States, at a time
when it is meant to convey information and best
practices aimed at helping States in their efforts to
implement resolutions on the Iranian nuclear
programme.

The international community, and the Security
Council in particular, must prevent nuclear energy from
being diverted from peaceful uses towards the
manufacture of nuclear weapons or other nuclear
devices. In that context, it is important to redouble our
efforts to ensure more efficient and effective measures,
such as sanctions, and to remain vigilant in confronting
violations of Security Council resolutions.

