Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I
commend you, Madame President, and the Secretary-
General for having taken the initiative to organize
today's debate on an issue that has taken on worrisome
proportions in the Gulf of Guinea and along the West
African coast. Naturally, I thank the preceding
speakers for their briefings and welcome the
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission.

We share the recognition that maritime insecurity
has increased in the waters of the Gulf of Guinea. This
phenomenon involves many factors. Insecurity in the
Niger delta, in particular the attacks on oil
installations, has now extended to neighbouring
territorial waters. This transnational threat has been
compounded by the rise in trafficking activity along
the West African coast, for example in drugs, migrant
smuggling and illegal fishing. Finally, an ever-growing

number of hostage-taking incidents and the rising costs
of maritime trade and extraction activities threaten the
growth, development and, in turn, stability of States on
the Gulf of Guinea.

The attacks in the Gulf of Guinea have their own
features, however, and cannot be compared with the
rampant piracy off the Somali coast. Indeed, this
insecurity affects States whose sovereignty is not in
question, must be respected and should form the basis
for our actions. Thus, the guiding principle of our
policy should be that the Gulf of Guinea States bear the
primary responsibility for ensuring security in the
maritime areas under their jurisdiction.

We should operate in a framework of cooperation
among the States and organizations of the region and
on the basis of capacity-building for its stakeholders.
That is why we fully support the proposal of President
Boni Yayi of Benin to organize a regional meeting on
this issue that would focus on dialogue among the
concerned States and help to better distribute tasks
among donors of funds and assistance.

We welcome the first instances of operational
coordination between Benin, Nigeria and Cameroon, in
particular the conduct of joint maritime patrols.
Finally, we commend the initial efforts made by
regional organizations, particularly the Economic
Community of Central African States and its regional
coordination centre for maritime security.

A related issue for the Gulf of Guinea countries is
improving inter-ministerial cooperation, as well as
adapting legislation and the institutions responsible for
carrying out coast guard activities. That is the spirit of
the West Africa Coast Initiative, launched in 2009 by
the United Nations to strengthen local entities in the
fight against trafficking on the West African coast. The
Initiative brings together various sources of police,
customs and judicial expertise to that end. In that
connection, we could also consider extending this
model from the Atlantic Arc to the eastern Gulf of
Guinea.

In that regard, we welcome the Secretariat's plan
to deploy a piracy assessment mission to the Gulf of
Guinea. We also hope that the two United Nations
offices in Dakar and Libreville can coordinate their
efforts so as to regularly brief the Council on
developments in piracy and efforts undertaken to fight
it.

The international community can further improve
its support to regional initiatives. France and the
European Union have spared no effort in helping the
concerned States to enhance their capacities and
maritime cooperation. France's navy is using its ports
of call in the region to carry out training activities. On
11 October, the authorities of Equatorial Guinea
opened a new national naval academy in Bata. The
academy has a regional focus and is supported by
French cooperation. Finally, in September we launched
a priority solidarity fund project for maritime security
sector reform in the countries of the Gulf of Guinea.

The European Union is also active in this area. It
funds a project aimed at establishing a regional training
and information-sharing framework and at bolstering
coast guard activities in the States of the Gulf of
Guinea. The Strategic Sealift Contingency Planning
System is focused on strengthening efforts to fight
maritime trafficking and on ensuring the safety of ports
and goods.

We believe that these international initiatives to
support local capacities and regional coordination
represent a coherent approach to preventing and
effectively suppressing acts of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. These actions should be based on the
sovereignty of the States of the region, national
ownership of the responses to piracy and, finally,
respect for the law of the sea and freedom of
navigation. We are, of course, prepared to give close
and favourable consideration to a draft resolution on
that basis.

