Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
The Secretary-General has promised to make the
strengthening of the rule of law and justice in post-
conflict societies a priority for this Organization.
France fully supports that resolve and thanks the
United Kingdom for having placed this key issue on
the agenda of the Security Council.

Heeding the recommendation you made, Mr.
President - with which I fully concur - that we limit
the length of our statements, I shall confine myself to
underscoring orally the main points of the statement
that I have prepared. I will circulate it in written form
to delegations so that they may consult it if they so
wish.

The excellent report of the Secretary-General
gives a useful account of the experience acquired and
makes specific proposals for future progress. France
supports the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, in particular those addressed to the Council.

In our view, the Security Council has a special
responsibility in the area of the restoration of justice
and the rule of law in countries at war or which are
striving to emerge from conflict with the assistance of
the international community.

It seems to us that it is incumbent on the Council
to take into account, right from the outset of peace
processes or operations, the dimension of justice and
the rule of law. We believe that it should also draw on
the experience acquired by the international
community as a whole in that regard; that it should
fulfil its responsibilities, in particular in the area of
combating impunity; and, finally, that it should bolster
its preventive action.

I shall take up briefly each of these points.

First, we should build dimension of the rule of
law into an overall approach to the restoration of
peace. That, indeed, is what the Security Council
does - perhaps not yet as well as we would wish it to
do, but it has begun to follow that course. I believe that
the action undertaken in Haiti in that regard is a good
example in that respect, because, right from the start -
with the first Council resolution - respect for human
rights, the combat against impunity and the need to
restore the rule of law were affirmed as goals and fully
integrated into measures to restore security.

However, we should have no illusions. The
Organization's actions must be well thought out; they
cannot be undertaken in haste. For example, as regards
the elections, we believe that everything possible
should be done to ensure that they take place in a
climate of sufficient security and freedom. Indeed,
their credibility is at stake.

Secondly, we need to benefit from the vast
experience that has been acquired on the regional and
national levels. In that regard, it should be noted that
regional organizations have increasingly accumulated
genuine expertise. In Europe, for example, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Council of Europe and, of course, the European
Union - whose presidency will speak shortly - are
often partners of the United Nations in restoring
sustainable peace, as in Bosnia and Herzegovina or in
Kosovo. We are in favour of the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations being
further strengthened in this area.

It also seems to us that the contribution that non-
governmental organizations can make also needs to be
taken into greater consideration and incorporated more
systematically. There are many actors here - the
United Nations and regional and non-governmental
organizations - and the wide range of actors involved
in promoting the rule of law and peace-building means
that we must be careful to ensure the proper
coordination of their efforts to avoid duplication and
lack of clarity. We are in favour of further reflection as
to ways to better dovetail United Nations activities
with those of other international interveners:
international financial institutions, regional and
subregional organizations, as well as non-governmental
organizations and the private sector.

Thirdly, my country feels that it is incumbent on
the Security Council to fully carry out its
responsibilities. We know that a society fractured by
conflict is often incapable - unassisted - of ensuring
the dispassionate exercise of justice. However, justice
is vital for reconciliation. We must, therefore, assist in
meeting that need.

It seems to us that as a start, the Organization
should be ready to lend its support in building national
legal authorities, provided, of course, that they are in
conformity with international standards. In that regard,
France concurs with the Secretary-General when he
states that the United Nations could not participate in
any judicial system that might demand the death
penalty.

The so-called mixed tribunals, bringing together
national and international judges, are a very useful
approach in helping a society to put to rest a troubled
past and in rendering proper reparation to the victims.
The Human Rights Chamber of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, established by the Dayton-Paris Peace
Accords, for example, made a key contribution in the
restoration of victims' rights and, in particular, their
property. That example of a non-criminal court is
worth examining because of the fact that displacements
of populations during a conflict always give rise to
intractable disputes.

France welcomes the ratification by the National
Assembly of Cambodia of the agreement signed on 6
June 2003 between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Kingdom of Cambodia, with a view to
bringing the historical Khmer Rouge leaders of
Democratic Kampuchea to trial. We invite States, as
Cambodia will do, to lend their support to establishing
those special tribunals.

In certain situations when local resolve is
insufficient, only a fully international tribunal can
serve justice. In the past, the Council shouldered its
responsibilities by creating the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda.
Now it should refer to the International Criminal Court
the most serious crimes, if they remain unpunished.
That Court is the instrument par excellence of the
primacy of law and justice. More than half of the
United Nations Member States are parties to its Statute.
It should become universal. That is our hope and that
idea is inherent in its conception. We hope that the
Court will also be a model in terms of access for
victims and reparation, owing, among other things, to
the United Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Gross
and Flagrant Violations of Human Rights chaired by
Ms. Simone Veil. Cooperation between the Court and
the United Nations should be exemplary.

Fourthly, we believe that we need to bolster
preventive action and, in that regard, we would like to
express our satisfaction at the appointment of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for the
Prevention of Genocide. It is one of the Special
Adviser's tasks to draw our attention to any situation
that threatens to degenerate into massive atrocities. It is
also incumbent on the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to draw our attention
to any gravely disquieting situation.

On the subject of prevention, I would like to say
a few brief words on the question of Darfur. An
international commission of inquiry on human rights
violations is preparing to go to the region. We eagerly
await its report and its recommendations on how to
best combat the culture of impunity there. We greatly
hope that the commission of inquiry can be established
as soon as possible.

Here are the focuses that, in our View, the Council
should concentrate on in order to contribute to the
restoration of justice and the rule of law in post-
conflict situations. The Secretariat should assist us in
that task by implementing the recommendations made
in the report of the Secretary-General without delay. I
would add that the contribution of Germany, Finland
and Jordan to the debate on the internal organization of
the Secretariat is one we feel will be very useful.

It remains for us, the Member States, to fulfil our
part of the mission, in particular by providing the
United Nations with experts that can be rapidly
mobilized, which the United Nations needs to be able
to carry out its activities in the restoration of the rule of
law and justice.

