Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks Viet Nam for its work as President of the Council in January and congratulates Belgium on assuming the presidency for this month. It also thanks Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Mr. Spleeters for their briefings. The international security situation is complex and grave at present, with regional conflicts and hotspot issues popping up one after another. As stated in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/1011), the illicit trade of small arms and light weapons (SALW) aggravates regional and armed conflicts, abets violent extremist forces and organized crime and obstructs peace, security and sustainable development. The Security Council and the Secretary-General himself have made positive efforts and achieved effective results on SALWs. The Council adopted resolutions 2117 (2013) and 2220 (2015) and has taken appropriate account of SALWs when considering regional hotspots. The Secretary-General has made SALWs a priority concern in his disarmament agenda and set up a new trust fund to support the relevant efforts of all countries. In order to further prevent and counter the illicit trade of SALWs, China would like to make the following proposals. First, there should be a focus on political settlement. Settling disputes through political and diplomatic means and maintaining international and regional peace and stability are key to eliminating the illicit trade of SALWs. We should intensify peacekeeping and post-conflict rebuilding efforts to assist the countries concerned in achieving economic prosperity and sustainable development. Secondly, State responsibility should be strengthened. Governments bear the primary responsibility for combating the illicit trade of SALWs and should establish and improve laws and regulations and strengthen their enforcement. In addition, they should strictly implement Council resolutions on arms embargoes, refrain from transferring weapons to non-State actors and prevent the trafficking of legitimate weapons through illicit channels. Thirdly, United Nations leadership should be enhanced. States should earnestly carry out their international obligations deriving from, for instance, the outcome of the third Review Conference of the Parties to the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. They should also support the Secretary- General and United Nations agencies in playing their positive role and push forward the multilateral process of countering the illicit trade of SALWs so as to share in the security and governance dividends. Fourthly, international cooperation should be increased. All countries should actively engage in multilateral, bilateral and regional cooperation on a voluntary and equal basis. In the light of the needsof developing countries, the international community should increase, inter alia, its assistance for institution- and _capacity-building, funding - contributions, technology transfers and personnel training and should effectively enhance developing countries' capacity in stockpile management, marking and tracing, collection and destruction of illicit firearms. The Chinese Government consistently opposes the illicit trade of small arms and light weapons and is prudent and responsible in exporting them. It actively participates in international and regional cooperation and endeavours to combat their illicit trade. State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi announced at the General Assembly last year (see A/74/PV.9) that China had started its domestic legal procedures to accede to the Arms Trade Treaty, thereby illustrating the determination and sincerity of China to adhere to multilateralism and actively participate in the global governance of the arms trade and in building a community of shared future for humankind. China would like to work together with the international community to jointly combat the illicit trade of small arms and light weapons, appropriately address the humanitarian issues arising from their illicit transfer, excessive accumulation and abusive use and make our due contribution to the maintenance of international and regional peace and stability.
