Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening this open
debate. Under the leadership of Argentina and your
dynamic leadership, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions has
produced significant results, contributing to greater
transparency and efficiency in the Council's work.

The four notes by the President issued since the
beginning of 2014, in addition to the two notes issued
in 2013, are ample testimony of that dynamism. The
notes provide an undeniable contribution to the proper
functioning of the Security Council. I will mention
only note S/2014/393, of 5 June 2014, which proposes
concrete measures to facilitate the transition between
the successive Chairs of the Council's subsidiary
bodies, and therefore ensures the continuity of those
bodies' work.

Improving the Council's working methods is
not an end in itself. It must allow the Council to best
carry out its duties under its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. The
Council must provide itself with the means to better
anticipate and prevent crises, in particular through
better information on potential crisis areas, whether by
means of presentations such as horizon-scanning, or
briefings by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide or the Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. The Council
must also provide itself with the means to overcome
blockages when it comes to preventing mass atrocities.
We therefore support the initiative of France proposing
a voluntary restriction on the use of the veto power in
situations where the most serious crimes are committed
or may be committed.

In the excellent concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
that you, Madam President, distributed for this debate,
you have focused on two aspects: enhancing due process
in sanctions regimes, and the follow-up of Security
Council referrals to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). I thank Ombudsman Kimberly Prost and ICC
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for the ideas and proposals
that they have been good enough to share with us in
that area.

Targeted sanctions are an important tool of the
Security Council. They seek to implement individual
restrictive measures against persons or entities that
threaten international peace and security. However,
for sanctions regimes to be effective, the process for
listing and delisting must be guided by the principles
of fairness, respect for the rule of law, credibility and
transparency.

The establishment and the strengthening of the
mechanism of the Ombudsman in the context of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime made it possible to affirm
those principles. As an independent and effective
sanctions review mechanism, the Office of the
Ombudsman plays an essential role in ensuring the
accuracy and legitimacy of the sanctions list. We pay
tribute to Ms. Kimberly Prost for the independence,
professionalism and courage with which she fulfils her
mandate. We welcome her obsession with fair process,
which she demonstrated once again this morning.

While it is true that the work of the Ombudsman
has meant fairer proceedings, in our View, progress
can nevertheless still be made on three points. In
order to decide whether keeping a person or an entity
on the list is justified, the Ombudsman must have
access to the relevant information. The cooperation
of the Ombudsman with Member States in that regard
is essential. To that end, in June Luxembourg and the
Ombudsman concluded an arrangement for access to
confidential or classified information.

Once the review of a request for delisting has been
completed, petitioners must be informed of the reasons
for the decision to delist them or to keep them on the
list. Otherwise, the Council would be deprived of an
essential tool for informing petitioners how to modify
or continue to modify their behaviour in the direction
that we wish. Under resolution 2161 (2014), progress has
been made with regard to transmitting the reasons for
granting or refusing a delisting request. The provisions
of resolution 2161 (2014) must now be implemented.

Finally, at present, only individuals and entities
on the Al-Qaida Sanctions List have access to the
Ombudsman. However, similar issues concerning
respect for the principle of a fair trial also arise in other
sanctions committees. In our View, the Council should
therefore extend the mandate of the Ombudsman to
other sanctions regimes.

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court confers on the Security Council a unique role.
Under the Statute, the Council has the power to refer
to the Court situations where crimes within the Court's
jurisdiction appear to have been committed. Since
the Security Council decided to refer the situations
in Darfur and Libya to the ICC, the Prosecutor has
informed the Council of its work in a transparent
manner, and we warmly thank her for that. The reports
of the Prosecutor allow the Council to closely follow the
work of the ICC and to acknowledge the many obstacles
facing the Court.

I can assure Ms. Fatou Bensouda of the full support
of Luxembourg in the resolute action that her Office
continues to carry out in order to put an end to impunity
for the most serious crimes. The Council must ensure
strict follow-up of cases referred to the ICC. That is a
matter of credibility and effectiveness. We can better in
that regard to assist the Court in its indispensable work.

To date, the Council has received seven letters from
the President of the Court addressed to it concerning
the obligation of States to cooperate with the ICC. The
Council has not answered any of them. It has taken no
action to follow up a refusal to cooperate with the Court.
Such inaction is all the more incomprehensible given
that the Council itself "expresses its commitment to an
effective follow up of Council decisions in this regard"
(see S/PRST/2013/2). We strongly hope that the current

efforts will succeed so that the Security Council can
respond to the formal communications that the Court
has addressed to it.

We also support the idea of setting up a mechanism
that reflects the Council's commitment to effectively
follow up the situations that it refers to the Court. The
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
could be entrusted with addressing that issue. If not, a
subsidiary body could be established for that purpose.
Whichever option is chosen, we must act. As I have just
said, the Council's credibility is at stake.

In conclusion, allow me to underscore the
importance of today's open debate. The now yearly
practice allows all Council members and delegations
not members of the Council to make specific proposals
to improve the Council's working methods. We hope
that the ideas expressed here today will be favourably
reflected in the work of the Council, in the interest of
international peace and security for the benefit of all.

