Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Sir, let me
express to you my delegation's gratitude for the
initiative you have taken to hold this open meeting on
justice and the rule of law: the role of the United
Nations.

Clearly, the notion of justice and the rule of law is
today at the very heart of the concerns of the
international community. In their quest to create a
world ruled by law, States have established among
themselves binding norms that confirm the statement
made by Cardinal Richelieu: "Bulls are bound by the
horns and peoples by treaties".

This fundamental bond among the peoples of the
United Nations is the United Nations Charter. In
Articles 1 and 2 of Chapter I, the Charter clearly sets
out the Organization's basic aims: the maintenance of
international peace and security, the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace and the development of
friendly relations among nations. It also clearly
indicates the principles needed to reach these aims: the
sovereign equality of States, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and respect for the territorial integrity and
independence of every country.

It is in order to achieve those aims that the
international community has adopted appropriate
instruments for addressing relations among States and
for promoting justice, law and security. In a world prey
to changes involving violations of all sorts, the role of
the United Nations in general and that of the Security
Council in particular are increasingly evident.

We believe that strengthening multilateralism in
the management of global affairs is an urgent necessity
at a time when our Organization is in a particularly
delicate moment in its development. Since its creation,
the Security Council has concerned itself mostly with
resolving conflicts. In many cases, it has been able to
end situations of aggravated hostility. Nevertheless, its
efforts have at times been compromised by the clear
determination of certain parties to exploit international
law by violating its fundamental principles.

Beyond its traditional peacekeeping activities, the
Security Council must, in the context of conflict
management, help to strengthen institutional capacities,
particularly in the promotion of human rights and good
governance and in improving relations among States.
In this undertaking, the organizations of civil society
have a key role to play. Experience in this respect can
broadly influence future actions of the Security
Council. Moreover, experience shows that establishing
justice and the rule of law in international relations is a
shared endeavour.

This mission calls for a pooling of efforts, both at
the domestic level within States and at the subregional
and regional levels. The many initiatives of the
Economic Community of West African States, whose
central role in conflict management is now widely
recognized, fall within that approach. Nor can we
overlook the primary place of arbitration in the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States. The
work of the International Court of Justice in this field
deserves our attention. Similarly, the entry into force of
the Rome Statute and the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, which we commend,
attest to the international community's commitment to
promoting the rule of law.

Can we truly imagine a world of justice, however,
without of necessity taking into account the rights and
interests of the economically weak countries in the
globalization process manifest in today's world
economy? Do not poverty, the great pandemics and
inequity in the international trading system represent
an injustice with respect to developing countries? My
country believes that achieving the goals of the
Millennium Summit and the necessary reform of
United Nations structures is a priority if we are to
usher in a world that is more just and united.

At a time when peoples are striving for greater
freedoms and to shape their own destinies, world
cooperation is necessary. The drafting and codification
of international law tailored to the imperatives of
globalization are consequent to such cooperation, as is
the creation of the conditions necessary for compliance
by all countries with their obligations under treaties,
conventions and other international agreements.

The international community has a stake in
ensuring that the rule of law replaces the law of the
jungle in all areas of activity and at all levels of social
and political organization. As Secretary-General Kofi
Annan has put it so well:

"Thriving markets and human security go hand in
hand; without one, we will not have the other. A
world of hunger, poverty and injustice is one in
which markets, peace and freedom will never take
root." (E/1999/53, para. 79)

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
its appreciation to the Secretary-General and looks
forward to hearing his proposals on creating a high-
level group to focus on threats to peace. Such an
approach will help us to take appropriate measures to
adapt our institutions to the requirements of
globalization and the major challenges before the
international community. I wish to reaffirm our belief
that justice and the rule of law, with a View to
preserving peace and security throughout the world,
entail the promotion of multilateralism, underpinned by
the concept of collective security.

