Ms. Mungwa: On behalf of the Commission of
the African Union, I would first of all like to thank
you, Sir, for inviting us to participate in this important
meeting and to convey the apologies of the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
who has already travelled to Sharm el-Sheikh for the
meetings of the upcoming eleventh ordinary session of
the African Union taking place at the end of the month.
She therefore could not attend this meeting in person.
It is on me that the great honour and privilege have
fallen today to convey the remarks of the African
Union Commission to the Council today.

In view of the challenges that the situation
between Djibouti and Eritrea may present for the
already challenged region of the Horn of Africa, your
initiative, Mr. President, to organize this timely and
important meeting once again illustrates the continuing
attention of the Security Council to matters of concern
to Africa and highlights the growing cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union in dealing with
common agenda items. Allow me also, Sir, to take this
opportunity to convey our deep gratitude to you and to
all other members of the Council for the special focus
placed on Africa during your presidency.

We would also like to join in welcoming His
Excellency the Prime Minister of Djibouti, His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
other members of their delegation. We thank the Prime
Minister for the very informative briefing he gave the
Council today. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Desta of Eritrea for his statement to the
Council. The presence of the representatives of these
two countries in the Council today is a clear sign that
both are willing to give priority to the path of dialogue,
and we wish to commend them for that choice.

We also thank Mr. Honwana for his statement.
Our appreciation goes as well to all members of the
Council for their statements today.

As members are aware, Eritrea and Djibouti are
two important and valued States members of the
African Union, and the surprising occurrence of the
regrettable incidents under consideration in the Council
today was never expected - even remotely - despite
the persisting tensions in the Horn of Africa as a
whole.

We would like to recall that at its 121st and 125th
meetings, held on 24 April and 2 May respectively, the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
exchanged views on relations between the State of
Eritrea and the Republic of Djibouti, following a letter
sent to the Peace and Security Council on 24 April
2008 by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Djibouti
regarding the situation at the border between the two
countries.

For its part, the Commission of the African Union
formally wrote to the two countries to gather as much
information as possible about the situation at their
common border and about the steps they may have
taken to resolve the situation amicably. Further to the
recommendation of the Peace and Security Council, the
Commission also dispatched a mission to assess the
situation on the ground and to consult with the two
countries. The mission was received by authorities of
Djibouti and is still waiting to be received by Eritrea.

In the light of the disturbing tensions unfolding
between Djibouti and Eritrea - in particular the
incidents between the armed forces of the two
countries - since Tuesday, 10 June 2008, the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, at its 136th
meeting, held on 12 June 2008, strongly condemned
the use of force and stressed the imperative need to
respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of member States, in conformity with the
Constitutive Act of the African Union. The Council
called for the immediate return to the situation
prevailing at the common border between the two
countries before the current tension began, including
the withdrawal from the border of all forces that have
been positioned there since 4 February 2008. The
Peace and Security Council again urged the two
countries to show utmost restraint, resort to dialogue to
resolve any bilateral dispute and give their full
cooperation to all efforts made to that end.
Furthermore, the African Union's Council decided to
meet in due course at the appropriate level to consider
the situation and to take necessary decisions.

We are pleased to confirm to the Security Council
today that the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, in implementation of that decision, will
discuss the situation between Eritrea and Djibouti at
the level of heads of State and Government on 29 June
2008, on the margins of the eleventh ordinary session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the African Union, to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh,

Egypt.

In that regard, and pursuant to the provisions of
the Protocol of the Peace and Security Council, Eritrea
and Djibouti have been invited to that summit. We
would like to take the opportunity of their presence in
the Security Council today to underscore the
importance of their participation at the summit meeting
with a view to finding a peaceful and lasting solution
to their differences.

We would also like to reiterate the appeal of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union to the
two countries; we hope that all parties will act
positively and constructively for the restoration of
peaceful and cordial relations between them, in the
interest of peace and security for the Governments and
the peoples of both countries, and for the subregion
and Africa as a whole. We are confident that the
deliberations of the Security Council today will
contribute to that process.
