Ms. Lisson (Australia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council.

I wish to begin by expressing our thanks to the
Secretary-General for his progress report on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) (S/2006/24)
and to the Special Representative for Timor-Leste,
Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his work leading the United
Nations mission. I would also like to acknowledge the
very welcome presence here today of President
Gusmao.

Australia welcomes the contribution of the United
Nations mission in Timor-Leste to establishing
effective democratic governance, as outlined in the
report, and congratulates Timor-Leste on the
remarkable progress made since 1999. As members
know, Australia has been at the forefront of
international efforts to support Timor-Leste's transition
to an independent and secure State. We have
contributed to all United Nations missions in Timor-
Leste - INTERFET, the International Force for East
Timor; UNTAET, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor; and UNMISET, the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor -
and are currently contributing three military liaison
officers and four civilian police advisers to UNOTIL.
Australia has also provided more than US$ 330 million
in official development assistance to Timor-Leste since
1999.

Over the past six years, the United Nations has
played a critical role in the transition to a democratic
and peaceful Timor-Leste. The United Nations and the
broader international community should be
congratulated for their contribution to Timor-Leste's
successes.

However, the important work of the United
Nations should not overshadow the indispensable
efforts of the people and the Government of Timor-
Leste to create a new nation, and the positive spirit in
which both Indonesia and Timor-Leste have set about
developing productive bilateral relations. In particular,
we commend the efforts of the Governments of Timor-
Leste and Indonesia for their cooperative approach to
border management issues, notably the progress made
in demarcating almost all of their mutual border and
the commitment by both countries to resolving the
border incidents noted in the Secretary-General's
report. We encourage Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
continue to work together to improve their border
management arrangements.

Clearly, the situation in Timor-Leste, through the
country's own efforts and those of its neighbours and
the international community, is in transition from the
challenge of post-crisis management to one in which
the priority is longer-term development. The twentieth
of May this year marks the end of the mission
established by the Security Council in resolution 1599
(2005), and UNOTIL must continue to focus on
preparing for the end of its mandate. More than ever,
the United Nations needs to consider what UNOTIL
will leave behind in terms of solid and sustainable
indigenous capacity in civil administration, policing,
law and justice and defence.

There is clearly more to be done to assist Timor-
Leste after the end of UNOTIL's mandate. Timor-Leste
will require ongoing support, particularly in capacity-
building and poverty alleviation. The international
community has made a considerable investment in
Timor-Leste's success, and continuing challenges must
be addressed by its development partners if the country
is to remain a successful example of the international
community's involvement in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

Australia has been and will remain one of the
largest bilateral donors to Timor-Leste. Our bilateral
aid programme is estimated at more than $30 million
for 2005-2006 and includes substantial capacity-
building in the areas of economic governance, police
and justice - for example, through a four-and-a-half-
year, $23 million police development programme in
partnership with the British Government. Australia also
maintains a significant $6 million-per-annum defence
cooperation programme with Timor-Leste.

The move from the short-term adviser placements
currently supporting Timor-Leste's Government to
long-term institutional strengthening supported by
conventional bilateral and multilateral agencies will be
a challenge. Australia is planning to provide ongoing
support to the World Bank and to the specialized
United Nations development agencies in priority areas,
including law and justice and political and economic
governance, together with a $50 million commitment
over 10 years to help build public sector capacity in
Timor-Leste. We encourage other international
supporters of Timor-Leste to maintain their bilateral
assistance after UNOTIL's mandate ends to help meet
those needs and to ensure a smooth transition to a
sustainable development framework.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
2007 elections in Timor-Leste. United Nations support,
including appropriate technical assistance, for those
elections will be important, as will support from the
international community to Timor-Leste through
electoral capacity building, voter education and
monitoring assistance.

Finally, I should also note here a milestone event
in Australia's bilateral relations with Timor-Leste that
occurred on 12 January, when our two countries signed
a treaty on maritime arrangements in the Timor Sea.
The treaty will raise Timor-Leste's share of upstream
revenues from the Greater Sunrise gas field from
18 per cent to 50 per cent and could lead to Timor-
Leste receiving additional revenue of up to $4 billion
over the life of the project.

Much has been achieved in Timor-Leste in a short
time, which is a credit to the people of Timor-Leste, to
the United Nations and to the international community.
We must all remain committed to supporting Timor-
Leste in its transition to secure and self-reliant
statehood. Australia, for its part, can be relied upon to
contribute to these efforts.

