The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his clear and straightforward
statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign of the State of Qatar.

I should like to begin by thanking all present for
having accepted our invitation to participate in this
open debate to discuss the question of peace in the
Middle East. That issue is at the top of the
Organization's list of priorities in the field of
international peace and security. I would be remiss if I
failed to welcome the Secretary-General and to thank
him for his tireless efforts devoted to this cause, which
he considers to be one of his most important priorities.

The United Nations has been seized of the
dilemma of the Middle East conflict since the
establishment of the Organization. Its engagement in
this crisis, in all its aspects, has been manifested in
efforts that have been effective at times and have
stagnated at others, depending on the intensity of the
situation at any given moment and on the degree of
concern and attention shown by the international
community. It is no secret that the crisis has had grave
consequences for the region and for the world. Its
repercussions will continue to be felt as long as it
eludes a peaceful, just and comprehensive solution that
guarantees the rights and spells out the obligations of
all the concerned parties.

When, following the Madrid Conference, the
international community decided to assume
responsibility for the establishment of a just,
permanent and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East, the people of the region felt that this augured well
for their future. A sense of optimism prevailed, because
a long-sought-after objective was finally within reach.
Fifteen years after the Madrid Conference, optimism
has dissipated, hopes for peace have been shattered and
frustration and despair prevail. Destruction is rampant.
Many innocent Arabs and Israelis continue to fall
victim to acts of violence and counter-violence. Added
to this list are acts of terror whose effects are felt far
beyond the region - acts that constitute a serious
challenge to the international community. All of this is
the result of our failure to arrive at a just and
comprehensive peace.

As the Council embarks on a discussion of this
fundamental issue of international peace and security,
we must not forget a number of basic points. The
conflict has lasted for over half a century. Failure to
arrive at acceptable solutions to this question over the
years has led to catastrophic consequences for the
overall situation in the region. The repercussions have
been felt throughout the international community.
While the reasons for failure are well known, just and
equitable solutions need not remain elusive. All it takes
is good intentions and commitment to the tenets of
international legitimacy.

Israel is not the only side that is legitimately
entitled to live in peace and security in the region.
Palestinians and Arabs have exactly the same right.
Generally speaking, the Arab side has for some time
been consistently confirming, through both its
positions and its actions, that it earnestly desires and
seeks a just and comprehensive peace.

We must understand that the basic political,
security and development problems of the region
cannot be resolved without an honourable and peaceful
resolution of the question under discussion. History has

shown that a military solution to the problem is
impossible. It also shows that the civilized
humanitarian course of action that we are collectively
advocating dictates that we renounce extremism and
avoid rigid positions and unilateral solutions that seek
to guarantee the rights of one side and stamp out those
of the others.

We have more international resolutions, projects,
plans and positions than we can possibly use. We must
acknowledge that fact. What we lack is the political
will to achieve the common objectives that will serve
the interest of all parties to live in peace, security and
stability and promote coexistence and constructive
cooperation.

At this stage, the Arab-Israeli conflict can no
longer be resolved through partial solutions. Not only
have these been shown to be futile, but they have also
failed to bring about a permanent settlement. We need
to pursue a coordinated, integrated and consistent
approach to resolve the conflict, build peace and
achieve reconciliation. The approach must be
comprehensive and open to participation by all parties,
must reflect the needs and interests of the parties
concerned and must protect fundamental rights and
humanitarian principles. It should stamp out violence
and attend to the social and psychological aspects of
the conflict, with a View to arriving at sustainable
peace and stability. We are all called upon to confront
parties on both sides that refuse to work towards peace.

I would like to recall that Israel has repeatedly
stated that it needs a partner in the peace process. But
who will determine the criteria for an acceptable
partner?

The efforts that the State of Qatar is making to
bring about sustainable peace in the Middle East are
not simply an item under discussion in the Security
Council. They constitute a part of the policy that we
are pursuing with a View to arriving at a peaceful,
comprehensive and just settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. The longer the conflict continues, the worse
the consequences will be for our peace and stability.
We are part of the region; we both influence and are
influenced by developments in it.

The United Nations is responsible for the
achievement of sustainable peace in the Middle East,
as the first purpose of the Organization is to maintain
international peace and security. Maintaining
international peace and security, undertaking effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to international peace and security and
upholding the principles of justice and international
law are among the primary objectives of the
Organization.

While the Security Council is the organ that has
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is incumbent upon
all Member States to seek to resolve international
disputes peacefully, in accordance with the United
Nations Charter.

It is regrettable that the Council deals with issues
of lesser gravity and importance with unwavering
seriousness and resolve, but fails to accord the
dangerous question of the Middle East, which poses an
ominous threat to the region as a whole, the same
degree of significance. We are all aware of the critical
and alarming circumstances in the region. The Council
should therefore accord greater attention to this
question in order to revive the peace process. It must
play an active role with a View to arriving at a
comprehensive, just and permanent solution to the
Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
When the Council is seized of other ongoing conflicts
around the world, that is the course it pursues.

We strongly believe that the dividends of peace
will not only benefit the parties concerned and the
immediate region but will also extend to the world at
large, particularly to influential actors, to whom we
appeal today to earnestly strive for peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council. I give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of Palestine.

