Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation notes and deplores the escalation of
violence in the occupied Palestinian territories and in
Israel since the Council's adoption on 30 March of
resolution 1402 (2002).

Despite the international community's numerous
appeals for the prompt implementation of that
resolution, the situation continues to deteriorate
dangerously. The Israeli army is intensifying its
military offensive in the Palestinian territories. The
offensive is characterized by the sustained occupation
of Palestinian towns, the destruction of infrastructure
and the maintenance of the siege of President Arafat's
headquarters, as well as summary executions and
arbitrary arrests. The suicide bombing attacks, directed
by groups of Palestinian extremists, have greatly
increased in number, leading to numerous Victims
among the Israeli population. We were very
encouraged this morning to hear the Permanent
Observer of Palestine acknowledge that the suicide
bombing attacks are harmful to the interests of the
Palestinian people.

In this context of great concern, my delegation
welcomes the fact that yesterday in this same Chamber
two meetings were held, with the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine. Those private meetings were of great
usefulness to us and shed light on the position of each

p arty.

Though the two parties commit themselves to
implementing resolution 1397 (2002), Israel has
signalled some reservations with regard to certain
aspects of resolution 1402 (2002). On the question of
the ceasefire and withdrawal, Israel would like to
obtain the prior cessation of suicide bombing attacks, a
principle source of its concern.

For its part, the Palestinian party judges that a
solution to the crisis must necessarily include the
simultaneous implementation of the political and
security issues, as well as the presence of an
international force of interposition. As well, my
delegation points out the existence of differing
understandings of the elements to be implemented in
the Mitchell report.

In our opinion, the security question and a
political settlement of the conflict are inseparable. In
this framework, everything must be done to end the
suicide bombings and the Israeli occupation of
autonomous Palestinian territories. For this reason, we
urge President Arafat and Prime Minister Sharon to
demonstrate greater responsibility in the search for a
negotiated solution to the conflict. However, to do this,
my delegation invites the Israeli authorities to lift their
siege so that the Palestinian leader can entirely regain
his freedom of movement and action.

My delegation congratulates the courage and
lucidity of the Palestinian leader in these critical
moments. Mr. Arafat remains the symbol of national
Palestinian identity and of the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people.

The offer the Israeli Prime Minister made to the
Palestinian leader of a "one way ticket for exile" is
unacceptable, in our view. We will never cease to
repeat that President Yasser Arafat is not an obstacle to
peace; he remains an inevitable part of the peace
process. The achievements of Oslo must be preserved
at all costs. The war on peace must stop.

We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the urgent need for the immediate implementation of
all provisions of Council resolution 1402 (2002) in
order to create favourable conditions for the
resumption of dialogue and a final settlement of the
Israeli-Arab crisis.

In the light of this, Guinea supports the peace
plan adopted by the Arab League Summit recently held
in Beirut. Guinea invites all parties to renounce
confrontation and violence and to commit themselves
with determination to the path of peace in order to
ensure the one party's existence and security and the
other party's right to an independent State.
