The President (spoke in Spanish): We understand
that this is the last occasion on which Ambassador
Mirjana Mladineo, Permanent Representative of
Croatia, Will participate in the meetings of the Council.
Ambassador Mladineo, with her distinguished career in
the diplomatic service of her country, has represented
Croatia at United Nations Headquarters since 2005. I
Wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of the members
of the Council and on my own account, to express to
our colleague and friend every success in her future
endeavours.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Darfur.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Eliasson to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Mrs. Lila H. Ratsifandrihamanana,
Permanent Observer of the African Union.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana to take a seat
at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, and Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

I now give the floor to Mr. Eliasson.


