Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this debate. I am also grateful
to the Secretary-General and to the Prime Ministers of
Samoa and Jamaica, as well as Minister Adam, for their
presentations.

Small island developing States (SIDS) play a
valuable and increasingly distinct and active role
in fostering international peace and security. They
provide troops to peacekeeping operations across
the world, support vital initiatives to counter the
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, and seek
to advance the multilateral agendas of peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and nuclear disarmament, among
others. Those countries also face particular social,
economic and security vulnerabilities that are linked to
their unique geography, as the concept note authored by
New Zealand (S/2015/543, annex) correctly points out.
Understanding and facing those specific concerns is a
collective responsibility. Brazil is proud to cooperate
with many SIDS on an array ofissues that assist in their
sustainable development.
Transnational organized crime and, in particular,
the illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons are
a source of insecurity for many small island developing
States, which are often unable to effectively patrol
their territories, airspace and exclusive economic
zones. International cooperation and coordination
of initiatives on the ground should be the preferred
answer in that regard. While we recognize the human
suffering caused by the illicit flow of small arms and
light weapons into many SIDS, it is important to also
acknowledge that not all illicit cross-border trafficking
represents a threat to international peace and security.

The Security Council can play a role in countering
the dissemination of armaments and ammunition in
conflict or post-conflict situations, including through
sanctions. It is important, nevertheless, not to lose sight
of the distinction between situations that may threaten
international peace and security from those that pertain
to public security. Discussions on small arms and light
weapons in domestic contexts should be addressed
by the General Assembly, in particular within the
framework of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
Brazil expects that the entry into force of the Arms
Trade Treaty, by favouring stricter arms-export control
systems, will have a healthy impact on the levels of
violence experienced by some small island developing
States. We urge all States to sign and ratify it.

The challenge faced by small island developing
States regarding the illicit exploitation of their natural
resources should be addressed by strengthening
national ownership and the State institutions needed to
bolster national oversight and develop adequate policies
regarding natural resources. National ownership and
sovereignty are strong antidotes against the use of
natural resources as fuel for conflicts.

Brazil acknowledges the serious hazards posed
by climate change to many small island developing
States, whose long-term survival may be endangered
by rising sea levels, desertification, extreme weather
events and cataclysmic natural disasters. We express
our full solidarity with these nations and continue to
stand ready to cooperate with them in seeking answers
to their specific needs.

Yet, as several delegations stressed during a recent
Arria Formula informal debate of the Council, the
issue of climate change cannot be properly understood,
let alone resolved, from a security-based perspective.
The Security Council lacks the tools, the expertise,
the representation and the legitimacy to deal with
the economic, social, environmental, humanitarian,
scientific and technological aspects of this global debate.
Instead of debating climate change in a forum where
the SIDS themselves are seldom represented, we should
seek solutions to this real problem in the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP 21), where the voice of SIDS
has acquired increased resonance.

Climate change cannot be considered a threat to
international peace and security per se or a "threat
multiplier". Instead, it is the foremost sustainable
development challenge of our times. Of special
relevance for developing countries, and particularly for
small island developing States, is the need for adequate
resources for adaptation measures. Brazil is convinced
that the most effective way to address the legitimate
concerns of small island developing States on climate
change is to renew our efforts towards an ambitious
agreement, under the Convention, that is based on the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capacities. Brazil expects such an
outcome to be reached at COP 21 in Paris, and will
continue to play a constructive role in this regard.

Let me reiterate, in conclusion, Brazil's confidence
that with capacity-building, enhanced international
cooperation and the strengthening of national
institutions, small island developing States will be able
to confront environmental and natural hazards and
other challenges they face. Brazil will remain engaged
with small island developing States at the bilateral,
regional and international levels in order to cooperate
and promote their development and security.

