Mr. Prosor (Israel): I should first like to
congratulate New Zealand for its able stewardship
of the Security Council this month. I thank Foreign
Minister McCully for being here today to preside
over this meeting, and I also wish to thank the United

Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing today
and his ongoing efforts to help ease the situation in this
volatile region.
Ten years ago this month, Israel disengaged from
the Gaza Strip, and I would like to remind the Council
that we also dismantled four settlements in the West
Bank in order to show that there is a political horizon.
We removed thousands of Israeli families from their
homes, uprooted entire communities and withdrew
every unit of the Israeli Defence Forces. Not a single
Israeli civilian or soldier remained in Gaza.

We in Israel have always been told, including in
this prestigious Chamber, that the obstacles to peace
are the settlements and the Israeli presence in Judea and
Samaria. If only Israel would pull back, if only Israel
would leave the Palestinians to run their own affairs,
there would be peace. If Israel would only listen to the
international community, the border between Israel and
the Palestinians would be like the border between the
Netherlands and Belgium.

So we did.

Ten years after we withdrew from Gaza, the territory
we left has become a safe haven for terrorists. Hamas,
an internationally recognized terrorist organization,
has used and abused the people of Gaza to continue its
war against Israel. Apparently it did not get the memo
that an Israeli withdrawal was supposed to end the jihad
against its people. Since the disengagement, terrorist
groups have fired 15,000 rockets and mortars at Israeli
citizens. They have dug terror tunnels underneath the
border to attack Israeli towns and communities.

Yet, despite all of this, When Hamas joined the
Palestine Liberation Organization Government, the
UN gave its warm blessing. When Hamas refused to
adopt the Quartet principles and refused to recognize
Israel's right to exist, the Council looked the other way.
And just recently, when Israel revealed to the world
that senior Hamas members Abdullah Kishta and Wa'al
Faraj collaborated with the Islamic State in Iraq and
Sham (ISIS) in northern Sinai to carry out a large-scale
attack on Egyptian military bases, not a single voice of
condemnation was heard from this Chamber.

To this day, Hamas refuses to accept the three
conditions of the international Quartet. It refuses
to recognize Israel, it refuses to abide by previous
agreements, and, obviously, it refuses to renounce
violence. The Quartet, not Israel, established these
conditions, and Hamas flouts them.

Gaza was supposed to be a model of a stable,
self-governing society. Instead, it became the model
for lawlessness, violence and destabilization. Gaza
was supposed to be the pilot project for Palestinian
governance in the West Bank, but the pilot crashed the
plane.

Since then, a similar model has proliferated all
over the Middle East. From the Mediterranean to the
Caspian, States that we knew yesterday are no longer
here today, and others are on the verge of disappearing
tomorrow. We live in a time in which nation States are
disintegrating before our eyes. New political structures
have not been established, and bands of religious
zealots are rushing in to create new theocratic States
in this vacuum.

Iraq, Syria, Yemen and Libya no longer exist as we
knew them. Now we have the kingdom of Al-Qaida, the
republic of Jabhat Al-Nusra, Houthistan and, of course,
the Islamic State. This is not the Middle East we learned
about from our high-school geography teachers; those
borders are now unrecognizable. The Google map of
the region must be updated every day based on which
terror group seized control of which area during the
previous night.

In the Sinai peninsula, terrorists have declared war
on Egypt. Earlier this month, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis,
an ISIS branch in Egypt, carried out an attack on 15
Egyptian military positions in northern Sinai, killing
more than 70 Egyptians. Let it be clear: these groups
are not only looking to terrorize Egyptians, they are
trying to destabilize the entire region.

These emerging radical factions differ in their
ideologies, in their interests and in their goals, but they
all share one thing in common: they seek to impose
their radical religious beliefs on all who come under
their control. In the new lawless Middle East, there is
only one law - submit or die - and sometimes you are
not even given the choice.

A butterfly flutters its wings in one place and
causes a storm halfway around the world. When
the earth shakes in the Middle East, you can feel the
vibrations under your feet from Europe to Asia. In
one day last month, we witnessed terror attacks on
three continents - a day of bloodshed during which
terrorists murdered 65 innocent people in Tunisia, in
Kuwait and in France.

Many in the international community were captive
to their dreams of a new Middle East, but we can no
longer just hit the snooze button. It is time to wake up.
We are, all of us, engaged in a large-scale war over
the future of the Middle East and the rest of the world.
What will our region look like? Will it progress to an
era of democracy and human rights or regress to a
collection of fundamentalist States? Which countries
will remain standing? Will it be the countries we have
known for a century? Or will much of the Middle East
become known simply as the United Islamic Empire?
The trends are against us. If we do not wake up in time,
we will get all the answers wrong.

Israel does not have the luxury of waiting for the
rest of the world to wake up. Before the West had to
deal with the Islamic State halfway around the world,
Israel had to deal with the Hamas terror State on our
doorstep. It is now exactly one year since Operation
Protective Edge. One year ago, Israel was forced to
protect its people after Hamas terrorists kidnapped
and killed three Israeli youths, launched hundreds of
rockets and mortars at Israel, and rejected or violated
every truce offered to the parties.

The Israeli Defence Forces faced a cruel and
cynical enemy that knows no red lines and that has
violated every code of morality the civilized world
holds dear. Hamas launched its indiscriminate attacks
from residential areas that it had turned into military
staging grounds. Hospitals, schools and United Nations
facilities were used as weapons depots, playgrounds
were used as launching pads, and innocent children
were used as human shields. Firing rockets on civilians
from behind civilians is a double war crime, and the
international community should say so loud and clear.

While the rockets constituted terror from above,
Hamas also sought to unleash terror from below. In
Gaza, there is no money to rebuild hospitals or to pay
teachers, but there is a lot of money to dig and expand
terror tunnels. When Hamas finishes its work, Gaza
will be the first city in the world to have a modern
infrastructure underground before having a basic
infrastructure aboveground.

As we sit here today, one year after last summer's
conflict, we must ask: what has really changed? We can
start answering the question by looking at the Hamas
military parade in Gaza this month, where Hamas
publicly displayed two newly developed rockets. For
anyone who did not get the message, Hamas explained
that "until now the enemy has only seen a small part
of our true power". Hamas has intensified its efforts
to repair its network of terror tunnels and smuggle,
stockpile and develop new weapons.

A year after the operation, the United Nations has
done nothing to weaken Hamas, but plenty to criticize
Israel. Two weeks ago, the United Nations Human
Rights Council's Commission of Inquiry published
its report on last summer's conflict. Let me give the
Council an example of how professional, insightful and
thorough this report was. The authors of the report said,

"The Commission cannot conclusively determine
the intent of Palestinian armed groups with regard
to the construction and use of these tunnels."

Would I have a suggestion? Maybe these tunnels
were intended to be the new metro system in Gaza. In
that case, as the previous Ambassador to the Court of
St. James, I give Council members a tip: do not forget
to mind the gap. Perhaps the United Nations is simply
suffering from a severe case of tunnel vision. After
all, this is the same United Nations that appointed
as the head of the Commission William Schabas, the
law professor who conveniently forgot to mention his
prior paid consulting job with the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

I am holding in my hands a 200-page-long Israeli
report that details the systematic and widespread
atrocities committed by Hamas and analyses Israel's
military response. If someone at the United Nations had
read this report, he or she would have had a broader
perspective on the threat Israel faces and recognized
Hamas for what it really is - an internationally
recognized terrorist organization. When Palestinians
in the Yarmouk refugee camp were massacred by ISIS
and the Secretary-General said, "the refugee camp is
beginning to resemble a death camp", we did not hear
any call for a commission of inquiry from the Human
Rights Council.

The United Nations prides itselfon taking a balanced
approach to international affairs. That is very interesting.
Saudi Arabia has for months been carrying out massive
and indiscriminate air strikes in Yemen. Those strikes
have hit United Nations facilities, hospitals, schools and
civilian neighbourhoods and left entire families dead,
yet - surprise, surprise - no commission of inquiry,
no board of inquiry. This is the same United Nations
that made it clear to us 4 Israel 4 that it is standard
operating procedure to automatically establish a board
of inquiry any time a United Nations facility is hit.

That is a balanced approach indeed. When it comes
to investigating the results of war and conflict, it seems
the United Nations believes, to paraphrase George
Orwell, that all people are equal, but some people are
more equal than others.

Israel's struggle against the Hamas rulers of Gaza
does not prevent us from playing a key role in helping
the people of Gaza. Hundreds of trucks enter Gaza every
day, carrying thousands of tons of food, humanitarian
aid, medicine and more, all without restrictions. Since
October 2014, Israel has supplied Gaza with 1.3 million
tons of construction material.

While Israel is fully committed to the
implementation of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism
and will continue to cooperate with the United Nations
in this important mission, the Palestinian Authority
(PA) not only refrains from taking part in the effort,
but it puts obstacles in the way of those who do so. The
PA is quick to condemn Israel at the United Nations,
but on the ground it refuses to assume responsibility
for the people of Gaza. The Palestinian Authority has
no authority over the Gaza Strip, and apparently it does
not want any.

Last September, the Security Council tried to adopt
a draft resolution to address the situation in Gaza. While
Israel agreed to the draft resolution, the Palestinian
President dragged his feet, obstructed the process and
eventually rejected the proposition altogether. The
draft resolution would have restored PA governance
over the people of Gaza, granted the PA control over
the crossings into Gaza and disarmed Hamas. The draft
resolution would have given control over Gaza back to
the PA, but Mahmoud Abbas rejected it.

The Palestinian leadership is apparently too busy
settling scores with political rivals in the PA to worry
about what happens in Gaza. Just look at how Abbas
treated the former Prime Minister of the Palestinian
Authority, Salaam Fayyad - a Palestinian leader
esteemed and respected in the international community.
Abbas seized the funds of Fayyad's non-governmental
organization, Tomorrow for Social Development,
and froze his accounts. The Palestinian Authority
never misses an opportunity to avoid responsibility.
The international community should not shy away
from criticizing the PA and pushing it to assume
responsibility.

Avoiding responsibility has its price. Last month,
there were numerous terror attacks, including two that
were fatal. Dani Gonen and Malachi Rosenfeld were
shot and killed by Palestinian terrorists as they went
about their daily lives. May their memory be a blessing.
Those murderous attacks are just part of an increase
in the terror attacks we have witnessed recently. Yet
the leadership of the PA remains silent and fails to
condemn the murder of innocent people.

Three days ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2231 (2015), which endorses the nuclear
agreement with Iran. The agreement is bad for Israel,
bad for the region, and bad for the world. It is a historic
mistake that brings Iran closer to achieving its 30-year
goal of attaining nuclear weapons and fuels its drive for
imperial expansion. The resolution took the first step to
lift the sanctions without waiting to see ifIran complies
with even one single obligation in the agreement.

What makes the international community so sure
that Iran will live up to its end of the bargain? When
the nuclear deal was struck with North Korea, good
and well-intentioned people believed that it would
prevent North Korea from developing nuclear weapons.
Sometimes, good intentions lead to wishful thinking.

Iran is the source of instability in the Middle East.
In Syria, Lebanon, Yemen, Iraq and other countries,
Iran has deployed its Revolutionary Guards in order to
expand its empire. Iran is also the godfather of terror
around the world. Countries from Bulgaria to Argentina
have experienced the horror of Iranian terror at first
hand. For years, Iran has armed and financed Hizbullah
in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza - two groups that
make clear their goal of wiping Israel off the map.

Many members of the Security Council described
the agreement as the opening of a new chapter. I am
sorry to ruin a good book, but Iran's supreme leader,
Ayatollah Khamenei, has a different story to tell.
Council members may have signed a deal with the
poster boys of Iran - Zarif and Rouhani * but in
Iran the Ayatollah and his Revolutionary Guards are
the ones calling the shots. Khamenei declared that
even after the agreement is signed, Iran will continue
to support terrorists in the Middle East and around the
world. Ifthat was not clear enough, listen to what Iran's
Deputy Foreign Minister had to say two days ago:

"We have told the P5+1 that we will supply arms

to anyone and anywhere and will import weapons

from anywhere we want we clarified this point

during the negotiations."

It is worth noting the fact that Israel and many
States in the Arab world share grave concerns over the
implications of the agreement on the stability of the
Middle East. When Israel and the Arab world share
the same concerns, the world should pay attention.
Instead of contributing to a solution in our region, this
agreement has strengthened the source of the problem;
it has given the source of the problem, Iran, the money
to act on the basis of its destructive ideology and the
time and opportunity to develop a nuclear arsenal.
The agreement grants Iran not one, but two paths to
the bomb: it can acquire the bomb by cheating, or by
keeping the deal for 10 years, and then assembling its
bomb immediately. And 10 years go by in the blink of
an eye.

Under the terms of the agreement, Iran may
continue significant enrichment not needed for civilian
use, as well as continue research and development
on advanced centrifuges that will significantly
reduce the break-out time for a bomb. Enforcement
is largely dependent on Iran's goodwill: inspections
are not "anywhere, any time". The deal gives Iran the
ability to delay inspections of undeclared sites for 24
days - enough time to hide a smoking gun; and there
are insufficient limitations on Iran's weaponization
activities. Iran already has the enrichment capability
to produce a bomb and the means for suitable delivery:
without limitations on weaponization, the way is paved
for Iran to assemble a bomb.

Now, in the summer of 2015, the countdown to
Iran's becoming a threshold nuclear State has begun.
In five years, the embargo against conventional
weapons will end. In eight years, it can acquire missile
technology; in 10 years, unlimited centrifuges. That
is not disarmament. It is a timetable for Iran to build
nuclear weapons. In future years, the consequences
of that mistake will become clear to everyone, but for
Israel tomorrow is already too late.

Ten years ago, Israel took a significant step with its
disengagement from Gaza. A decade later, in the light
of regional developments, the international community
must take steps of its own. It must disengage from
illusions, from its constant bias against Israel and
from murderous terror groups. The time has come to
disengage from old habits, but engage with the values
that we all cherish.

