Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jean Arnault and the members of
the Security Council. As you just said, Mr. President,
it is very encouraging to not only receive the briefing
of Mr. Arnault and the report (S/2016/1095) of the
Secretary-General, but also to receive the support that
Colombia has always felt from the Security Council
since we started along this long path a year ago.
On 2 October 2016 - I think it was a surprise
for everyone - the referendum voted "no" by a
narrow difference. This had an obvious consequence
of a delay of the beginning of the actions that were
proceeding for the implementation of what we had
agreed upon. However, and I believe that it required a
huge commitment and singular perseverence, it was an
opportunity that opened the door to President Santos
Calderon to initiate a national dialogue to conclude a
new peace agreement, which we were finally able to
celebrate on 24 November 2016. It incorporated a good
number of the changes that were based on the proposals
of the political leaders of the "no" movement. The new
Final Peace Agreement was ratified by the National
Congress 30 November 2016.

The first day of December 2016 was set as the date
to start the demobilization schedule 4 to group the ex-
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) into
temporary territories while they transitioned to the
agreed upon zones - as well as for the handing over
and collection of weapons, which must be completed
within a 180 days.

Thanks to a spirit of great commitment on the
part of the Colombian legislature, the Constitutional
Court approved the fast-track. The approved period
of six months has made it possible for the legislature
to introduce six important legal reforms - the first
of which was mentioned by Mr. Arnault, namely, the
amnesty law for those members of the FARC who have
not committed crimes against humanity, as well as a
subseqeunt law on a special peace jurisdiction, both of
which flowed from the special capacities conferred on
Colombia by the Constitutional Court.

The personal commitment of President Santos
Calderon to go to a gathering site and meet with the
tri-party mechanism, along with the Foreign Minister
and Mr. Arnaud and his entire team, is another way in
which we will manage to overcome the time that - well,
I do not want to say "lost" but, rather, the setback of
the referendum. I shouldl ike to inform the Council
that, following President Santos Calderen's visit to
the field, a commitment was ratified by all the parties
involved - the Government, the FARC-EP and the
United Nations Mission in Colombia - to complying
with the 180-day period, with modifications and
adjustments, as the Mission has mentioned, in order to
ensure the handing over of all weapons.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
isued on 23 December 2016. I thank Mr. Arnault and
his entire team. It was not an easy task. There are in fact
two Colombias: the urban Colombia, which members
are familiar with and which is developed and thriving,
and another rural Colombia, which is perhaps neglected
and, owing to the conflict, is often very difficult to
reach. We trust that, with the arrival of security thanks
to the deployment of the police and the Colombian
army; with the modifications and construction in
the new zones, the majority of which, as members
have been able to see for themselves, have no roads,
drinking water, electricity or any sort of infrastructure;
with the establishment of the Mission's structures; and
with the deployment of international observers and the
investigation of incidents by the Mechanism, which has
in the past been a behind-the-scenes task - we have
managed to move forward in ensuring the alignment
of the three components: the rebel forces, the United
Nations and the national police. However, implementing
the ideas from Havana and from the negotiation period
was not an easy task, as we had to actually implement
them in the field, which owing to the tripartite nature
of the Mechanism, occurs sui generis and is perhaps
a disappointment. Despite the progress, we must
acknowledge the difficulties in the implementation of
the Mechanism itself.

In that context, it is important not to lose the
momentum and commitment shown by all. We must to
intensify our efforts - by the Government, the FARC-
EP and the United Nations - to conclude as soon as
possible the establishment and structure of the Mission
in order to begin activities that have to do with the
specific task that the Council entrusted to the Mission
related to the laying down of weapons, including the
technical installations that are required and that will
help us comply with the Council's mandate in the
agreed timetable. I would like to emphasize that we
need to conclude as soon as possible the administrative,
logistical and legal aspects that are still outstanding,
including the letters ofassist, all ofwhich can sometimes
take a great deal of time and be an impediment. It is
important to find a flexible mechanism to provide
speedy assistance from the Secretariat.

Colombia believes that the professionalism and
neutrality of the Mission's members must be maintained
at all times in order to fully fulfil the mandate that was
entrusted to them.

As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
assessment of the first three months is generally
favourable. The Mechanism, as it has been designed,
generates trust among the parties. The spirit that
characterized the Havana negotiations must be
reflected at both the regional and local levels. We are
sure that we will be able to continue to count on the
support of the Security Council and the new Secretary-
General. I am sure that, based on the conversation he
had with President Santos Calderon, as well as in future
conversations, that major commitment will continue,
including, of course, the commitment of the United
Nations Mission.

The support of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States has been very important. At
yesterday's debate (see S/PV.7857) we talked about the
importance of the commitment of regional organizations.
This is a clear example of how, with observers and forces
from our region, and with empowerment rooted in a
decision taken by the Latin American and Caribbean
region that this process belongs to us, the oldest and last
conflict in our hemisphere has been overcome. Amid
so many concerns before the Council and before us as
Member States, Colombia is pleased to bring news of
peace to the Security Council.

