I congratulate the Niger on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of September 2020 and thank it for organizing today's open debate on what is a very important topic. I would also like to thank the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and Ms. Inna Modja for their briefings. The Security Council first addressed the link between climate change and security in April 2007 in an open debate convened by the United Kingdom (see S/PV.5663). Thereafter, in 2009, the General Assembly adopted resolution 63/281, in which it recognized the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change as the key instrument for addressing climate change, and invited "the relevant organs of the United Nations, as appropriate and within their respective mandates, to intensify their efforts in considering and addressing climate change, including its possible security implications" (ibid., para. 1). The Security Council's recognition of the adverse effects of climate change on peace and security has grown, as demonstrated in the meetings held on this issue, most notably in 2017 in an Arria Formula meeting held on 10 April 2017), in 2018 (see S/PV.8307) and in 2019 (see S/PV.8451). This recognition demonstrates the existential relationship between climate change and peace and security. The Niger's accession to the Council in January 2020 has further put this issue at the forefront, as it is one of the countries where the evidence of the impacts of climate change are there for all to see. Armed conflicts, together with their causes, dimensions and resolutions, have some connections to climate change, a combination of which poses a threat by reversing the economic growth and development gains made by countries over the years. Climate change has been recognized as a threat multiplier, whereby it aggravates pre-existing risks and challenges. The present situation in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin are concrete examples. The resolve to deal with the effects of climate change would equally lead to the promotion and preservation of the blue economy, because such efforts are also aimed at addressing oceanic and riverine systems and issues, as well as those that threaten the sustainability of lakes. When these are addressed, conditions that give rise to violence, crises and conflicts are forestalled. Namibia is one of the countries in the world most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Increasing temperatures, evaporation and the variability of rainfall translate into drought, shortage of water and floods. As a matter of fact, in May 2019, Mr. Hage G. Geingob, President of the Republic of Namibia, declared a state of emergency in all regions of the country on account of a historic drought. For these reasons, Namibia has institutionalized the synergies between the three Rio Conventions - on climate change, biodiversity and combating desertification. We based this move on the understanding that land is the infrastructure on which biodiversity can flourish. There is no way we can protect biodiversity without stopping land degradation and reclaiming degraded lands. There is no way to adapt to climate change and mitigate its effects without relying on healthy lands and thriving biodiversity. Namibia therefore welcomes the upcoming United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration, chiefly in terms of the restoration of degraded land. Moreover, Namibia welcomes the post-2020 global biodiversity framework. As the vision of the framework envisages a harmonious relationship with nature where, by 2050, biodiversity is valued, conserved, restored and wisely used, and ecosystem services are maintained, sustaining a healthy planet and delivering benefits essential for all people, Namibia regards it as a framework for tackling environmental degradation in the context of sustainable development to contribute to building back better after the devastation wrought by the coronavirus disease. Together with Iceland, Namibia co-chairs the Group of Friends on desertification, land degradation and drought. Currently, the Group has a total number of 23 members. I encourage other States Members of the United Nations to join the Group so that we could collectively ensure that these developmental issues are not regarded as trivial and therefore set aside. I conclude by reaffirming that Namibia will continue to play its role in the international community to promote cooperation in tackling these issues effectively. We simply cannot afford to fall behind in combating climate change, failing which international peace and security would be negatively affected.
