Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his very sobering briefing this morning.
As we held an open debate on this issue some two weeks
ago (see S/PV.8244), I will focus my remarks today on
the immediate situation in Gaza.

We are appalled by the Violence that we have
witnessed in Gaza since 30 March, in particular the
sharp escalation yesterday. Every life lost is a tragedy,
but the number of people killed was the highest in a
single day since the beginning of the protests. Indeed,
it was the bloodiest day since the last conflict in Gaza,
in 2014.

Yesterday at least 60 Palestinians were killed by
the Israeli security forces and more than 2,000 were
wounded. Yet again the Israeli security forces used
live ammunition, including when shooting at children.
There are reports that several children under the age
of 18 were among those killed yesterday, in addition to
the seven children killed in the preceding weeks. We
condemn the killings, and we express our condolences
in connection with the tragic loss oflife.

As we have stated repeatedly, Israel has a right to
protect itself and the people within its borders. That
said, Israel, as the occupying Power, has a responsibility
to protect Palestinian civilians and must fully respect
the right to peaceful protest; protect civilians; and
ensure that the use of force and other measures taken
are strictly proportional. The lethal use of force should
be exercised with maximum restraint, and only as a last
resort. These incidents raise serious concerns as to their
compatibility with international law, and there must be
an independent and transparent investigation, as called
for by the Secretary-General, among many others.

We urge all parties to act with the utmost restraint
to avoid any further loss of life and to protect civilians,
particularly children. This means never making children
the target of violence as well as not putting children
in harm's way or encouraging them to participate
in violence. We urge the Israeli security forces to
refrain from the use of force against unarmed civilian
protesters and representatives of the media. We also call
on Hamas and those organizing the demonstrations to
avoid any provocations and ensure that protests remain
non-violent and peaceful.

In addition, we must not forget that the people of
Gaza have lived in intolerable conditions for far too long,
in a humanitarian situation that is now deteriorating
even further. To tackle this situation and to enable
Gaza to recover, movement and access restrictions
must be eased. We support the proposal just made by
the representative of the United Kingdom on the need
to come forward with concrete ideas in this regard.

At this time, Israelis and Palestinians are
commemorating defining moments in their history that
serve as important reference points for both peoples.
The position of Sweden and of the whole European
Union on the status of Jerusalem as a final-status
issue is clear and will not change. All three Abrahamic
religions 4 Judaism, Islam and Christianity - have
strong bonds to Jerusalem that must be preserved. A
way must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of both States,
in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions.
In line with the long-standing policy of the European
Union, we will continue to respect the international
consensus on the status of Jerusalem embodied in, inter
alia, Security Council resolution 478 (1980), including
on the location of diplomatic representation, until the
final status of Jerusalem is resolved.

As was stated in December last year, we regret the
United States' decision to recognize Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel and to move its embassy from Tel Aviv
to Jerusalem. This runs counter to international law
and the Council's resolutions.

Our immediate priority must now be to defuse the
current tensions on the ground, as more demonstrations
are expected today and in the coming days. The lethal
violence cannot be allowed to continue. All parties
must take immediate steps to de-escalate, and the
Council has a responsibility to actively promote such
efforts. We regret that the press statement proposed by
Kuwait yesterday could not be adopted, and we hope
that a way forward on an appropriate public expression
can be found without further delay. There is unanimity
around this table, I believe, in calls for restraint and
de-escalation to break the cycle of violence, relieving
the dire situation in Gaza, and for resumed serious
negotiations towards peace.

Increased regional instability must not contribute
to a marginalization of the Israeli-Palestinian question.
We must more than ever urgently engage to bring the
parties back to negotiations so as to advance the two-
State solution. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the
Palestinian Authority's re-establishment in Gaza are
also needed. A halt to settlements and an end to the
ongoing Israeli occupation are fundamental. It is time
for a relaunch of the Middle East peace process.

