Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
representative of the State of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of the State of Palestine for their statements.
I shall touch on several points - the Israeli-
Palestinian peace process and the situation in
Syria - before saying a few words about Lebanon.

In the Middle East, everything must be done to
ensure that the efforts of the United States Secretary
of State are crowned with success. France lends its full
support to the efforts of the United States, particularly
those of the Secretary of State, to drive forward the
negotiations that are under way. The parametres for
a solution are well known and have been set forth in
several Security Council resolutions. The eventual
acceptance by the parties of an initiative by the
United States on a framework for the negotiations,
broadly outlining a resolution to the conflict, could
constitute significant progress towards a definitive
peace agreement. Twenty years after Oslo, any interim
formula must be discarded.

In order to ensure progress in the current efforts,
the parties must refrain from any gesture likely to
undermine the process, particularly as far as settlements
are concerned. Along with its European partners,
France has condemned the publication of a call for
proposals by the Israeli authorities, on 10 January, to
build more than 1,800 homes in East Jerusalem and the
West Bank, following the approval given on 5 January to
build new homes in the settlements of Ofra and Karnei
Shomron in the West Bank. The French President called
on the Israeli authorities to totally and finally halt the
settlements when he visited Israel and Palestine from
17 to 19 November 2013.

In its conclusions of 16 December, the European
Union presented the details of the unprecedented
special privilege partnerships that would be offered
to the parties in the event of a definitive agreement,
which is of course the goal of the current efforts. That
partnership would cover economic, political, security
and social aspects, thereby allowing for stronger
cooperation between the European Union an the two
States, bolstering and helping with the construction of
the Palestinian State and promoting trade and economic
and human development in the region.

On Syria, gGiven the suffering of the people
and the destruction of the country, fatalism must not
prevail. We hope that this week will prove a decisive
one. The second Geneva Conference on Syria will
begin in Montreux on Wednesday, 22 January. France
and its international partners have done everything in
their power to assist the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces to prepare for that
important Conference. We should welcome the decision
taken this weekend in Istanbul by the Syrian opposition
to participate in the Conference under the aegis of the
National Coalition.

That decision was not an automatic one. The
ongoing brutal repression, especially in Aleppo; the
fact that civilians are caught in the fighting; the lack
of humanitarian access to areas under the control of the
opposition, in which Yarmouk is one of the most tragic
examples; and, finally, the provocative statements about
maintaining President Bashar Al-Assad in power at all
costs in the midst of presidential elections, which no
reasonable person would recognize as legitimate; and the
outrageous reply from Mr. Mouallem to the Secretary-
General's invitation to the Conference - everything
has been done by the regime to deter the opposition
from participating in that exercise.

The Secretary-General's invitation to the second
Geneva Conference on Syria was unambiguous. The
goal of the Conference is the full implementation of the
Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), namely, the
establishement of a transitional Government with full
executive powers, including, of course, over the armed
forces and the security services. We are in agreement
in acknowledging that this document is a reference
point for a political solution in Syria. The attempts by
the regime to impose its interpretation on the second
Geneva Conference on Syria will not fool anyone.

When it comes to Iran, it must be clear to everyone
that any participation in the second Geneva Conference
on Syria is conditional to the explicit acceptance of
the mandate laid down in the invitation letter to the
Conference from the Secretary-General, to which I have
just referred. One cannot claim to support a political
process out of the crisis in good faith while rejecting
the goal and the parametres. In that connection, the
questions raised by the Syrian National Coalition are
legitimate and should be answered.

Although this is obvious, I would also remind the
Council that those with blood on their hands - those
who bear responsibility for the crimes committed in the
course of more than two years - must not play a part
in the political transition. We wish to see those matters
brought before the International Criminal Court.
Against that backdrop, we must also send a message
of support to Lebanon. We support the determination of
the Lebanese authorities to protect themselves from the
political repercussion of the Syrian crisis, in line with
the Baabda Declaration of June 2012, as they combat all
forms of terrorism and commit to combating impunity.
The opening of the trial at the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon marks a decisive stage in combating impunity
for terrorist acts.

Lebanon urgently needs a Government capable of
taking decisions, given a political, economic and social
situation increasingly fraught with difficulties. It must
also be able to count on functioning institutions that
can help with the influx of almost 1 million refugees
from Syria. We must continue to mobilize to support
that country, particularly within the context of the
International Support Group for Lebanon.

