Mr. Vongxay (Lao People's Democratic Republic): At the outset, let me express my delegation's sincere congratulations to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its election to the Security Council and on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of January. My delegation associates itself with the statements delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and the Philippines on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, respectively (see S/PV.8699 Resumption | and S/PV.8699). I am honoured to speak at this important open debate, which is timely and of great importance as the international community marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. Since its inception, the United Nations has made significant achievements on many fronts, making substantial contributions to the maintenance and promotion of international peace and security. The Security Council has the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security by performing its duties in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. At the same time, Member States agree to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council. All that demonstrates that the role of the United Nations remains very relevant after more than seven decades. The international community now faces ever- increasing challenges, which include, among others, armed conflicts, terrorism, extremism, political unrest, climate change, natural disasters, widening inequality and extreme poverty. The current situation poses serious threats to international peace and security and sustainable development in various parts of the world. We are therefore of the view that it is high time for all countries to reaffirm their strong political will and commitment to strengthening multilateralism by upholding the United Nations Charter and international law, in particular the principles of the sovereign equality, independence and territorial integrity of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in seeking to address the current challenges and promote international relations. The Lao People's Democratic Republic recognizes that, without peace, development cannot take root and human rights cannot be upheld. Therefore, supporting multilateralism, enhancing cooperation at all levels and creating a conducive environment for peace and development are of great importance. In that connection, the United Nations system, especially the Security Council, should further strengthen its efforts and central role in the maintenance of international peace and security, while every Member State should honour its commitments and fulfil its international obligations and responsibilities in good faith. Let me conclude by stressing the importance of making the United Nations more effective, more responsive and more relevant to all and by calling for collective political will and a renewed commitment to upholding the United Nations Charter and international law.
