Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, we congratulate the Russian Federation
on its successful presidency during the month of
September and express our gratitude for the wonderful
results achieved this month. We commend the Russian
delegation for the great deal of work accomplished.

I wish to thank Mr. Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, for his briefing. Since the
beginning of his mandate, Special Envoy Pedersen has
engaged with multiple stakeholders through his good
offices leading to positive results in the tasks at hand.
China expresses its appreciation.

Lately, important progress has been made on the
Syrian issue, with a breakthrough on the political
track. On 23 September, Secretary-General Guterres
announced that the Syrian parties had reached an
agreement on the formation of the Constitutional
Committee. On 26 September, the Secretary-General
sent a letter to the President of the Council, transmitting
the Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure
of the Constitutional Committee (S/2019/775, annex).
We also note that the Special Envoy said that the
Constitutional Committee will meet on 30 October.
Those achievements are of great significance to
the political process in Syria. China welcomes
those developments, appreciates the constructive
participation of the Syrian parties in the preparation
of the Constitutional Committee and commends the
diplomatic efforts of the United Nations and the Astana
guarantors, namely, Russia, Turkey and Iran.

During the high-level segment of the General
Assembly, the Syrian issue was one of the constant
focuses of world leaders and representatives. In his
statement at the general debate, Mr. Walid Al-Moualem,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic stressed
that the Constitutional Committee must maintain
independence in its work and be free from foreign
interference (see A/74/PV.ll). Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity must
be fully respected. All parties must pay attention to
Syria's concerns and create favourable conditions for
the political settlement of the Syrian issue.

First, they must build on the results achieved to
continue moving the Syrian political process forward.
A political settlement is the only way out for the Syrian
issue. Parties to the issue should seize the current
favourable opportunity to advance the work of the
Constitutional Committee. Committee members are
expected to set store by the interests of the Syrian
people so as to reach a consensus at an early date.
The Syrian Government is encouraged to strengthen
communication and coordination with the United
Nations. To that end, the international community,
including the Security Council, should provide support
and do more to help the Syrian parties narrow their
differences and build consensus.
Secondly, security guarantees must be provided
to ensure a sustainable political process. Rampant
terrorism is a major latent security problem for the
political process. If not properly addressed, it will
adversely affect the political settlement of the Syrian
issue and the future of the country. China is closely
following the relevant trends with regard to the
terrorist forces in Idlib. With respect to the issue of
the settlement of the foreign terrorist fighters and their
families in Syria, the international community should,
under international law and on the basis of relevant
Council resolutions, continue its collective efforts
against terrorism.

Thirdly, an integrated approach must be taken in
dealing with all aspects of the Syrian humanitarian
issue. The international community should provide
humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people and
support the post-war reconstruction of the country. The
humanitarian issue must not be used as a bargaining
chip to exert political pressure. It is necessary to address
the return of Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons objectively and impartially, while taking into
account the legitimate concerns of Syria's neighbours,
and actively encourage the return of Syrian refugees.
Lifting the economic sanctions against Syria will be
an important step to improve the overall humanitarian
situation of the Syrian people.

China categorically rejects the groundless
accusations made by the representative of the United
Kingdom against China in his statement. China has
clearly indicated that it makes its decisions on the merits
of an issue. We proceed from interests of the Syrian
people when deciding how to vote on draft resolutions.
No country has a right to make irresponsible remarks
in that regard.

