Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your effective presidency of the
Security Council, and in particular on your timely
initiative in convening this meeting. I would also like to
pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Burleigh, for
the excellent job he did last month.

Last Wednesday the open debate in the Security
Council on the agenda item before it was suspended
because of the situation in Iraq. The events of the past
week, which are still awaiting the official reaction of the
Council, made us all - let us be honest - take a new
look at the role of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. In view of this, a

 

thematic, theoretical consideration of the agenda item
before the Council today is indeed quite a difficult task.

Nevertheless, we believe that discussion of the various
aspects of United Nations post-conflict peace-building
activities in the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security may provide a fresh assessment of those
activities against the background of continuing changes in
the international environment and the ongoing
transformation of the United Nations itself.

The end of the cold war obliged the United Nations to
enhance its role in global burden-sharing for peace by
adapting its peacekeeping activities to emerging realities
and new types of conflicts. As a result of this evolution, a
second generation of United Nations peacekeeping
operations - with multifunctional mandates, including
assistance to war-torn societies in moving from violent
conflict towards national reconciliation, economic
reconstruction and democratic consolidation - came into
being; this actually gave birth to post-conflict
peace-building.

It is known that in the course of the last decade the
United Nations accumulated valuable experience in this
field. One may recall United Nations missions in
Cambodia, Croatia, El Salvador, Mozambique and
elsewhere. A United Nations post-conflict presence is at
present maintained in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Haiti, Sierra
Leone, Western Sahara and other countries or areas.

Ukraine has continuously contributed to such
collective international efforts. As a matter of fact,
representatives of our country have participated in a number
of United Nations missions under post-conflict peace-
building mandates, including those to Angola, Croatia,
Guatemala, Mozambique and South Africa. Currently,
representatives of Ukraine serve with United Nations
missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Angola. For the
last few years, Ukrainian observers have been serving with
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) mission in Georgia. Today, Ukraine is contributing
its personnel to the OSCE Verification Mission in Kosovo.
Ukraine also remains one of the guarantor States of the
peaceful settlement of the Transdniestrian conflict, Republic
of Moldova.

The evolution over the past decade of United Nations
peacekeeping practice highlights the need for further
development of its theory as well. In this regard, "An
Agenda for Peace" (S/24111), submitted by the
Secretary-General in 1992, and its Supplement of 1995
(S/1995/1) provided a solid theoretical foundation for the
strengthening of United Nations capacities in maintaining
international peace and security, including the concept of
post-conflict peace-building.

Ukraine supported that process and took an active
part in the deliberations of the four sub-groups of the
General Assembly Working Group on An Agenda for
Peace. Although the discussion in the sub-group on
post-conflict peace-building demonstrated the existence of
different views with regard to the problem of the
competence and responsibilities of the principal bodies of
the United Nations in this field, Ukraine believes that
those differences are not insurmountable. Therefore, it
would be a welcome development should this meeting of
the Security Council contribute to the resumption of
efforts aimed at the elaboration of a strategic framework
for post-conflict peace-building activities.

This year we have already witnessed several
encouraging steps undertaken within the United Nations
in that direction. I refer, first of all, to the submission by
the Secretary-General of a very important report, entitled
"The causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa"
(S/1998/318), which, inter alia, spotlighted the increasing
significance of post-conflict peace-building and the need
for its further consideration by both the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

In our View, post-conflict peace-building activities
have a special place among the tools for maintaining
international peace and security, since they are designed
to address comprehensively the political, economic, social
and humanitarian problems of States in the wake of
conflicts. Besides, such activities are undertaken, as a
rule, only after other international peace support tools
have been used in the areas of conflict. This makes the
mandates of the post-conflict peace-building missions
highly complicated, since they must either finalize the
success, or compensate for the underachievements, of the
previous missions. Therefore, we believe that in
formulating the future mandates of post-conflict peace-
building missions, more attention should be paid to the
various preconditions of their deployment.

In the same vein, my delegation is of the view that
parallel approaches should be pursued in launching post-
conflict peace-building activities with a view to
eliminating the different consequences of both intra- and
inter-State conflicts.

 

We share the broadly held view that there is no
standard post-conflict peace-building model. However, we
strongly believe that any such activities should be carried
out in full accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter, at the request and on the basis
of consent of the conflicting parties and with their full
commitment to the cause of reconciliation, civilian
reconstruction and durable peace.

My delegation remains convinced that the United
Nations should continue to play a primary role as the
coordinator and originator of guidelines for the post-conflict
process, with the involvement of regional organizations.

The United Nations, which is like no other
organization in existence, offers the best framework to this
end. In this context, Ukraine maintains that constant
political monitoring by the United Nations of the process of
formation of the new states which, as a rule, emerge as a
result of conflicts should be an integral part of the
Organization's post-conflict peace-building strategies. We
also deem necessary that such monitoring be performed by
a specialized organ of the United Nations - for instance,
the Trusteeship Council. In the light of the ongoing
discussions about the further existence of this body, we
may find that one way to revitalize its activities could be to
assign to it a new mandate and to reconsider its title.

The wide range of United Nations activities in this
area requires an integrated and coordinated approach in
order to ensure the success of post-conflict peace-building.
As we all are aware, the programme for reform initiated
last year by the Secretary-General did not pass by United
Nations post-conflict peace-building efforts. We are
confident that thanks to the innovations introduced -
primarily the designation of the Department of Political
Affairs as the United Nations focal point for post-conflict
peace-building - United Nations efforts in this area have
become more coherent and comprehensive. The Security
Council may wish to take this opportunity to request the
Secretary-General to reflect on proposals for further
improvements in this field.

I should like to conclude by expressing once again the
hope that the outcome of our debate will contribute to the
further development of the conceptual and operational
framework of the United Nations post-conflict
peace-building activities.

