Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for
his briefing and for the work he is doing in Somalia.

The pirates are still a threat, first of all to the
people of Somalia, since half of all Somalis are now
dependent on international aid, and virtually all of this
aid reaches Somalia by sea. The pirates are also a
threat to the troops of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as their supplies, again,
essentially come by sea. Lastly, they imperil
international shipping off the coast of Somalia, one of

the most dense shipping areas in the world. Many of
the previous speakers have indicated that the deep-
rooted causes of piracy are to be sought on land, and
that the insecurity prevailing after more than 20 years
of conflict, the lack of a State, the absence of legal
economic possibilities and the actions of criminal
groups have created the conditions that have led to the
appearance of piracy. We are all in agreement that
security and development will in the long term prevail.
In the short term, however, resolute action by the
international community is essential in order to limit
the effects of piracy. Any slackening in our endeavours
would have immediate consequences. France notes that
during the two months in two years when the World
Food Programme (WFP) received no protection for its
ships, it had to cut its shipments by 50 per cent, to the
detriment of the civilian population.

In his report (S/2009/590) the Secretary-General
described the various efforts being deployed by the
international community. Through Operation Atalanta,
the European Union is playing an essential role here,
and regional organizations and national partners, such
as the Russian Federation, China and Japan, are also
involved in these activities. France is playing an active
role through Operation Atalanta as well as in its
national capacity.

In parallel, we have been able to improve
coordination. The Contact Group on Piracy Off the
Coast of Somalia, with 45 States members, is playing
an essential role in making political, legal and military
progress. The Shared Awareness and Deconfliction
(SHADE) mechanism in the framework of the Contact
Group's Working Group 1 is enhancing the exchange
of operational information with a view to working
together more effectively.

We have come along way since the first
operations to protect World Food Programme (WFP)
vessels, in November 2007. Our efforts are beginning
to bear fruit. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/590) indicates that while the number of attacks
remains high, a large proportion of them are foiled
thanks to the international presence.
The European Union has committed itself to
continuing Operation Atalanta, deployed in December
2008, at least through December 2010. In that way, it
will continue to provide protection to WF P vessels and
provide resolute support to other vulnerable vessels,
including those chartered by the United Nations in
order to supply the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). This poses a particularly significant
challenge, as 80 per cent of those convoys have come
under attack in the past.

Operation Atalanta and the countries of the
European Union will be considering the expanded
sphere of operation of the pirates in the Indian Ocean.
France has provided assistance to Seychelles, and the
European Union has signed an anti-piracy agreement
with Seychelles, which will make it possible for pirates
apprehended by Operation Atalanta to be transferred to
Seychelles. Clearly, I support the statement to be made
by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union presidency.

As we pursuing our efforts we must retain the
legal framework of our activities and extend
resolutions 1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008) for a further
year, which authorize participating countries, under
strict conditions, to enter Somali territorial waters and
take action against pirates. I am grateful to the
delegation of the United States for its draft resolution
and trust that the Council will adopt it in the coming
days.

Effective action also requires diversification, and
we have begun to do that. Beyond the military aspects,
it is essential that we improve legal redress for acts of
piracy, as mentioned by the representative of the
Russian Federation. In the near future, the international
community must provide material assistance to
Somalia and other countries of the region to enable
them to apprehend, prosecute and punish pirates. Here,
France commends Kenya's endeavours in that regard
and supports the trust fund that the Contact Group
decided on 10 September to establish, to which we
shall be making a contribution. We also encourage all
States to amend their legislation to make it possible to
try acts of piracy within their jurisdictions.

Finally, we must continue to address more directly
the root causes of piracy. The European Union has
begun to consider this and has indicated its willingness
to provide enhanced support to the Transitional Federal
Government, for instance, in combating illegal fishing.
We must continue such efforts, while ensuring that
naval forces combating piracy off the coast of Somalia
are not faced with tasks that are too numerous, too
diverse or too far from their mission.

The true significance of Security Council action
off the coast of Somalia is seen when we consider the

Council's comprehensive strategy for that country.
Provisions adopted by the Council include support for
the Transitional Federal Government, resolute support
for AMISOM, including the use of United Nations
resources, and a sanctions regime that has been
renewed and enhanced by resolution 1844 (2008). We
still must make progress on all those fronts. France
wishes in particular to see the pirates and their
supporters punished as individuals.

I wish in conclusion to note that the Security
Council was innovative in adopting resolution 1816
(2008) on 2 June 2008, with the aim of combating
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The international
community has been able to make use of the new tools
that the Council has provided through its resolutions.
International mobilization is strikingly broad and is
complemented by the development, through the
Contact Group, of a new framework for cooperation, in
close association with the United Nations Secretariat.
This encourages us that the Council will continue its
work in Somalia, beyond the issue of piracy, in the
framework of a specific and pragmatic strategy.

Once again, I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for helping ensure that the
international community takes consistent action on
Somalia. I assure him of our full support.

