Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I begin by thanking
your country, South Africa, and you personally,
Mr. President, for steering this important open debate
on the situation in the Middle East. I convey our
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing this morning. We are also grateful to His
Excellency Mr. Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim, Deputy
Minister of International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa, for his presence in chairing the meeting
and delivering a statement.

The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statements of the representatives of Egypt and
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Organization of the Islamic Cooperation,
respectively. In addition, I wish to briefly make certain
points that Bangladesh believes to be of importance.

May I congratulate Palestine on becoming a
member of UNESCO - the first United Nations
agency to admit it as a full member, in December 2011.
States members of UNESCO deserve credit for
adopting that resolution.
My delegation commends the recent meeting for
negotiations between Palestine and Israel brokered by
Jordan. We appreciate the efforts of King Abdullah II
of Jordan and the country's Foreign Minister,
Mr. Nasser J udeh, in facilitating that meeting.
We reiterate our concern over the impact of
Israel's continued settlement activity in the West Bank
and its adverse effects on economic development and
Palestinians' access to basic services. The ongoing
blockade of Gaza and the impact that the closure has
had on economic development and on the plight of
those living in the area is also worrying.

We are concerned about the destruction by the
occupying Power of properties, homes and economic
institutions and the construction of the wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in and around
East Jerusalem, contrary to international law. Those
actions have hampered the already critical socio-
economic situation faced by the Palestinian population.
We also express our concern about the inhuman
treatment of Palestinian prisoners languishing in Israeli
jails.

We also condemn the detention of the Palestinian
Legislative Council Speaker, Mr. Aziz Dweik. We
expect the occupying forces to release him
immediately as his imprisonment is a violation of
international law and human rights principles.
Moreover, his detention does not help to create an
environment conducive to a dialogue for a two-State
solution. We are saddened and puzzled and find
difficulty in understanding that the Jewish people, who
suffered discrimination and ill-treatment, are now
perpetrating inhuman ill-treatment towards the
Palestinians.

My delegation believes that the Fourth Geneva
Convention; the relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly Security Council resolutions 242 (1968),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978); the principle of land for
peace; the Madrid terms of reference, which guarantee
Israel's withdrawal from all occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories back to the 4 June 1967 line; the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative are the best
guides for achieving a two-State solution.

The principled support of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination from all
corners of the globe, both bilaterally and multilaterally,
has been an essential pillar of Palestinian resilience
over the decades. It is heartening to note at least 131
countries have recognized the State of Palestine on the
basis of the 1967 borders. It would therefore be
morally befitting for this body to unanimously respect
the will of the majority of Member States and to
endorse the application of Palestine.

With regard to the situation in Lebanon and the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights, my delegation calls
upon the concerned parties to fully respect Lebanon's
sovereignty and stop the recurrence of breaches of
resolution 1701 (2006). We further urge the occupying
State to immediately halt its actions to alter the legal,
physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights, in accordance with resolution
497 (1981).

In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh's long-
standing position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of violence, unrest and destabilization in the region.
Let us remind stakeholders that neither occupation nor
the destruction of Palestinian houses and olive trees
can help to achieve peace for the people of Israel. The
principle of live-and-let-live in harmony within the
legal, not the occupied jurisdiction, will lead to peace
and security for the States of Israel and Palestine.

Let me also reiterate our full support for a lasting
peace for all inhabitants of the region - both Arabs
and Israelis - and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, living side by side and in peace with all its
neighbours.

