Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for July. I wish to assure you that my delegation is
fully prepared to work closely with yours during the
course of our work.

I also wish to thank our colleague, Ambassador
Loj, and her delegation for their excellent work in
June.

I welcome the opportunity to thank you, Sir, in
your capacity as the head of the mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the excellent
report that was issued following the visit and which
you have just outlined for us. I simply wish to confirm
that everything you have just said perfectly reflects the
many discussions we held in Kinshasa on 11 and 12
June.

We sent two main messages to the political
protagonists and civil society in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I shall continue to use the full
name "Democratic Republic of the Congo" in my
06-41819
statement because, if I were to use the terms
"Congolese people" or "Congolese leadership", I
would feel as if I were referring to my own country and
nation. My brother from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will therefore understand why I shall use the
full name of his country to make that distinction.

Our first message was one of thanks to all our
interlocutors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We told them that it is high time that democratic, free,
transparent and credible elections were organized there
in an atmosphere of peace and rejecting hateful and
divisive language. We, too, expressed our concerns
with regard to the tone adopted by the media and made
it clear that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must find a way to ease tensions before proceeding to
elections. With the launching of the campaign on
29 June, we note that calm is prevailing for the
moment, and hope that it will continue to do so up to
the elections and beyond.

The second message was that the international
community has been and continues to be ready to
support the Democratic Republic of the Congo during
this process without any interference, as we believe
that the future leaders of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should emerge exclusively from the ballot
box.

We also explained that, while the elections
certainly represent a crucial step, a great deal remains
to be done. The elections are unlikely to resolve all the
problems. There is still a long road to travel before
peace and stability are fully restored and the
foundations have been laid for sustainable
development. We must therefore bear in mind the need
to preserve the potential for ongoing cooperation with
the international community, which must remain
engaged, and with the United Nations in particular,
which must on this occasion ensure the successful
fruition of its partnership with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My Congolese sensibility leads
me to stress that point.

Six days ago, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo celebrated the forty-sixth anniversary of its
independence. It was precisely at the time that
independence was declared that the difficulties arose.
The crisis in that country has thus lasted 46 years. We
are all aware that the first United Nations intervention
was not successful. Now, however, I feel that the
moment has come for everyone - the international
3
community, and the United Nations in particular, as
well as the political actors, leaders and people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - to ensure a
successful outcome this time around and to begin the
process of rehabilitation.

The Security Council mission undertaken a few
weeks ago to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was therefore very welcome to us. It was the ideal
opportunity, on the eve of an important event, to clarify
the rules of the game and to agree on the steps that
must be taken in the future to ensure an end to the
lengthy transitional process.

