Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
A month after the first meeting of the Council to
consider the subject that brings us together today (see S/PV.8452), it should be noted that concern continues
to grow, as confirmed in her briefing by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs.

Acts of violence continue to cause injury and claim
human lives, in addition to the thousands of Venezuelans
who have been forced to leave their country in search of
better opportunities as a result of a political, economic
and humanitarian crisis that threatens their safety
and security.

As a country that promotes dialogue and peace and
with a manifest humanitarian vocation, Panama strongly
condemns the use of force against the Venezuelan
people, the repression of human rights and all the acts
of violence that prevented access to humanitarian aid
last weekend, despite the obvious needs which the
assistance was intended to meet. My country, together
with the more than 50 others that have censured the
perpetuation of a de facto regime, has ratified its
recognition of the interim President of Venezuela, Juan
Guaido, to whom it has offered its support in the light
of its determined commitment to democracy, freedom
and peace in our brother country.

The illegitimate regime must allow a transition to
a democratic process, decided through fair elections
with the equitable participation of all political actors. It
must above all avoid further confrontations among the
Venezuelan people. As a member of the Lima Group,
Panama has also called at the highest level for the
political, economic and humanitarian crisis affecting
more than 27 million Venezuelans not to be turned into
a geopolitical conflict.

The superior purpose of the international
consensus that my country has joined seeks only for
Venezuela to return to the path of democracy, freedom
and prosperity for its people, within the framework
of a peaceful solution, without violence and without
the use of force. We therefore hope that dialogue and
prudence will prevail. Concern over the situation in
Venezuela has been and remains genuine, and under
no circumstances can it be interpreted as interference
in the internal affairs of that brother country. With
this vision, we endorse the contents of the declaration
issued yesterday by the Lima Group in Bogota, in the
firm conviction that the international community's
efforts in favour of the rights of the Venezuelan people
and institutional recovery in Venezuela are also critical
to the development and tranquillity of our region.

