Mr. O'Brien (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
you, Sir, for convening this timely and important debate,
and to the Secretary-General; the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, Prime Minister Prodi;
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Guterres; and to Minister for Foreign Affairs Diby
for their briefings. I am very pleased to follow United
States Permanent Representative Rice, and I look
forward to hearing more from our colleagues from the
region, including the African Union, the Community
of Sahel-Saharan States, and the Maghreb Arab Union.

The United Kingdom approaches the problems
of the region with respect, with care and with a clear
sense of purpose. My Prime Minister, David Cameron,
has asked me, as his Special Envoy for the Sahel, to
convey his personal commitment to working with our
partners here at the United Nations and in the region in
order to tackle the challenges ahead. We recognize the
responsibility that all United Nations Member States
share to help the people of the Sahel, working in full
partnership with those countries most affected, for
instability in the Sahel threatens not only the security
and livelihoods of people in the region, but also those
of its neighbours and beyond. Events in Mali have made
that only too clear.
What are the challenges that we face? First,
fragility exists across much of the Sahel, where, for a
variety of historical reasons, States are weak, borders
are long and porous, and Governments are challenged
by the need to serve diverse and growing populations
over vast distances and with few resources. Despite
remarkable achievements over the past 50 years, many
States of the region remain fragily.

Second are poverty and vulnerability. The Sahel
is one of the most devastatingly poor parts of the
world, with people surviving on the smallest possible
incomes. These many millions of people are blighted
by the lack of economic opportunity and unfair market
access, and they are on the front line of the world's
natural challenges, especially that of malnutrition.
Food insecurity, compounded by political uncertainty,
has led to hundreds of thousands of displaced persons
and refugees this year alone, as was just so graphically
illustrated by High Commissioner Guterres, who rightly
urged us to give humanitarian action equal strategic
emphasis, along with the political and anti-violence
strategies.

Finally, there is insecurity, and the use and wider
threat of terror, Violence and crime imported from
outside the Sahel. Extremism imposed in the name of
religion in the north of Mali is entirely contrary to the
long traditions of tolerance, diversity and respect that
characterize Islam in West and North-West Africa. The
criminality that accompanies it is also an aberration
imported from outside, however much it may subvert
and poison local populations.

For the sake of the people of the Sahel and the wider
international community, we must get to the heart of
these problems, and quickly, by addressing poverty,
building resilience - as the Secretary-General himself
so strongly stressed earlier today, citing his Sustainable
Energy for All initiative as a solar exemplar in that part
of the world - promoting political dialogue, renewing
engagement with all acceptable interlocutors, including
civil society organizations, and combating the scourge
of terrorism and crime. Working in concert with the
region, we must all share the responsibility of being the
builders of stability, opportunity and decent lives.

How can we achieve this? We must show resolve
against those - extremists, criminals, terrorists,
kidnappers, destroyers of heritage, and human rights
violators - who wish to exploit poverty and instability
for their own ends. Nowhere is action more urgently
needed than in the north of Mali. I welcome the work
of Economic Community of West African States,
the African Union and the United Nations to offer a
political process to those in the north who want to work
for a stronger, more just and united Mali, and to prepare
the option of military action against those who seek to
rule by hatred and terror. We must apply equal effort to
both those initiatives.

But in focusing on the urgent needs of Mali, we
must not lose sight of the needs of the wider region,
where many of the same drivers of conflict are present.
While others work to advance stability in Mali, we
look to Prime Minister Prodi, as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, to lead this critical
work in the wider region. The United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel must address the problems of
fragility, poverty and insecurity comprehensively and
with urgency. Only with such leadership will we be able
to build stability and prosperity for all in the Sahel.

Since February this year, the United Kingdom has
committed over $90 million in humanitarian assistance
to respond to the current crisis, which will reach at
least 1.6 million people in need. But we know that such
assistance can provide only short-term relief. Together,
we must help the region to build resilience to the shocks
of scarcity, climate change, population growth and
food insecurity, and lay the foundations for long-term
development. The United Nations integrated strategy
must the show the way, and I welcome Prime Minister
Prodi's insistence that this be action-oriented, not just
fine words.

To ensure the sustainability of that development,
we must work with our partners in the region to build
institutions of good governance and stability. In that
way, we can, together, fight terrorism and organized
crime and build a better future for the people of the
region. The United Kingdom believes that there is an
urgent need for action to build stability and resilience
and fight the scourge of terrorism and organized crime.
We look forward to a strengthened, comprehensive and
coordinated approach, and we back the United Nations,
through Special Envoy Prodi, working with regional
partners to achieve this.

We have a common analysis and we have a common
political will. We are all already united, so now is the
time to grasp the opportunity that unity gives us and to
deliver our vision.

