I would like to thank Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his insightful briefing. We fully support the work of the Special Representative and of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I also thank Mr. Edmund Yakani for his statement. Viet Nam warmly welcomes the recent positive developments in South Sudan, particularly the establishment of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. It is especially encouraging that one out of five Vice-Presidents and 9 out of 35 Ministers are women. We commend the efforts of relevant parties aimed at continuing to resolve their differences and implementing the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We are also pleased to see the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union (AU), the United Nations and other relevant parties, which are contributing to the overall positive atmosphere. The role of IGAD as the mediator will continue to be critical in the transitional period. We note the increasing challenges to the peace process posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and recognize the efforts of the Revitalized Transitional Government in responding to the pandemic. Furthermore, we are very much encouraged to see that the permanent ceasefire has continued to be maintained in most parts of the country, as stated in the latest UNMISS report (S/2020/536). While taking note of the complexity of the situation, particularly the issue of intercommunal violence and humanitarian challenges, the international community should recognize the important achievements of the South Sudanese parties in recent months. In the light of the current situation, allow me to make the following observations. First, we reiterate the importance of the full implementation of the 2018 peace agreement by the parties in South Sudan. Viet Nam calls on the parties to resolve the pending issues in a timely manner, in the spirit of mutual trust and understanding. We note the recent reports that an agreement has been reached on the reorganization of the country's federated structure. We call on the South Sudanese parties to spare no efforts in advancing the joint security arrangements in the coming months, as this process is essential to the effective functioning of the Transitional Government. We also hope to see an increased participation of women in the transitional process. Secondly, Viet Nam emphasizes how important it is to continue respecting the permanent ceasefire and refrain from any actions that may undermine efforts toward sustainable peace. Further effective measures are also needed to address the rising intercommunal violence, especially its root causes. In this regard, the role of UNMISS in the protection of civilians will remain significant. We would like to commend the efforts of all members of the Mission, especially the female peacekeepers, in this difficult period of the COVID-19 pandemic. Vietnamese women represent 16 per cent of our peacekeepers in UNMISS, and they continue to do an excellent job. Our level-II field hospital continues its utmost efforts in attending to the needs of the people. Since the beginning of 2020, the hospital has provided treatment for nearly 1,000 patients and has been actively engaged in the Mission's COVID-19 response efforts. Thirdly, Viet Nam notes with appreciation the recent positive economic development in South Sudan. At the same time, we acknowledge the critical humanitarian challenges in the country, especially those resulting from the impact of COVID-19 and from the increasing adverse impact of climate change and natural disasters. We call on the Transitional Government and other parties in South Sudan to continue to make their best efforts to promote sustainable livelihoods for the South Sudanese people. Fourthly, we reiterate our consistent position that sanctions shall only be a tool applied by the Security Council in a temporary and case-by-case manner to facilitate the maintenance of international peace and security. Such measures shall not adversely affect the livelihoods of the people, the essential functioning of the Government or the legitimate development of the country. These measures should be lifted when the required conditions are met. In this regard, Viet Nam will continue to work closely with relevant States Members of the United Nations, the Organization itself, IGAD and the AU to advance the implementation of the agreements among the South Sudanese parties, thereby facilitating the midterm review of the sanctions regime at the end of this year. We call on other Council members to do the same. In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm its support for the pursuit of peace, stability and development in South Sudan.
