Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
On 4 April, the Security Council adopted resolution
1403 (2002), demanding the implementation of
resolution 1402 (2002) without delay. However, for
three days, Israel has ignored the demands of the
Council and the international community. Instead of
withdrawing from the Palestinian territories, it has
stepped up its military actions. That has led to a
deepening of the conflict between Israel and Palestine.
We are deeply concerned, and we express our regret
over the situation.

The Israeli authorities have carried out military
attacks against Palestinian cities and have conducted
searches in a barbaric manner, in violation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, including those relating
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Such
acts have also seriously violated the fundamental rights
of the Palestinian people and have led to a grave
humanitarian situation.

The wilful acts of the Israeli authorities are an
obstacle to all the efforts of the international
community, including the United Nations, to stop the
escalation of violence between Israel and Palestine and
to promote peace in the Middle East. Such acts have
also made it more difficult to realize the hope for the
peaceful coexistence of Israel and Palestine. The
military attacks of the Israeli authorities against the
Palestinians, carried out in the name of anti-terrorism,
have led to serious losses of Palestinian lives and
property. Such military attacks also interfere with and
undermine the international community's effort to
combat terrorism.

In order to put an end to the violent conflict
between Israel and Palestine and to promote the Middle
East peace process, the most urgent task today is to
urge Israel to implement Security Council resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), to withdraw its troops
immediately and unconditionally from all Palestinian
cities, and to guarantee the safety and freedom of
Chairman Arafat.

Our condemnation of Israel's military attacks and
our explicit demand that Israel withdraw its troops do
not mean that we accept suicide bombings. The killing
of innocent civilians in Israel can only add to fuel to
the fire. It cannot help the just cause of the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State.

The international community must take concerted
action to prevent the situation in the Middle East from
continuing to deteriorate. We support all international
efforts aimed at easing the crisis. The leadership and
the Government of China have been working hard to
ease the conflict between Israel and Palestine. We will
continue to conduct consultations in cooperation with
all parties concerned.

