Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Netherlands for taking
the initiative to organize this vital debate on the
relationship between water and peace and security in
the Lake Chad region, which is a very high priority
for France. I warmly thank Amina Mohammed, the
Deputy Secretary-General; Mr. Mohammed Bila,
representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission; and
Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, the representative of Adelphi, for
their very important and enlightening briefings. I am
also pleased to welcome the representative of Nigeria.

The development of the Lake Chad region
requires first and foremost a focus on security, which
is an essential, if not sufficient, prerequisite for
development. France therefore actively supports the
efforts of the countries of the Lake Chad basin region,
united in the Multinational Joint Task Force against
Boko Haram. Their joint efforts have made it possible
to gain ground and to record major gains against that
terrorist organization.

Nevertheless, the terrorist threat continues to loom
over the countries of the region and their peoples, as
shown by the tragic toll taken by the many attacks
carried out during recent months against both civilians
and security forces. We were deeply shocked by the
kidnapping of 110 schoolgirls in Dapchi last month, but
were pleased to hear this week that a large number of
them had been released. We also condemn yesterday's
attack on Nigerian soldiers in the Birnin Guari region.
But these, unfortunately, are but a few examples.
We also denounce in the strongest terms the grave
human rights violations committed against children,
particularly their recruitment as child soldiers and their
use as human bombs, which could constitute crimes
under the Statute of the International Criminal Court.

Faced with the persistent, ever-changing terrorist
scourge, the support of the international community
is more needed than ever and must continue. Such
support includes certain responsibilities. Under no
circumstances can the fight against terrorism be
accompanied by human rights violations. The activities
of the Multinational Joint Task Force must respect the
relevant provisions of international law. We welcome
the efforts of the countries of the region to bring
former terrorist fighters to trial and to take measures to
promote their reintegration. The rule of law is essential
for reconciliation and for the demobilization of people
who in many cases had joined terrorist groups without
any real ideological motivation.

We are aware that the response to the crisis in the
Lake Chad Basin region cannot focus only on security.
In order to ensure a lasting solution, we must continue
our efforts to address the root causes of the crisis
through an integrated response. That was the key lesson
learned from the Security Council mission to the area
a year ago, and it is this integrated approach, which
encompasses security, development and human rights,
that is enshrined in resolution 2349 (2017), adopted last
March, and in the January statement by the President of
the Security Council (S/PRST/2018/3).

Today the Lake Chad region faces major challenges.
The surface of the lake has decreased by half since the
1950s, and its fertile environment attracts neighbouring
peoples and subjects the area to strong demographic
pressure. The situation is worsening, which is having
lasting impacts on local economic activities such as
agriculture and fishing.

Food insecurity, competition for water, and social
tensions threaten both host communities and displaced
persons and could lead to heightened regional conflicts.
As today is World Water Day, I wish to stress the
importance of water resources to the security and
stability of the Lake Chad region. Water should never be
a source of division but, rather, a factor for cooperation
between States. This is one of the major challenges
facing our generation.

Against that backdrop, France will continue its
efforts to strengthen local governance tools, including
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, as well as its
development assistance projects, through the French
Development Agency in particular.

Lastly, I would like to recall that our efforts to
stabilize the region must also focus on humanitarian
challenges and the protection of civilians.

First, the major humanitarian emergency that the
region continues to face must lead us to strengthen
our efforts to support the countries on the front line
of the fight against terrorism and that are hosting a
considerable number of internally displaced persons
and refugees. The severity of the humanitarian
crisis that the countries of the Lake Chad Basin are
experiencing today requires the mobilization of all
stakeholders, in particular through support for the
humanitarian response plan for the region recently
launched by the United Nations. France has taken
concrete steps to that end. It provided €14.5 million in
humanitarian assistance in 2017 and contributed to the
implementation of the Lake Chad Initiative, aimed at
empowering displaced persons and refugees, for a total
contribution by France of more than €36 million.

Secondly, the fight against terrorism must be
accompanied by a continued requirement to protect
civilians. We must ensure the ongoing safety of
peoples from Boko Haram and support the voluntary
and lasting return of displaced persons and refugees
where security conditions allow it possible. The issue
of refugee and displaced women must also be met with
specific and immediate responses, and women should
be fully consulted to that end.

I would like to close by recalling the need to break
down the barriers between the issues of sustainable
development, governance, human rights, and peace and
security. Environmental deterioration and in particular

the increasingly scant water resources in the Lake Chad
region illustrate with particular clarity the imperative
need for a comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention, which lies at the heart of the reform strategy
of the Secretary-General and which we fully support.
Conflict prevention is one of the major challenges of
our time, and its importance will only increase in the
years to come.

In this regard, in accordance with resolution 2349
(2017) and the January presidential statement on West
Africa and the Sahel (S/PRST/2018/3), we encourage
the adoption by Governments and the United Nations
system of appropriate risk assessment and management
strategies so as to respond to the destabilizing factors
linked to environmental deterioration, desertification
and climate change.

In the Lake Chad region, we must urgently move
from words to action. Commitments must translate
into specific actions; rest assured of France's resolute
commitment to that end.

