Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his report (S/2008/354) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We welcome the participation in today's
meeting by President Tadie of the Republic of Serbia
and are grateful for his analysis. We also listened
attentively to the speech delivered by Mr. Sejdiu,
although it is obvious that his opinions seriously
contradict provisions requiring respect for international
law and, in particular, the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999).

Russia's approach to the current situation in and
around Kosovo is based on the need to strictly adhere
to resolution 1244 (1999) and the UNMIK mandate
approved by the Security Council in that resolution. We
are convinced that the unilateral declaration of
Kosovo's independence and its recognition by some
States runs counter to international law, especially the
Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act
and resolution 1244 (1999) and other decisions of the
Security Council.

As the Secretary-General clearly states in his
report, resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force.
Therefore, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations mission in Kosovo,
which the Special Representative heads, must carry out
the functions and responsibilities entrusted to them.
These include ensuring that the rights and security of
national minorities are preserved and achieving in the
province the democratic standards established by the
international community.

We consider unlawful both the deployment
without the appropriate approval of the Security
Council of the so-called European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, which has already begun, and the
establishment of the International Steering Group. That
runs counter to resolution 1244 (1999) and the agreed
principles for a resolution of the issue of Kosovo.

We are also perplexed at the behaviour of
Mr. Pieter Feith, who recently said that as of 15 June
the administration of Kosovo will be based on the
Kosovo constitution and that the role of the main
international representative in the province will belong
to him. That clumsy attempt to assume for himself the
functions of the main international representative in
Kosovo runs counter to paragraph 6 of resolution 1244
(1999), which stipulates that that role actually belongs
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

We also find unacceptable any actions aimed at
the transfer of functions or property from UNMIK to
the European Union mission or the international civil
representative, who has no legitimate status. The
attempt by former UNMIK leadership to reconfigure
the mission by bypassing the Security Council has
done damage to the prestige of the United Nations. The
activities of former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Riicker and his deputy Larry Rossin
were in total contradiction with the norms of behaviour
that international servants are required to adhere to in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Any attempt to reorganize the international civil
presence in Kosovo while deliberately concealing
information from the Security Council is unacceptable.
We request that the Secretariat regularly provide
members of the Security Council with detailed
information on all aspects of UNMIK's activities.

With regard to the sad legacy left by UNMIK's
former leadership, we must recall the events that took
place in northern Mitrovica on 17 March this year.
Those events are mentioned in paragraph 6 of the
report before the Council. However, nothing is said
about the results of the investigation carried out by the
Secretariat at the request of at least two Members of
the United Nations, namely, Serbia and Ukraine. We
insist that an appropriate report be submitted to the
Security Council in the nearest future.

We hope that UNMIK's new leadership will learn
from what has happened and will act in an unbiased
manner, as is appropriate for United Nations officials,
and strictly within the framework of the mission's
mandate based on resolution 1244 (1999).

The Kosovo Force acting in the province under
the aegis of the United Nations must also strictly
adhere to its mandate approved in resolution 1244
(1999). Any arbitrary interpretation of this mandate
would be unacceptable.

We are concerned by the recent actions of the
Ministers of Defence of the States members of NATO
seeking to directly involve the Kosovo Force in the
mission to train the so-called Kosovo security force. In
general, we welcome the stabilizing role of the NATO-
led Kosovo Force. At the same time, if a decision is
taken that NATO should be involved in the process of
training the Kosovo security force, then NATO will
have stepped beyond the mandate of the international
military presence as approved by the Security Council.

Having studied the report of the Secretary-
General, we do not agree with everything stated there.
In paragraph 5 the report states that the Kosovo Serbs,
after the unilateral declaration of independence, "took
measures that pose serious challenges to the role of
UNMIK in Kosovo". At the same time, we do not see
any assessment of the actions of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo, which have
openly spoken of their intention to curtail their
cooperation with UNMIK. Yet, what is at stake here is
the real ability of the international civil presence to
fulfil the main elements of its mandate, such as
maintaining law and order and preserving social and
ethno-confessional peace in the province.

When there is any threat to UNMIK personnel or
any attempt to block their work, we expect that the
Secretary-General, together with the Kosovo Force
leadership, will take the necessary steps that are
provided for in resolution 1244 (1999) to ensure the
safety and security of United Nations personnel and
that the Secretary-General will immediately inform the
Security Council of any violations of the obligations
established by resolution 1244 (1999).
In the report, the Secretary-General noted the
intentions of the interim Kosovo Albanian authorities
to significantly violate provisions of paragraph 7 of
resolution 1244 (1999). Paragraph 7 of the report reads
in part:

"the government of Kosovo has indicated that it
would welcome a continued United Nations
presence in Kosovo provided that it carries out
only limited residual tasks".

And paragraph 9 reads in part:

"the government of Kosovo has passed legislation
that comes into force 15 June that effectively
seeks to assume tasks and competencies that have
been carried out by pillar IV [of UNMIK]".

Unfortunately, those violations are treated as
valid in the report. Thus, in paragraph 10, reference is
made to a "new reality in Kosovo", although it is the
responsibility of the Secretariat leadership to ensure
that Security Council decisions are implemented and to
inform the Council of their violation. In fact, we have
seen a serious violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations that may have extremely
negative consequences for the development of the
situation in various regions of the world and, indeed,
for the role of the United Nations in conflict resolution.

We would like to confirm our principled position
regarding UNMIK reconfiguration. We believe that,
after receiving clear approval from the parties - in
particular from Belgrade - for the proposals of the
Secretary-General on transforming the international
civil presence in Kosovo, the Council cold promptly
take the appropriate decision. Any steps to bypass the
Council would be a violation of the Charter, no matter
when they are taken.

To that end, we expect that the Secretary-General
will be guided in his actions by the provisions of the
Charter and by the existing mandate as contained in
resolution 1244 (1999) and that he will refrain from
any independent action not sanctioned by the Security
Council to reconfigure UNMIK.

We believe that today's Council meeting does not
signify the end of the Security Council's consideration
of the issue of UNMIK. This discussion, in fact, is just
a first step in the process of finding possible solutions
to the issue by the Council. To that end, we call on the
Secretary-General to continue consultations with the
parties and with Council members on future UNMIK
parameters.

