Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Nigeria for having convened this debate. Your own
personal presence as President today, Sir, emphasizes
how important this debate is. I am acutely conscious of
the pressures of being the last speaker so I will
abbreviate my written statement to save time.

The primary focus of today's debate, of course, is
Africa. However, Australia has learned a number of
lessons from our own cooperation on security sector
reform with the countries of our region, Asia-Pacific,
that may be useful to share. I will briefly mention three
of those.

First is the importance of national ownership and
leadership. Member States are the central providers of
security, of course, in their own countries. That is both
their sovereign right and, naturally, their responsibility.
National ownership is critical to ensuring legitimacy
and sustainability. The role of the international
community is to enhance the ability of States to fulfil
that responsibility. With regard to national leadership,
effective security sector reform requires national
authorities to generate and drive forward a strategic
vision for their security sectors. That requires political
commitment and a strong buy-in from all those
involved, including civil society. The participation of
women is of course central.

Security sector reform cannot be a short-term
project. Long-term horizons are required to foster a
culture of transparency and accountability and to build
confidence and the necessary constituency for change.

The Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon
Islands (RAMSI), which is an Australia-led regional
peacekeeping, or peacebuilding, mission, has taught us
lessons about national ownership. Mechanisms for such
ownership have evolved over time. Today, cooperation
between RAMSI and Solomon Islands is governed by a
partnership arrangement that very carefully sets out
mutually agreed milestones and time frames. By way
of example, the police component of RAMSI has
progressively stepped back from front-line policing to
its current focus on capacity-building, such as
leadership development and review of the policing and
security legislative framework.

The second lesson is the importance of taking a
comprehensive and integrated approach. As we know,
many security sector reform initiatives fail because of
their narrow technical focus and inadequate
understanding of the social and political contexts.
Security sector reform requires a comprehensive
approach, beyond the simple train-and-equip
programmes. Security sector reform should ideally take
place as part of a wider public sector reform and focus
not only on the military, but also civil society, the
police and the justice sector. The most effective reform
is matched and complemented by the development of
strong democratic institutions, including parliamentary
oversight of security forces.

Again, RAMSI provides a strong model for an
integrated approach. From the outset, it has worked to
support reform in all aspects of the security sector,
from the police, Customs, border control, prisons and
the judicial system to public financial management
institutions.

The third lesson is the key role that can be played
by regional organizations and South-South and
triangular cooperation. Regional and subregional
organizations can have a unique legitimacy and a very
important role in fostering regional cooperation. As we
know, regional organizations and neighbouring States
can have very distinct comparative advantages, not
least in terms of cultural awareness and language
skills.

Again, RAMSI, which operates under the
auspices of the Pacific Islands Forum, provides a
strong example. Over the past eight years, thousands of
police, military and civilian personnel from across the
Pacific region have served with the Mission, bringing
important experience, cultural perspectives and
language skills to RAMSI's work.

In Africa, we note the impressive work that the
African Union (AU) is taking forward, particularly the
development of the continental security sector reform
policy framework. Australia remains ready to assist in
that work, particularly in the area of the protection of
civilians.

My final comments are on the role of the United
Nations but, to save time, I will leave those to be read
in my circulated statement. I would emphasize only
that United Nations actors must be integrated. The
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations have an essential role.
Secondly, close collaboration with the World Bank and
other development partners is essential. Thirdly, the
United Nations needs to support the security sector
reform work of regional organizations. The United
Nations-AU cooperation is an excellent example.
Fourthly, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund do important work, particularly on
lessons learned, which must be highlighted.

To conclude, I thank you again, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate. In its essence, security
sector reform is about reshaping the institutions that
serve and protect a country's citizens. Obviously, there
are very few subjects more important to the Council's
work.

