Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): As the
Security Council is gathered this morning for its first
public meeting in June, I should like to convey to you,
Sir, the congratulations of my country's delegation on
your assumption of the presidency and to assure you of
our full cooperation in guaranteeing the success of your
mandate.

I should also like to express here our deep
admiration of Ambassador Akram of Pakistan for his
skilful guidance of the Council's work last month.

We are grateful that you, Sir, have organized this
briefing of the Security Council, allowing us to hear
the important statements on the situation in Liberia
made by the Chairman of the National Transitional
Government and by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia. We welcome them to
New York and pay tribute to them for their
commendable work in the service of peace.

The progress made in the deployment of troops
throughout the country has allowed the successful
relaunching of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement (DDRR)
programme, the impact of which, it must be said, will
be felt beyond the borders of Liberia. We would
therefore congratulate and thank all the troop-
contributing countries that have made this beneficial
step possible.

All of the Liberian parties must now mobilize to
consolidate the yet fragile security situation in the
country, which is unfortunately still prey to internal
struggles among factions and numerous criminal
activities. In this respect, we urge the factions to
cooperate honestly and diligently with the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) so as, in
particular, to accelerate the disarmament and
demobilization of combatants.

We reiterate the priority we attach to the
reintegration and repatriation aspects of the programme
and welcome the efforts made to that end by certain
donors, including the United States Agency for
International Development, the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union. The
success of the DDRR programme is essential to the
country's recovery and to the fulfilment of the promise
of regional stability to which we wholeheartedly aspire.

We note the efforts made by the National
Transitional Government and the National Transitional
Legislative Assembly to fulfil their responsibilities in
the peace process. These efforts, along with those of
UNMIL, are establishing a genuine momentum that
should be supported more intensively by the
international community. In that regard, the assessment
provided in the Secretary-General's report points to the
urgent need for the establishment of certain essential
services within the country, such as the provision of
electricity, water and public health care, through the
development and implementation of quick-impact
projects and the creation of literacy centres for the
people and especially for ex-combatants.

The precarious security situation within the
country lends particular urgency to the need to launch
the training programme for the Liberian National
Police and to strengthen the judicial sector. This will
help to improve the living conditions of the population
and thereby ensure its support and ever-increasing
cooperation with the peace process. The extremely
limited financial means of the National Transitional
Government in facing this challenge require the rapid
mobilization of resources anticipated from the
international community on the basis of promises made
in February at the International Reconstruction
Conference for Liberia.

With respect to elections, there is no doubt that
the future of Liberia is largely dependent on the
establishment of conditions conducive to their
organization and holding. The efforts of the National
Transitional Government and UNMIL in this area lead
us to believe that they have taken the full measure of
what is at stake in October 2005. In this regard, we
welcome the positive developments represented by the
establishment of the National Elections Commission
and of legal frameworks for the creation of the
Independent National Human Rights Commission and
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

We remain concerned, however, by the delay in
reviewing, ratifying and issuing certain important legal
texts, especially those on human rights. We stress the
need to ensure that truly national political parties are
created, free of all regionalist, ethnic or tribal
tendencies and answering solely to the precise criteria
established in advance by a charter of parties. We
believe that substantial assistance, including financial,
could be considered within the framework of activities
to promote good governance in that country. That
would, moreover, be a good way to promote national
reconciliation.

With respect to sanctions, we are sensitive to
Chairman Bryant's excellent arguments in favour of
lifting them soon. We believe that the Council will
address this issue in the near future. However, with
respect to sanctions imposed against individuals, we
feel that an evaluation of their impact is required in
order to ensure their effectiveness. Available
information would seem to indicate that resolution
1532 (2004) has had only limited effect on the targeted
individuals.

At the regional level, my delegation welcomes
the nascent cooperation among the United Nations
missions in the subregion. We welcome the activities
and joint measures being undertaken by the missions.
We await with interest the report of the Secretary-
General and his recommendations on the regional
approach to implementing the mandates of those
missions. Benin is determined to continue to work
closely with all those who are striving to maintain this
new hope for a lasting peace for Liberia, for the
Liberian people and for the West African subregion so
that they can return to the path of peace, stability and
sustainable development.

In conclusion, I should like to ask the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to tell us what
kind of difficulties have caused the recent insurrections
by ex-combatants in Monrovia and what measures are
being planned so that such insurrections will not take
place again.

