Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation wishes at
the outset to thank Ambassador Chowdhury for the
major efforts that he has expended in bringing this
report to the Council. We also wish to thank the Panel
for having provided us with a comprehensive,
meaningful report.

My delegation welcomes the report of the Panel
established by Security Council resolution 1306
(2000), aimed at determining the link between illegal
exploitation of resources and the perpetuation of the
conflict in Sierra Leone. We believe that it is a timely
reminder to the Council that sanctions regimes which it
adopts require constant monitoring and adjustments to
ensure their successful observance and efficacy.
Indeed, my delegation believes that it is naive to think
that sanctions committees meeting in the basement of
the United Nations Secretariat in New York can
effectively monitor sanctions half a world away.

Accordingly, we urge that serious consideration
be given to the recommendation of the Panel that the
Security Council establish an ongoing capacity to
monitor the implementation of sanctions as well as to
study their unintended effects on third parties and
individuals. In that regard, the work of the Committee
on sanctions will give full consideration to this issue.

The Angola-UNITA monitoring mechanism was a
good and a useful innovation. It is now possible to state
categorically that the sanctions against UNITA are
succeeding in degrading the capacity of UNITA to
continue its military campaign. That monitoring
mechanism provides a good example of what can be
done when sanctions are effectively monitored.

As the report of the Panel informs us, violations
of the sanctions regime are widespread and occur with
impunity. Already, the work ofthe Panel of Experts has
borne fruit as Governments and other entities have
begun to focus on what can be done to improve the
enforcement of sanctions and to curtail existing
violations.

Those who have aided in violating sanctions are
equally culpable for the humanitarian tragedy still
unfolding in Sierra Leone and pressure must be brought
to bear by the international community to ensure
compliance with Council resolutions. My delegation is
disturbed by the frequency with which the Panel, in all
aspects of sanctions violations, implicated some of
Sierra Leone's neighbours.

My delegation pays tribute to the nations of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which by their actions have demonstrated
that the true measure of neighbourliness is that nations
care enough to take positive action to lift other nations
out of cycles of violence, rather than profiteering from
the misery of others. By seeking to return stability in
the political and security spheres to the region, the
nations of ECOWAS are paving the way for other
aspects of development to occur.

The imposition of measures to redress sanctions
violations will not be taken lightly by the Council, and
my delegation believes that whatever punitive
measures are adopted by the Council must have
minimum collateral effect on unintended targets and
must be precisely aimed at those who have been
unambiguously implicated in sanctions violations; a
broad-brush approach will have little support from my
delegation.

In this regard, my delegation is very supportive of
the recommendation to better regulate the flow of
rough diamonds from producing countries. It is
unacceptable that countries with small amounts of
proven exports of rough diamonds can be allowed to
circumvent sanctions by laundering illegal exports
through their territory. All diamond-exporting countries
in West Africa should be encouraged to adopt as a
matter of urgency a certification system similar to that
adopted by Sierra Leone. These countries should be
given the opportunity to implement a system which
will not hinder their own legitimate exports but will
prevent the profits from perpetuating the conflict.

We are equally concerned about the ease with
which small arms are supplied to the region. The
responsibility for the proliferation of weapons into
West Africa lies with the producing countries, as well
as with those that trans-ship them. The ECOWAS
Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and
Manufacture of Light Weapons in West Africa is a
good and useful mechanism upon which we can build.
The Council - and, indeed, the international
community - must assist the ECOWAS countries to
initiate a common system of controls that includes the
recording, licensing, collection and destruction of small
weapons.

The Panel also recommends that strict controls on
airspace in West Africa be effected in order to curb the
movement of both illicit rough diamonds and small
weapons. This will necessarily involve the installation
of new monitoring and surveillance equipment. The
countries of the region will need international
assistance to acquire and maintain such a monitoring
system, and we urge expeditious assistance in this
regard.
The measures recommended by the Panel will be
effective only if all Member States adhere to the terms
of the sanctions resolutions. We owe it to the people of
Sierra Leone to ensure that the riches of their country
are used for the development of the country and not to
perpetuate war.

My delegation will give careful consideration to
the recommendations made by the Panel, in particular
those that the Chairman of the Committee has
highlighted in his introduction of the report. As he
stated so emphatically, the Panel's work should not be
wasted or be allowed to gather dust. The greatest
tribute to the Panel's work will be to ensure that the
Security Council acts decisively on its
recommendations.

