Ms. Sison (United States of America): We thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda for the update on the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1970 (2011). Six years ago, the Council
referred the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), given the context ofthe appalling
violations of human rights that were perpetrated during
the 2011 revolution.

The ICC has charged Saif Al-Islam Al-Qaddafi
with murder and persecution committed during the 2011
revolution, and we have called on all relevant Libyan
actors to facilitate his transfer to the Court. We also
note the arrest warrant issued by the ICC for Al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled and emphasize the need to bring to
justice those involved in the horrific acts committed by
the Libyan Internal Security Agency against perceived
opponents of the regime of Muammar Al-Qaddafi. All
those responsible for the crimes committed during the
2011 revolution must be held to account.

Today much has changed in Libya. However, the
country is not free from horrific acts of violence. We
continue to call for respect of human rights in Libya.
We note with deep concern the recent air strike in
Derna - a city that remains in need of immediate
and unfettered humanitarian access. We also strongly
condemn the deplorable acts in A1 Abyar, where on
26 October the bodies of 36 men who had been shot to
death were discovered.

The insecurity in the country highlights the urgent
need to find a solution to the political crisis in Libya.
National political reconciliation is key to ending the
violent unrest that continues to plague the country. To
that end, we welcome the steps that have been taken
in line with the United Nations action plan that was
announced in September, and we reiterate our full
support for the leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ghassan Salame in the ongoing
mediation efforts.
As delegations from the House of Representatives
in the State Council negotiate amendments to the
Libyan Political Agreement, we encourage all Libyan
parties to support the United Nations political
process and work together in the spirit of compromise
towards the common goal of a more peaceful and
prosperous Libya. We also call for those responsible
for human rights violations and abuses or violations of
international humanitarian law to be held accountable;
they cannot act with impunity. To that end, we stressed
that the summary killings in Al-Abyar, as well as other
reports of unlawful killings in Benghazi, must be fully
investigated by the authorities on the ground.

We have also noted the ICC accusations against
Major Al-Werfalli of war crimes in relation to the
killing of 33 people in Benghazi. We are deeply
concerned by allegations that Al-Werfalli has carried
out additional killings in Ajdabiya despite the ongoing
investigation into his activities, as well as by reports
that Al-Werfalli has returned to active duty despite
the charges against him. The United States urges the
relevant Libyan authorities to ensure that Al-Werfalli is
brought to justice in accordance with international law.

Before closing, I would be remiss not to convey
the United States' position with respect to recent
developments relating to the situation in Afghanistan.
The United States believes that any ICC investigation
or other activity concerning United States personnel is
wholly unwarranted and unjustified. The United States
is deeply committed to complying with international
law and has a robust national system of investigation,
accountability and transparency that is among the best
in the world. The United States has a long-standing and
continuing objection in principle to any ICC assertion
of jurisdiction over United States personnel. More
generally, we do not believe that an ICC investigation
would serve the interests of either peace or justice
in Afghanistan.

