Mr. Fisher: I am pleased to have this opportunity to
provide the Security Council with an update on the most
recent developments in Haiti and to join this discussion
of the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The annex to the report of the Secretary-
General before the Council (8/2013/139) outlines the
MINUSTAH consolidation plan, as agreed with the
Government of Haiti. The plan outlines key objectives
for the next three years to strengthen security, the
rule of law, elections administration and institutional
modernization, which, if achieved, will enable
MINUSTAH to continue the process of consolidation
on which it has already embarked.

As outlined by the Secretary-General in his report,
the period under review has been a challenging one
for Haiti, both at the political level and for the people
of Haiti. The annual economic growth rate fell well
below forecast levels. High unemployment rates
were compounded by two severe tropical storms and
regional droughts that exacerbated the high levels of
food insecurity facing many households. Agricultural
production was particularly hard-hit.

The Government responded promptly by
establishing a state of emergency to accelerate the
disbursement of funds to address emergency needs.
A modest emergency appeal was launched with the
support of the United Nations and other partners, to
which the response was encouraging. In addition, the
Government announced agricultural production and
environmental protection as national priorities for 2013.

Progress continues in finding alternative
solutions for displaced Haitians remaining in camps.
Displacement numbers continue to decline, although
conditions for residual camp populations worsen
as humanitarian resources shrink and international
operational partners end operations.

The cholera epidemic continues. Fatality and
infection rates are much reduced from peak rates,
although a recent spike in outbreaks gives cause for
concern. The Government has launched the national
eradication plan, supported by the Secretary-General's
initiative, but significant additional financing is
required.

The Government also continued to deploy efforts
to attract investors and to stimulate economic growth
and job creation. Most recently, a new initiative was
launched to significantly reduce the time required to
register new businesses.

The security situation, in overall terms, remained
relatively stable. Nevertheless, difficult socioeconomic
conditions contributed to an increase in public protests.
The number ofkidnappings declined, but homicide rates
increased, in particular driven by inter-gang violence in
parts of Port-au-Prince.

As indicated in the report ofthe Secretary-General,
the period under review was one of impasse in the
political domain, epitomized by the lack of progress
in creating the electoral commission that would
oversee partial legislative and local elections, which
are now 16 months overdue. Despite the 24 December
agreement brokered by the religious coalition Religions
pour la Paix, and subsequent intense debate, significant
differences remain among the executive and legislative
levels and the high judicial council.

It is worthwhile recalling the reason that elections
are now so crucial in Haiti. At the local level, the
municipal and local elections were to have been held in
November 2011. In the absence of those elections, over
the past year we have seen the replacement of some
130 elected municipal Governments with presidential
appointees.

At the legislative level, the mandate of one
third of Haiti's Senators expired in May of last year,
considerably impairing the functioning of that body.
The issue of whether the mandates of an additional
third of the Senators expire in early 2014 or in early
2015 remains acrimonious and unresolved.

(spoke in Spanish)

The holding of credible elections in 2013 is
crucial, making it possible to bolster Haiti's democratic
institutions, strengthen the rule of law and respond to
the urgent needs of Haitian citizens in crucial areas
including social protection and employment.

Yesterday, through one of his advisers, the President
committed to establishing a temporary electoral council
before Easter. However, establishment of the electoral
council will constitute only a first step towards holding
credible and inclusive elections.

MINUSTAH, like all of Haiti's partners on the
ground, is urging all political actors to unite in a spirit
of strengthened collaboration to achieve an agreement
on a minimum set of necessary measures to ensure
the holding of elections before the end of the year.
That would include an agreement on the type and
date of the elections, clarification on the deadline for
senatorial terms, the adoption of an electoral law and a
law on political parties and their financing, as well as
an agreement on the modus operandi of the electoral
council.

(spoke in English)

Progress on elections has become the barometer for
measuring progress towards a more inclusive political
culture and for addressing institutional and development

challenges. But Haiti faces many challenges beyond
the electoral process alone. Recognizing the
interdependence of security, stability and development,
the Government of Haiti and MINUSTAH have
agreed upon a conditions-based consolidation plan
for MINUSTAH, which is annexed to the Secretary-
General's report.
The consolidation plan sets out four core-mandated
tasks to be achieved with the Government and, of
course, in collaboration with other national and
international partners. Those are, first, the accelerated
development of the Haitian National Police; secondly,
the strengthening of a permanent electoral commission
once it is created; thirdly, strengthening of the rule
of law and respect for human rights, with a priority
on reinforcing basic accountability and oversight
mechanisms; and, fourthly, supporting key national
and local governance reforms, as well as helping key
national stakeholders to achieve consensus on inclusive
political processes and institutional reforms - all as
necessary conditions for socioeconomic development,
which will benefit the majority of Haitian citizens.

For each of the four areas, the plan sets out a
limited number of benchmarks that could realistically
be attained by 2016. The plan is of course subject to a
number of conditions, including a graduated transfer
to Haitian authorities of responsibility for maintaining
security, as well as increased independence of the
judiciary.

On the issue of good governance, I am encouraged
by the recent steps taken by the Prime Minister to
fight corruption. The early passage of anti-corruption,
procurement and tendering procedure laws that is now
before parliament would also strengthen due process
and encourage investment.

Finally, the consolidation plan foresees the further
reduction of MINUSTAH's uniformed strength, as
part of MINUSTAH's overall consolidation, within a
progressively smaller and less costly Mission footprint
in Haiti.

At the start of my presentation, I mentioned the
ongoing cholera epidemic and the recent spike in cases.
I also mentioned the recently launched national cholera
elimination plan, supported by the Secretary-General's
initiative announced in December. We in the United
Nations family are committed to continued support for
the national plan and, with partners, to redouble efforts
to mobilize the significant additional resources needed

to fight cholera, to improve water and sanitation and to
strengthen the national health-care network. Haitians
expect no less.

MINUSTAH's leadership is also committed
to ensuring that the United Nations policy of zero
tolerance towards sexual exploitation and abuse by
our personnel is respected and enforced. It is essential
to our reputation that the conduct of our personnel
be in conformity with the highest standards and that
prompt and decisive action be taken to prevent abuse,
to investigate allegations and to impose disciplinary
measures where warranted.

(spoke in French)

The stabilization process in Haiti has encountered
a number of difficulties during the time period under
consideration. However, I remain convinced that
Haiti can and will make great progress in overcoming
political divisions by undertaking necessary and
important reforms in the institutional arena, as well as
in the area of the rule of law, and to meet the urgent
economic and social needs of its citizens.

Moving beyond the current political impasse
is crucial to consolidating democracy in Haiti.
MINUSTAH - the consolidation plan of which was
approved by the Haitian Government - is prepared
to support Haiti in assuming increasing responsibility
for its national security and the security of its citizens,
and to assist in creating consensus on an inclusive,
democratic process and institutional reforms and a
conducive environment for economic development and
the well-being of the majority of Haitians.

