Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on the assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January.
May I also express my delegation's sincere
condolences to the Government of Japan on the occasion
of the terrible disaster that struck the Kobe region
yesterday.

I am happy to have the opportunity to address the
Council on the important matter under discussion today,
which has already been the subject of an intervention by
the French delegation on behalf of the European Union.
We subscribe entirely to the views put forward in that
intervention, but would like to make a few additional
remarks.

As a substantial contributor to United Nations
peace-keeping and crisis-management, the Netherlands
attaches great importance to the strengthening of the
United Nations capacity in this domain and to the views
and recommendations put forward in the
Secretary-General's Agenda for Peace. This is a crucial
element of the United Nations response to the new
challenges confronting the international community after
the end of the cold war.

The timely and thought-provoking position paper of
the Secretary-General, which has been presented as a
Supplement to his Agenda for Peace, describes the
dramatic changes in both the volume and the nature of
United Nations activities in the field of peace and security
which have occurred since the Agenda was written. These
changes call for reflection, and I would like to address a
number of the issues raised in the Supplement.

In the report, the Secretary-General stresses the
importance of preventive diplomacy. But, as he points
out, the greatest obstacle to its successful application is
the reluctance of one or other of the parties in a conflict

 

to accept an active role for the United Nations. The hope is
expressed that in the long run the international climate of
opinion will evolve in such a way that it will become
established practice for countries not to refuse an offer of
United Nations good offices. The Netherlands shares this
View, but it would be useful, I think, to discuss in
somewhat more detail what we can do to bring about such
a climate. The coming celebration of the fiftieth anniversary
of the United Nations next October would provide a good
opportunity to this end. I would suggest that the Heads of
State and Government incorporate in their declarations on
that occasion a solemn reaffirmation of their willingness to
accept an offer of good offices by the United Nations in
conflicts to which they may become a party. This could
constitute a code of conduct for Member States in the field
of preventive diplomacy.
We warmly welcome the conclusion of the
Secretary-General that the idea of a rapid reaction force
deserves serious attention and we fully share his analysis.
As will be recalled, the Netherlands Minister of Foreign
Affairs in his intervention during the forty-ninth session of
the General Assembly also argued in favour of such a
force. In particular, he mentioned the possibility of creating
an all-volunteer, professional United Nations brigade at the
service of the Security Council, a brigade which could be
rapidly deployed in a crisis situation. The personnel of such
a brigade would have no links with the armed forces of
Member States and would be directly contracted by the
United Nations. This would seem to be the best way to
guarantee that these units would actually be available in an
emergency, as the use of units which would remain part of
national forces would still be subject to often time-
consuming national decision-making, including, in many
cases, parliamentary approval. Moreover, the outcome of
this decision-making would not necessarily be positive. The
Netherlands has undertaken a preliminary internal study as
to the feasibility and modalities of such a United Nations
brigade, and intends to further pursue this option in
consultations with Member States and the Secretariat in the
very near future.

In his "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace" the
Secretary-General makes a clear distinction between
peace-keeping and peace-enforcing. If we understand the
text correctly, the Secretary-General argues that we should
return to the classical type of peace-keeping operations,
based on the consent of all parties, impartiality and non-use
of force. New elements, such as the protection of safe areas
and of humanitarian operations during continuing warfare,
as well as putting pressure on the parties, endanger the
success of the peace-keeping formula, especially if the
peace-keepers lack the capability for the effective use of
force, so the argument goes. Of course, the Netherlands
agrees that the capabilities of the peace-keeping forces
should be sufficient to meet the requirements of the
mandate. Mandate and means should be well-balanced.
However, the answer is not, in our view, to limit
ourselves to the kind of peace-keeping that was
appropriate for a world which was very different from the
one we are now living in. As the Supplement makes
clear, the nature of the problem confronting the
international community has changed as a result of the
recent wave of intra-State conflicts and the phenomenon
of the failed State. The responsibility of the United
Nations for the maintenance of peace and security makes
it incumbent upon the Organization to devise ways to
address these new threats. In the case of massive
violations of human rights and humanitarian emergencies
it may become unavoidable to combine peace-keeping
operations with elements of enforcement.
I agree that there is a real possibility of contradiction
and confusion, and that the United Nations force may
face situations of a very difficult and delicate nature.
However, my country does not draw the conclusion from
the experiences in, for instance, Bosnia and Herzegovina
that we have given the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) the wrong mandate. On the contrary,
UNPROFOR's capabilities should be strengthened and its
vulnerability reduced, so that it can indeed perform its
existing mandate.

In his Supplement, the Secretary-General also refers
to the new interaction between the Council and the troop-
contributing countries. The Netherlands has repeatedly
emphasized the importance of enhanced transparency and
better consultations with troop- contributing countries that
are not members of the Council. The new procedures
decided upon recently by the Council have already
resulted in improved information and consultations on the
operations mandated by the Council, and I hope further
progress will be made in this respect. This is a legitimate
expectation on the part of those countries which, while
not on the Council, are nevertheless major contributors to
United Nations peace-keeping operations and thus
instrumental in the implementation of the Council's
decisions. This enhanced involvement of the troop
contributors in the political process is also important in
order to maintain domestic public support. It can be
realized without encroaching on the special
responsibilities of the Council or the Secretary-General.

 

The Council must have flexibility in its choice of
instruments while trying to maintain or restore international
peace and security. The Charter specifically mentions
sanctions as one of the instruments for this purpose. The
Secretary-General rightly observes that sanctions often have
unwanted side-effects.

The experience gained since 1990 tells us that a
mechanism such as that proposed by the Secretary-General
may give a sharper edge to what he calls a blunt
instrument. The effectiveness and credibility of the
sanctions instrument, applied in conformity with the
Charter, would certainly be improved if some of the
Secretary-General's recommendations were adopted.

But - especially if there should be a reduction in
military enforcement activities on the part of the United
Nations, as proposed by the Secretary-General - the
Organization will have to make sure that it does not lose
the only remaining means of action in cases of threats to
the peace, breaches of the peace or acts of aggression. The
Netherlands, in cooperation with Australia, intends to
address various questions related to the effective application
of sanctions in a working paper to be presented on the
occasion of the United Nations Congress on Public
International Law, which will take place in New York in
March 1995.

In reading the Supplement, I was particularly pleased
with the emphasis that the Secretary-General puts on the
concept of post-conflict peace-building. This should include
the transition from humanitarian assistance to development
cooperation - a vital instrument in the promotion of
international peace and security. Achieving synergy
between the different organizations concerned should be an
important goal, and we wholeheartedly support the
Secretary-General in his efforts aimed at greater
coordination in the field.

Let me conclude by stating that we welcome the
attention that the Supplement gives to regional
organizations. The cooperation between these organizations
and the United Nations seems to be evolving in the right
direction. The Secretary-General is correct in stating that a
universal model for their relationship with the United
Nations cannot be established. The primacy of the United
Nations, so far as enforcement is concerned, has been laid
down in the Charter and must be respected. However, this
does not preclude a division of labour between United
Nations and regional organizations, which, in the opinion of
my country, should be based on considerations of
comparative advantage. Individual tasks should be
performed by the organization best equipped to do them.
In this way, duplication and institutional competition can
be avoided, and the effectiveness of our common effort
will be enhanced.

