Mr. De Mistura: Let me update the Security
Council on developments and lay out some of the plans
that we have for the next round of the intra- Syrian talks
in Geneva. I shall then brief the Council on some of the
other potential initiatives.

We are seeing very significant developments in the
fight against United Nations-proscribed terrorists in
Syria. Raqqa has been liberated by the United States-
led coalition and Mayadin by the Syrian Government
and its allies. Action continues to eliminate the
remaining Da'esh pockets in Deir ez-Zor. By and large,
the deconfliction among the parties fighting Da'esh is
working so far, but we also see Da'esh retreating into the
desert and launching brutal assymetric attacks in and
near Damascus. Without an inclusive political process,
there is a real threat that Da'esh or similar entities could
return and exploit the feelings of marginalization and
grievance. That is why we need a political process.

On another note, it is also clear that some
recent public ceremonies in Raqqa did not send
the right signal - indeed, they sent the wrong
signal - about inclusion.

Meanwhile, apart from the south-west, where via
the Amman arrangements the overall level of violence
remains reduced, despite some flashpoints in Bayt Jinn,
we are receiving numerous reports of heavy shelling
and even air strikes in Idlib and Hama. This might be
attributed to the actions ofTahrir al- Sham/Al-Nusra, but
in other areas - eastern Ghouta, southern Damascus
and the Rastan triangle - there has been a trend of
re-escalation rather than de-escalation, whichwe fear
might intensify if energies are directed away from
fighting Da'esh to somewhere else.

Let me also register my concern that we are not
seeing any increased humanitarian access in the
de-escalation areas and elsewhere, as we had wished.
But I will leave it to my colleague Mark Lowcock to
refer to that in due time. As the Council is aware, we
have seen some shocking images, which we cannot
independently verify, allegedly emerging in the past
few days from eastern Ghouta. Again, I will leave that
for Mr. Lowcock to elaborate on.

The desired improvements in humanitarian access
therefore continue to elude us, owing to many factors:
the ongoing fighting in some areas, bureaucratic
impediments and interference by parties to the conflict.
Those with influence must work to enable the United
Nations and its partners to deliver assistance by
whatever modalities are available - cross-line, cross-
border or regular programmes.

With a genuine sense of civic duty and commitment
to support their own fellow Syrians, we are constantly
hearing messages coming from civil-society
organizations, which are continuing to express alarm at
the impact of the conflict on the protection of civilians
who are still being affected, including the killing of
civilians and a lack of humanitarian access. We all
share that concern, which is the reason I share it. Again,
I will leave it to Mr. Lowcock.

It is therefore a very mixed picture. Terrorism is
on the defensive, but it will not be defeated by military
means alone. De-escalation arrangements are sometimes
being seriously challenged, but they are working. The
next Astana meeting should therefore focus on putting
the existing de-escalation arrangements back on
track and on finalizing the establishment of a proper
monitoring system. That is vital in order to see real
action on the humanitarian front as well.

Let me now turn to the political process. Let
us recall that, first, any de-escalation or any other
arrangement must be interim in nature and should not
lead to the de facto "soft" partitioning of Syria.

Secondly, the United Nations remains committed to
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Syria,
as do all Council members. Our goal is the realization
ofa truly nationwide ceasefire and a political process to
advance the implementation of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
Thirdly, the Security Council has clearly mandated
the United Nations - through me as the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General and of the Council - to convene
and advance the intra-Syrian political negotiation
process for a political solution to the conflict, and no
one else. I have therefore been carefully preparing a
new round of talks. I was in Moscow last week to see
Russian Federation Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and
Defence Minister Shoygu, as well as in Brussels to see
the European Union High Representative for Foreign
and Security Policy, Federica Mogherini, and discuss
with her possibilities for how the Brussels conference in
the spring could support the political process - which
I hope will be well established by that time. Also,
yesterday in Washington, DC, I met with the United
States National Security Advisor, Mr. McMaster, and I
have just come to brief the Council following a meeting
with United States Secretary of State Tillerson here in
Geneva. That is why I must apologize to the Council
for not being able to be there in person. I also consulted
with the Secretary-General earlier this week while in
New York and received very clear guidance. I am now
engaging with a range of other contacts, including with
Syrian and regional players.

Accordingly, I wish to indicate to the Council - in
fact, announce - my intention to convene the eighth
round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva on 28 November.
I will continue to consult everyone concerned in that
regard prior to that date. We intend to hold formal
plenary meetings as well as technical discussions over
a period of time. The work plan for the eighth round in
Geneva will be framed by resolution 2254 (2015) and
the four baskets, which each need to find an expression
in the framework agreement to realize a transitional
political process in implementing resolution 2254
(2015). I have asked for focus and realism because we
need to get the parties into real negotiations over items
where there is some prospect that they could begin to
narrow the gap and really negotiate.

Applying that logic, my considered assessment
as the mediator is that for the eighth around - and I
would like to ask the Council's support on this i we
should see if we can move some aspects of the agenda
concretely forward, far beyond just exploration, and
enter into negotiation. Specifically, in my opinion, in
the eighth round we should focus on two main points:
first, the schedule and process for drafting a new
constitution and, secondly, but not necessarily in that
order, the precise requirements for United Nations-
supervised elections as per resolution 2254 (2015).
Negotiations should then be informed by the overall
framework of resolution 2254 (2015), as I already said,
and by the existing 12 essential principles. In that
regard, I am ready to put to the parties initial thoughts
as a starting point for serious negotiations.

I also believe that the time has come for a serious
step on detainees, abductees and missing persons. I
genuinely hope that could emerge from the next Astana
meeting. Indeed, we have already made some advance
suggestions on how to build on it. We need to continue
to push for progress however we can, as that is probably
one of the most important confidence-building
measures that Syrians, thousands of them, would like
to hear.

As we focus on negotiations on those two key
points - United Nations-supervised elections as per
resolution 2254 (2015) and the constitution - we must
continue discussions in preparation for negotiations
on all baskets, including 1 and 4. It is hard to see how
that could in fact proceed without looking at it in the
context of resolution 2254 (2015).

We will also do everything possible to ensure that
we draw on the best contributions of civil society,
through the civil society support room we have here in
Geneva, and utilize women's contributions and a gender
perspective, including via the women's advisory board,
especially on the two main issues for the negotiations in
the eighth round, which I just mentioned.

I need the Council's support to move ahead based
on what I have said here; let me first indicate in which
areas. We hope to see a successful focus meeting in
Astana on 30 and 31 October. In that regard, I already
flagged the challenges to the de-escalation arrangements
and the importance of advancing the detainee file. We
must also ensure that humanitarian mine action moves
forward. We have a common interest in preventing the
further unravelling of the interim de-escalation and
ceasefire arrangements that have been put in place.
That is what Astana was always meant to be about, and
that is what we want, and hope, they will fully achieve.

Secondly, those with influence over the Government
should now exercise that influence and focus on how
to ensure that it comes to Geneva ready to negotiate.
I particularly raised those points in details in my
meetings in Moscow - quite intensely.
Thirdly, we need to see a successful second meeting
in Riyadh - soon, and ideally before the next Geneva
meetings. We will continue to coordinate on that. We
have now heard about the fact that that initiative is
actually likely to take place. We sincerely hope that the
initiaive, originated by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
in the key meeting in Riyadh of 2015, will be followed-
up when Saudi Arabia hosts the second meeting of
the opposition in Riyadh. We hope that it proceeds
accordingly. It would be a mistake if we think that
time is on our side. The best way to proceed requires
intensified engagement among the key players in
support of the Geneva process. Let me say that advocates
of Syrians' women's rights are calling for a minimum
of 30 per cent representation in the delegations of both
the Government and the opposition as negotiators. As
I always do, I urge the Syrian parties and international
supporters to strongly support that call.

Fourthly, let us remember the regional and
international dimensions of Syria. I am doing my best
as the mediator to consult a large number of groups and
focus international discussions on how to concretely
support the Geneva process. Frankly, I welcome any
suggestions from the Council on how that can be done.
In that regard, I welcome initiatives through which
the international community could come together in
supporting the efforts of the United Nations.

Finally, I wish to bring to the Council's attention the
fact that, when I was in Moscow, the Russian Federation
briefed me regarding their own initiative to convene a
large gathering of Syrians in Syria at the Russian air
base in Khmeimim in the near future. Perhaps we may
hear more about that during our closed consultations,
including from the Permanent Representative of Russia.
I look forward to hearing that, as well as the views of
other members of the Council. In looking at Riyadh,
at Astana and at anything else, my focus is always the
same. Does it help to advance the United Nations-led
process in Geneva, as laid out in resolution 2254 (2015),
or not? Here are some bottom lines.

First, it is time to move forward on the political
track. It is really a plastic special moment. Let us use
it. After Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor, I used to say, as the
Council probably remembers, that there would be a
moment of truth. Now is the moment of truth. Next
week in Astana could be crucial for the stabilization of
the de-escalation areas. Secondly, those with influence
over the Government should use it in order to get them
ready to negotiate substance in Geneva. Thirdly, the
same applies to those with influence over the opposition.
The meeting of the opposition in Riyadh should take
place as soon as possible and lead to a constructive
and proactive outcome. Fourthly, we need active
international engagement in support of the Geneva
process. Fifthly, the eighth round oftalks is planned for
28 November. We will try to move into real negotiations
on the constitution and elections supervised by the
United Nations, as laid out in resolution 2254 (2015).
In parallel, we should, of course, keep exploring the
issue of governance and terrorism. We should look at
any initiative by virtue of whether it contributes to the
United Nations-led political process in Geneva, which
the Council has mandated me to pursue on behalf of the
Secretary-General and the Council.

That is my summary of, ifI can put it this way, a
bottom line wish list.

The President (spoke in French) I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.

