Mr. Kronfol (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and your
country, Pakistan, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
thank you for choosing as the subject for this open
debate the issue of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, to which we attach great importance.
Indeed, we were one of the first countries to become
truly aware of the importance of peacekeeping troops
when the first United Nations force - the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) -
was established following the 1948 Arab-Israeli
conflict in Palestine. To this day, UNTSO continues to
carry out its mandate on the ground. Following the
Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon in 1978, another
international peacekeeping operation was established:
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). Both missions have been doing
commendable work over the long term: for 56 years in
the case of UNTSO and 26 years in the case of
UNIFIL. However, despite their best efforts, they have
not yet attained the objectives entrusted to them.
Therefore, we believe it essential that they remain in
place until a just, comprehensive and lasting peace is
achieved in the Middle East - that is, after Israel
completes its withdrawal from Lebanon, from the
Syrian Arab Golan and from the occupied Palestinian
territories. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for their ongoing efforts to
achieve stability in southern Lebanon along the
international border.

Those forces comprise soldiers and civilians who
are doing their utmost - often in difficult and
dangerous conditions - to achieve peace in a region
that has been suffering from instability as a result of
Israeli aggression and Israeli mines. We pay tribute to
the memory of those who have died for the sake of
peace in the region - 249 officers, soldiers and
international civil servants - and to all those who
have suffered personally in the service of the principles
of the United Nations as they have striven to replace
war and conflict with peace.

As a result of the lessons, both positive and
negative, that Lebanon has learned from its
cooperation with international forces, we have
particular interest in the subject before us today,
especially given the increase in the number of missions
and troops and the many different kinds of situations in
which they are deployed throughout the world.

The prestige of the United Nations and the
success of those missions are inextricably linked to
respect for principles and for the forces deployed on
the ground. Any failure to comply with fundamental
principles negatively affects the standing of the United
Nations and the work of the troops. The only weapon
that actually protects the forces and international peace
is the moral authority that the United Nations still
possesses in the world.
We must strive to give peacekeeping operations
every possible chance for success by providing the
troops, training and material and moral resources
necessary for those operations to be successful, even
without the use of force. We must tirelessly and
constantly support the work of international
peacekeepers both politically and diplomatically with a
view to finding solutions that are acceptable to all
parties. That can be done through negotiations, good
offices and arbitration; we also have recourse to
international law and international courts. We can also
undertake humanitarian efforts, promote economic,
social and media development and increase public
awareness of the situation - all to ensure that missions
can carry out their mandates. The costs of all such
efforts pale compared with the costs incurred by war in
terms of both loss of life and military expenditures.

We must always remember that peacekeeping
forces are temporary. The international community
must do its utmost to ensure that missions are as brief
as possible by providing everything they need to
ensure their success. Troops cannot be a replacement
for permanent solutions or for international treaties and
agreements. We must require all parties to a conflict to
provide all necessary assistance to and respect for
international forces, including protection, in order to
facilitate their tasks. The broader international
community too must support peacekeeping forces to
ensure their credibility and indeed the credibility of the
United Nations itself.

Every country in the world that is able to do so
should contribute troops - officers and soldiers - or
make other contributions. It should not just be a small
number of developing countries that provide the bulk
of the personnel serving in these missions. Countries
that finance missions have a duty and a right to also
participate in decision-making. We extend our deepest
thanks and appreciation to the countries that make
contributions.

Today more than ever, Lebanon believes in the
work of the forces on the ground in Lebanon. They
must remain there until the task mandated to them by
the Security Council has been completed and until a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace is established in
the Middle East on the basis of the resolutions, the
principles and the Charter of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, the troops will not be able to complete
their mandate until all of the political, diplomatic,
media, humanitarian, and development bodies of the
United Nations work together to resolve the pending
issues. However great the sacrifices of these
international peacekeeping forces, their work will not
be complete until those mandates are successfully
completed and until we are able to achieve peace
wherever those forces are stationed.

