Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to thank you, Sir, for giving me the floor
to present some information on my country's policy for
resolving the conflict in Darfur, and on developments
in the peace process.

I wish to inform the Council that the Darfur peace
process has come a long way. The most recent positive
developments and good news came from Doha two
days ago, when the Government, represented by the
official in charge of the Darfur dossier, sat down with
several leaders of the Justice and Equality Movement
(J EM) and signed a memorandum of understanding on
negotiations with the Government aimed at allowing
JEM. to endorse the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. This represents a historic development and a
breakthrough in the Doha peace process because JEM
has refused to sit down and negotiate in recent times.
This indicates that the Movement is now convinced of
the positive turn of events in Darfur.

Another positive development indicating a
shift from conflict resolution to rehabilitation and
development is the donors conference to be hosted
by the sisterly State of Qatar in December. I call on
all States represented in the Council, invested as they
are in maintaining peace and security in the Sudan, to
participate in that conference and to support the peace
process in Darfur, whose features have now come into
sharper focus.

At the same time, I acknowledge that certain
incidents have taken place that affect the security
situation in Darfur. These incidents have been provoked
by elements of the so-called Sudan Revolutionary Front,
which has declared its intention to resort to the force
of arms not only to contain and resolve the situation
in Darfur, but also to bring down the current system
of governance in Khartoum. Mr. Mulet, who is sitting
right beside me, described the incident in Hashaba, in
Northern Darfur, and noted that it was instigated by
some elements of the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni
Minawi and JEM. Mr. Mulet also noted that these groups
exploit certain disputes between various tribes over
grazing land. We need the international community,
embodied by the Security Council, to bring pressure
to bear on those movements that do not wish to join the
march towards peace in Darfur.

With respect to Mr. Mulet's suggestion that
Government authorities prevented access by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) to Hashaba, we say that the main reason
it did so was its concern for the safety of its personnel.
We said this a short while ago, when incidents broke
out in El Geneina and UNAMID forces did not heed the
advice of the Sudanese authorities, with the result that
some UNAMID elements were killed in a treacherous
ambush set up by certain rebel movements. We fear
a repeat of this scenario in the areas where military
operations are being launched by some of these armed
movements, as is the case in Hashaba. But even
following what happened in El Geneina, the competent
authorities employed their utmost efforts and arrested
the criminals murdered UNAMID personnel.

Mr. Mulet spoke of the kidnapping of certain police
elements working in UNAMID, and here I say with
complete confidence that those behind the kidnapping
were the remnants of the armed movements, who have
recently been kidnapping UNAMID workers. They
have even attacked and killed UNAMID personnel,
and have been attacking trade convoys in order to send
a message to the international community that the
security situation in Darfur is still precarious.

Just as we have cooperated in the past in the case of
kidnappings, and just as we have achieved success to a
large degree and returned all those kidnapped, I inform
the Council that we, the Government of the Sudan, will
work on tracking down and catching the kidnappers
and returning their victims safely to their homes.

I do not want to speak for too long, but I should like
to inform the Council of a dangerous development that
took place in my country yesterday and is organically
related to the root causes of the conflict in Darfur.
We all know of the role that Israel plays in the Darfur
conflict. The Council knows that Israel provides
military support to the rebel movements that are active
in Darfur, establishes offices for them in Tel Aviv,
and provides air transport to the leaders of the rebel
movement from the capital of South Sudan to other
countries and cities. Israel's interference in the Sudan's
affairs does not stop there. Yesterday, Israel carried
out an air strike on a military plant in my country that
produces conventional weapons. Four Israeli airplanes
violated and invaded our airspace and carried out that
heinous attack.

We reject such aggression, and I expect the Council
to condemn that attack because it was a blatant violation
ofthe concept ofpeace and security and ofthe principles
and purposes of the United Nations Charter, and it
jeopardizes the peace and security of the entire region,
not just the Sudan. We call upon the Council to stop
foreign hands from meddling in the Darfur conflict and
to help the Sudan arrive at a final solution that would
maintain peace and security in the Sudan and the wider
region in a manner that serves the interests of all of our
citizens in Darfur.

