Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav Jenea, and
the United Nations High Commissioner of the United
Nations for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein,
for their briefings today.

For Uruguay, there is a clear, intimate link between
the systematic violation of human rights and the
generation of conflicts, and the potential for conflicts
to become threats to international peace and security.

The human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is a cause of
major concern, especially given the context in which
it occurs. The North Korean population is hostage
to will of the authorities, without the most basic
freedoms or guarantees provided for in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights of 1948. The violations
committed by the North Korean Government of the
rights to life, to freedom in the broadest possible sense,
and to the security of its people cannot and should
not be permitted in the twenty-first century. The very
existence of concentration camps and the lack of fair-
trial guarantees fundamentally violate all the freedoms
of the civilian population of North Korea.

We are furthermore concerned about the extreme
poverty affecting the North Korean people. Uruguay
therefore condemns the production of nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles, which has a detrimental effect
on the well-being of the population, whose massive
needs go unmet. The diversion of resources for nuclear
weapons and ballistic missile programmes has a direct
negative impact on the humanitarian and human rights
situation of the citizens of North Korea, who suffer
major material deprivation and hunger.

Unfortunately, there are many other Governments
that commit constant violations and abuses to the human
rights of their populations and are not on the Security
Council's agenda. However, the situation of Democratic
People's Republic of Korea occurs against a particular
backdrop that not only threatens to destabilize the
Korean peninsula but also threatens international peace
and security.

We acknowledge that the Government of North
Korea has devoted modest effort to follow up on the
conclusions of the Commission of Inquiry into the
human rights situation in the country. Also, we welcome
the launch of the strategic framework for cooperation
between the United Nations and the Government of the
Democratic People's Republic Of Korea for the period
2017-2021, entitled "Towards Sustainable and Resilient
Human Development". However, while those are steps
in the correct direction, there is still a long way to go.

Last month, the international community expressed
its concern about the human rights situation in North
Korea once again with the adoption by consensus of
the annual draft resolution of the Third Committee on
the topic.

I should like to conclude by noting that a solution
to the tensions on the Korean Peninsula can be found
only through dialogue, negotiations and political
commitment. We therefore stress once again the
importance of the implementation of the provisions of
the numerous resolutions of the Security Council on the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the resumption of the Six-Party Talks to contribute
to a lasting political solution.

