Mrs. Horvath Fekszi (Hungary): The Republic
of Hungary welcomes this open debate and the
Secretary-General's annual report on children and
armed conflict (S/2010/181). I should like to express
my gratitude to Mexico for its work as chair of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. I should also like to convey our
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for their
comprehensive contribution to the protection of
children in armed conflict and for bringing this issue to
the forefront of the international agenda.

The Republic of Hungary fully aligns itself with
the statement made by the European delegation on
behalf of the European Union.

The Government of the Republic of Hungary
strongly supports resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882
(2009) and the implementation of an effective
monitoring and reporting mechanism on violations
committed against children in situations of armed
conflict. We attach special importance to the expansion
of the triggers for listing, in particular sexual violence,
killing and maiming. We share concerns regarding the
alarming issue of systematic sexual violence being
used as a tactic of war in order to deliberately target
civilians, including women and children. Such
infamous assaults significantly aggravate armed
conflict and post-conflict situations, and their lasting
negative impact may seriously impede the recovery
process. In this regard, we should spare no effort to
take effective steps to respond, and ultimately to put an
end, to such acts and any kind of violence against
children, both girls and boys, and women, with a
special emphasis on sexual violence in armed conflicts
and post-conflict situations.
Furthermore, we believe that the work of the
sanctions committees constitutes a significant step
towards implementing the relevant resolutions and
other international documents.

It is my pleasure to announce that the Republic of
Hungary deposited the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict with the
United Nations on 24 February 2010, and I should like
to reaffirm that my Government is fully committed to
the principles and norms of the relevant international
instruments. We welcome and firmly support the
campaign for the universal ratification of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which was launched on 25 May.

The Republic of Hungary strongly encourages the
Council to continue its work to fight against the
recruitment of child soldiers, while taking into
consideration the recommendations proposed by the
Secretary-General in the current report. I should like to
assure the Council once again of the Republic of
Hungary's commitment to and engagement on
enhancing the protection of children in armed conflict.

