Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): With the firm
commitment to fully respecting international
humanitarian law, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela condemns indiscriminate attacks against
the civilian population and humanitarian personnel
carried out by any party. It also condemns air strikes
carried out against hospitals and health facilities, just
as we have denounced them in the Gaza strip, in the
occupied territories of the State of Palestine, in Iraq,
Libya, Yemen, Afghanistan and Syria. Nevertheless,
our country voted against the draft resolution on the
situation in eastern Aleppo because the it does not
adequately address the humanitarian problem that
is severely impacting the civilian population in that
province, due to the terrorist barbarism of Jabhat
al-Nusrah and its related groups, and the terrible logic
of war in the country.

We are concerned that although the humanitarian
situation calls for concrete responses based on
the principles of impartiality, objectivity and
non-politicization, in this case the noble humanitarian
aim has been distorted in favour ofthe political interests
of some of the members of the Security Council to
the detriment of the Syrian people. Specifically, the
humanitarian tragedy of the people in eastern Aleppo
is being used in an attempt to blame Syria and Russia
for exacerbating the humanitarian situation in the
zone, where in truth those directly responsible for that
tragedy are the terrorist groups with foreign backing
that have been committing heinous crimes against the
people of Syria for five years now, in their desire and
purpose of overthrowing a legitimate Government.

We cannot ignore the fact that there are
other interested parties to the conflict within the
Security Council. Therefore, in that regard, we
members of the Council have a shared but differentiated
responsibility. Those players have been direct
participants in the armed conflict since its inception,
providing weapons to violent non-State actors who
then became terrorist groups that are no longer under
their control. They now claim not to understand the
consequences of their own actions and employ dramatic
rhetoric while continuing to fuel a war, not only in Syri,
but throughout the Middle East.

We believe that, had there been genuine interest
in producing a consensus document, the Council
would have been in possession of a draft resolution
that reflected its unity. Regrettably, the political
agendas of some of the members of the Council took
precedence, which prevented a positive outcome - to
the detriment of the people in Aleppo. The obstinate
insistence on pushing this draft resolution (S/2016/846)
in the Council while knowing that it was not viable has
deepened divisions within this collegial organ. We now
run the risk of undermining the progress that has been
made, in particular by the co-Chairs of the International
Syria Support Group - the Russian Federation and the

United States - as well as the efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura.

The fight against terrorism being conductedjointly
by the Governments of Syria and Russia cannot be
viewed as an excuse for destroying the Syrian population
in Aleppo, as some are attempting to encourage without
good basis. A genuine threat exists in that region and is
reflected by the thousands of fighters of the Al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist groups that are holding hostage
the thousands of civilians living there and using them
as human shields - all in breach of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We need only recall that the Government of Syria
opened up humanitarian corridors to evacuate the city
of Aleppo, while the terrorist groups executed those
who attempted to leave the city.

Given the fight against terrorism is a goal shared
by the international community, as stated in various
Security Council resolutions, we do not understand how
the so-called moderate opposition has not disassociated
itself once and for all from the Al-Nusra Front. If its
intentions for peace and stability in Syria are indeed
sincere, the moderate opposition should join in the
efforts to eliminate the scourge of terrorism and take
part fully in the peace talks without any preconditions.
What is urgent is to stop outside support to armed
groups - which evolve into terrorist groups - and to
implement the cessation of hostilities agreed upon on
9 September.

In addition, it is paradoxical that today's draft
resolution demands that Syria curtail its legitimate
right to exercise full sovereignty over its territory, in
particular its airspace by ceasing all military flights
over Aleppo. That demand stands in contrast to the
flexibility - or the failure - of the Council in other
conflicts, such as in the Gaza Strip, Fallujah, Baghdad,
Yemen or Afghanistan. We insist that issues brought
before the Council should not be addressed with double
standards. We believe that Syria's full exercise of its
sovereignty, by way of controlling its territory, is a
guarantee for an effective fight against the scourge of
terrorism in that country. We wonder how Syria could
be asked to limit its sovereignty when sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence are all
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations as being
key to international peace and security.

The Council does not have the right to violate the
sovereignty of Member States, and it cannot decide
whether or not a Government is legitimate. That is
solely up to peoples. We cannot allow the disastrous
military acts of aggression that occurred in Iraq, Libya
and other places to reoccur. Those events inflicted a
great deal of suffering on the people of those countries
by creating fertile ground for Al-Qaida to expand and
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to emerge,
following the dismantling of their institutional and
political structures.

In conclusion, we reject the fact that the human
tragedy being experienced the Syrian people is being
manipulated by a war imposed from abroad and
financed and sustained by foreign players and fighters.
In spite of the media pressure and manipulation, in order
to address the issue without double standards, uphold
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
work towards a political, negotiated solution to such a
terrible conflict, we will resolutely continue working
towards peace.

