Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan is deeply concerned about
the recent developments in eastern Ukraine and the
accompanying escalation, which could increase the
threats to the stability ofthat region. What is happening
there is a mutiny against the State and the Constitution
of Ukraine. If it continues it will lead inevitably to
the dismemberment and dismantling of the Ukrainian
State. Ukraine therefore has a right and a duty to its
citizens to preserve its unity and territorial integrity,
and, even more important, to restore every part of its
territory.

We call on the Ukrainian authorities to attempt to
use every possible means to resolve the crisis and keep
open the channels for dialogue with the rebels and all
the relevant parties in order to put an end to this mutiny.
We also appeal to them to respect the principles of
human rights in dealing with the crisis. We call on the
influential parties to exert every effort to convince the
rebels to bring a peaceful end to the crisis, to end their
armed demonstrations and acts of intimidation, and
to withdraw from Ukrainian public and Government
buildings.

The Security Council should also send a clear
message of support for Ukraine and its authorities
in their efforts to end this movement of armed
insurrection, to promote the rule of law and to preserve
the country's unity and territorial integrity. There
should be no interference in the internal affairs of
Ukraine, no act of intimidation and no threat of use of
force against it, which would contravene the principles
and positions of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that regard, we reaffirm that it is in the interests of the
international community as a whole to maintain the
integrity of the provisions of international law and to
refrain from creating excuses and justifications for
military intervention against States, in contravention
of the Charter. International law is the cornerstone of
equality among States and is designed to protect them
from armed threats to their sovereignty regardless of
their size, importance or military might.

