Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Government of Israel closed its borders with
the West Bank and Gaza at the beginning of March. This
has affected the normal lives of the Palestinian people and
caused serious problems for the economy of Palestine, thus
violating the national interests of the Palestinian people.

The international community is deeply concerned, and
the Government and the people of China share that concern.
In our View, the national interests of the Palestinian people
should be respected and safeguarded. We hope that the
Israeli Government, on the basis of the overall interests of
peace in the Middle East, will lift the closure as soon as
possible so that the process of Palestinian autonomy can
proceed smoothly, allowing the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and Gaza to resume their normal economic life.

We are deeply shocked by the repeated and large-scale
terrorist bombing attacks that have taken place in Israel
since February. We wish to extend our sympathy and
condolences to the innocent victims. China opposes all
forms of terrorism. In our view, terrorism is a threat to the
lives and security of the people concerned. It is also a
threat to international peace and security. All terrorists,
therefore, must be brought to justice. We believe that there
should be no difference in this respect between Israel and
the Arab countries of the Middle East.

In our view, in opposing terrorist acts as in dealing
with other international problems, it is necessary to observe
the norms of international relations and international law.
In particular, there should be no violation of the
sovereignty, security or fundamental interests of other
countries. We believe that the sovereignty and security of
all countries in the Middle East, including Israel, should be
respected and safeguarded. But at the same time, no one
should link terrorism with the Arab countries and peoples,
much less take blind action against innocent populations
on the pretext of opposing terrorism. We hope that all
parties concerned will join forces and strive for the early
achievement of a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East, promote the economic development of the region
and eliminate the root causes of terrorism.

At present, the peace process in the Middle East is
at a critical juncture. The parties concerned must not only
implement comprehensively and effectively the
agreements already reached, but they must also actively
consolidate the results already achieved to overcome any
interference and prevent reversals or regressions. We hope
that all parties concerned will exercise restraint and
continue to create the necessary conditions to further
promote progress in the peace process in the Middle East.

