Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate Mr. Stephen O'Brien
for his efforts in addressing the Syrian crisis and to
thank him and all humanitarian workers who make
daily sacrifices in that connection. I would also like
to thank Mr. O'Brien for the clarity with which he
presented the thirtieth report of the Secretary-General
on Syria (S/2016/714), which enables us to look beyond
the humanitarian situation and consider the difficult
political and security situation in that country.

As my delegation pointed out during the
previous briefing, the cessation of hostilities, which
is fundamental for the provision of humanitarian
assistance and a prerequisite for finding a political
solution, seems seriously compromised. In that
connection, our primary concern continues to be
possible clashes between the Syrian army and the
armed opposition groups, particularly in several
governorates - for instance, Deir ez-Zor, Idlib, Rif
Dimashq and Aleppo - where bombardment continues
to claim many victims, including women, children, the
elderly and the vulnerable. Moreover, it is worth noting
that, in addition to claiming hundreds of victims, the
violence has led to the displacement of tens of thousands
of people, particularly in Idlib, where 45,000 people
have fled aerial bombardments.

Air strikes threaten to put between 250,000 and
275,000 people in Aleppo in a state of siege, owing
to the 7 July closing of the Castello Road, the only
access route to the eastern part of the city, a situation
that has led to a significant hike in the prices of basic
food supplies. It has also led to disastrous effects on
children, who increasingly suffer from malnutrition
and diseases associated with it.

Additionally, the escalation of clashes between
Kurdish forces and the Government at Hasakah, in
northern Syria, has resulted in more civilian victims and
the displacement of many, while further complicating
a conflict that is already difficult to resolve owing to
the very many parties already involved. The besieged
suburb of Al-Wair, inhabited by 100,000 people, is
currently being targeted by Government forces, which
have issued an ultimatum. Al-Wair has been lacking
humanitarian assistance since last month and must
continue to be on our radar.
I would also note the destruction of public
infrastructure, such as markets, schools and health
centres, 44 of which were targeted in July alone,
in flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law and resolution 2286 (2016). In that regard, my
delegation would like to take this opportunity to once
again remind the parties to the conflict, in particular
the Syrian Government, of their obligation to respect
human rights and international humanitarian law.

In the light of what I have said here, and in
recognition of current efforts, particularly those
undertaken by the Russian Federation, we reaffirm our
support for the humanitarian agencies of the United
Nations to implement weekly 48-hour ceasefires in
order to take care of those in need. Furthermore, we urge
the International Syria Support Group, in particular
its co-chairs - the United States and the Russian
Federation - to continue to bring their influence to
bear on the parties, especially the Syrian Government,
to effectively implement the ceasefires, which are so
crucial to humanitarian efforts.

Although we commend the sustained efforts of
humanitarian actors, particularly of United Nations
agencies and the Syrian Red Crescent, in ensuring
the provision of humanitarian assistance to thousand
of Syrians, we must remember the major constraints
that keep them from fully meeting the needs of the
affected population. Moreover, the sharp increase in
the number of people living in besieged and hard-to-
reach areas is regrettable. That number has gone from
4.6 million to 5.47 million, a significant increase of
900,000 people - primarily owing to violence, but also
to administrative red tape and the obstruction on the
part of the belligerent parties.

While we welcome progress in supplying aid to
besieged and hard-to-access areas - particularly
becauseaccesshasbeengrantedbytheGovernment-we
urge the Government to work towards ensuring that the
goal of providing humanitarian access to 1.2 million
people by August this year is reached. It is essential
that the United Nations be granted ongoing access,
as providing humanitarian assistance to people in
need is - I would recall - an obligation under
international humanitarian law. While we welcome
the medical evacuation of 39 people from the besieged
towns of Madaya and Fo'ah, among them children and
the elderly, by the Syrian Red Crescent, we point out
that numerous civilians, particularly children, in the
four besieged towns - Fo'ah, Kafraya, Madaya and
Zabadani - still remain to be evacuated under the
humanitarian agreement on those towns. We continue to
condemn the systematic practice of removing medical
items from humanitarian convoys that are destined for
people in critical condition, especially pregnant women.

In addition to those problems we should mention
the dislocation of families, the early marriages and the
child soldiers, problems that continue to affect Syrian
children. On that subject, my delegation welcomes the
ongoing efforts of UNICEF and its partners, which
managed to provide multidimensional assistance to
214,000 children in July. We also welcome the ongoing
vaccination campaign of the World Health Organization
and UNICEF, a campaign that has made it possible to
reach 1.07 million children. So far, approximately 86 per
cent of the population still needs to be vaccinated.

The sacrifice on the part ofmedical andhumanitarian
staff for the Syrian people can be seen once again in
the tragic losses and deaths that have occurred among
the staff of the United Nations Relief and Work Agency
for the Palestine Refugees in the Near East. On 16 July
a humanitarian worker, Mr. Yaser Mahmoud Shuaeeb,
was killed. We would like on this occasion to pay tribute
to those brave men and women and call for the freeing
of those who are still in detention.

In conclusion, the humanitarian and security
situation in Syria is unacceptable, with more than
30 million people affected. That should speak to our
collective conscience and lead us to take decisive
action once and for all in order to bring about a lasting
solution to the crisis that will, above all, enable the
affected population to be able to return to their homes
in security and dignity. I would also like to reiterate my
delegation's call to those with influence, particularly
the International Syria Support Group and its co-chairs,
to concentrate more on the humanitarian situation,
because we cannot stress enough that the unprecedented
humanitarian situation in Syria is only a symptom of
the political situation, which is getting worse day by
day. It is also important to give every possible chance
to the political process, pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015).

