Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane (South Africa): South
Africa expresses its appreciation to Germany,
particularly to our colleague, Minister for Foreign
Affairs Guido Westerville, for organizing this timely
debate, which provides an opportunity for us to reflect
on the peace and security situation in the Middle East,
especially in light of current events taking place in
the region. We wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the Secretary General of the League of
Arab States, Mr. Nabil Elaraby, for their respective
statements.

The Charter of the United Nations gives the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It also
recognizes the complementarity between the roles of
the United Nations and regional organizations in that
respect. Political and strategic alignment between
the Security Council and regional organizations has
demonstrated effective results, as we have seen in the
cases of Somalia and the Sudan. Coordination should be
enhanced and become more formalized and structured,
which is why South Africa has consistently championed
the strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.

We also pioneered the adoption of resolution
2033 (2012) to further strengthen that relationship,
particularly between the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations Security
Council. Cooperation between regional organizations
is equally important, especially in instances in which
there is overlapping membership, such as in the case
of the League of Arab States and the African Union.
In such situations, regional organizations should
collaborate in developing close regional solutions to
common challenges, such as resolution of conflicts. In
that regard, we look forward to the joint consultative
ministerial meeting between the Peace and Security
Council of the AU and the League of Arab States
scheduled to take place in New York on 27 September.

In the case ofthe Middle East, we have to recognize
that the League of Arab States is the organization best
placed to have a deeper appreciation of the dynamics
within which conflicts in the Arab world take place
and to provide conflict-specific solutions. South Africa
appreciates the efforts of the League in promoting
peace in the Middle East region, especially efforts at
furthering the Middle East peace process, the oldest
peace and security item on the agendas of both the
United Nations and the League. It is therefore apt that
the United Nations is strengthening its engagement
with the League. The appointment of the Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States for Syria was demonstrative of that cooperation.
It would also be appropriate for the Secretary-General,
in consultation with the League, to explore modalities
for further enhancing cooperation. In its cooperation
with the League, the Council should be consistent and
not selectively cooperate on matters that serve the
national interests of some of its members.

The events in the Middle East over the past 19
months have had a significant impact on the region and
the rest of the world. The complexities underlying those
events underscore the fact that no individual countries
or organizations can address the developments on
their own. The need for cooperation among States and
international organizations when dealing with cross-
cutting issues of peace, security and development is
therefore paramount.

Equally, the underlying causes of those uprisings,
including long-standing conflicts, have to be addressed
in a coordinated manner. In the Middle East, we have
not seen such an approach. There has been swift
international reaction to some, while in others such
cooperation is lacking, and, as a result, there has been
no significant movement towards resolving the conflict.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League on the Middle East peace process has been
most disappointing. The Arab League has consistently
played a significant role in trying to find a resolution to
the conflict, including through the adoption of the Arab
Peace Initiative. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has yet to provide effective and meaningful support
for the League's efforts. Instead, we have relied on the
Middle East Quartet, whose efficacy is increasingly
being questioned, especially because its composition
excludes the League and regional representatives.

Exactly one year ago, in September 2011, the
Middle East Quartet committed itselfto the resumption
of the direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine
by September 2012. That deadline has come and gone,
with no significant progress towards the resumption of
talks.

As a result, the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories continues to deteriorate sharply. The
construction of illegal settlements, which violates
international law and the resolutions of the Council,
remains the major stumbling block to the viability of
an independent Palestinian State and the resumption of
the peace talks.

South Africa laments the failure of the Council
to agree to the admission of Palestine as a Member of
the United Nations, despite the overwhelming support
of and endorsement by the League. We welcome
the Arab League's decision to revive Palestine's
bid for United Nations membership and call on the
international community to provide support for a
permanent and sustainable political solution, namely,
the implementation of the two-State solution, which
provides for the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State, existing side by side in peace with Israel, within
internationally recognized borders based on those
existing on 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

Regrettably, years of failed diplomacy and
oversight by the Security Council have resulted only
in a hardening of positions by the occupier, increased
abject poverty and suffering by the people of Palestine,
and continued insecurity for the people of both Israel
and Palestine. Perhaps it is time to consider a new
approach. The League is well placed to take the lead
and to ensure that Palestine's cause again becomes a
priority of the Council.

With regard to the situation in Syria, we condemn
the ongoing violence, which continues unabated.
Meanwhile, the Security Council remains divided on
this issue. South Africa emphasizes that the Security
Council and the League of Arab States should address
the Syrian crisis in a balanced manner, by applying
pressure on all sides to stop the violence, and stop it
immediately, to establish a ceasefire and comply fully
with their respective obligations under the six-point
plan and the Geneva action group communique.

Those assisting either party militarily are
worsening the situation and prolonging the bloodshed.
We call on those involved in such initiatives to refrain
from them in assisting the efforts to bring the parties
to the negotiating table, in order to launch a credible
Syrian-led and -owned political process that will lead
to a legitimate transitional arrangement that is aimed at
established a democratic, pluralistic society that meets
the legitimate aspirations of all the Syrian people. The
resolution of the conflict should also preserve the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.

In conclusion, the inability of the Council to deal
with the situation in Palestine and in Syria underscores
the need for Council reform. The absence of reform
renders cooperation with regional organizations
vitally important as the unreformed Council attempts
to grapple with contemporary threats to international
peace and security.

