Mr. Sorcar (Bangladesh): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for arranging this debate. It has been a
very timely initiative. It was indeed essential that we
undertake a follow-up of the Council summit now that
six months have elapsed. We appreciate the well-
researched background paper provided by your
delegation. That paper picks up, as is most appropriate,
the salient points in resolution 1318 (2000). You have
also included the highlights of the statements made by
the heads of State and Government of the Council
members at their 7 September summit. This is very
pertinent to our present exercise.

I shall not dwell much on what the Council has
done over the last six months. That is outlined in your
paper. I shall concentrate on what has not been done
and what we should do in the days ahead. In doing so,
we shall base our comments essentially on resolution
1318 (2000), the provisions of which are supported by
the leaders of the Council member countries. In their
statements the heads of State and Government also
expressed views and made concrete proposals, which
were not the subject of a consensus-seeking exercise.
Nevertheless, those ideas deserve our serious attention,
particularly when we are engaged in follow-up of the
summit. We shall, of course, favour taking all those
proposals made at the summit into account when we
consider the outcome of the two days of debate.

Let me recall the appeal of Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina to the United Nations at the last Council
summit: to choose and sustain government of the
people, by the people and for the people. This is clearly
in line with the emphasis put on democracy, good
governance, the rule of law and human rights. Many of
today's conflicts have their roots in non-democratic -
I would rather say dictatorial - regimes. Protection of
democracy in many cases may mean preserving peace
or preventing conflicts. These institutions, coupled
with sustainable development, constitute the
foundations for durable peace. In his 13 April 1998
report on the causes of conflict in Africa, the
Secretary-General did recognize bad governance as a
major source of conflict. No one could possibly dispute
the fact that protection of the rights of minorities and
respect for unlimited freedom and human rights
contribute to conflict prevention.

The Prime Minister of Bangladesh proposed the
establishment of child soldier-free zones. We believe in
keeping with our commitments to the future
generations. This objective should be pursued by the
membership and should be supported by the United
Nations system and other actors. Bangladesh has also
stressed that peace and security should be conceived
basically in terms of human security. The ravages of
war are experienced by human individuals, a reminder
echoed in the statement of the former High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata.

Turning to resolution 1318, we shall limit our
comments to the six central themes you have
suggested, Mr. President. The basic question before us
is whether the Council has lived up to its commitments.
A pertinent question will also be whether the
Secretariat, other organs of the United Nations, funds
and programmes of the United Nations system and the
Bretton Woods institutions have assumed their
respective roles in advancing the objectives. Most of
all, as the Secretary-General has stressed this morning,
whether Member States - in the first place the
Council members - have engaged in their respective
capitals in seeking to implement the summit pledges.

First, Africa. The year 2000 started with the
month of January designated as the month of Africa,
under the United States presidency. Since then, all the
months of the year remained, as the situations
demanded, focused on the conflicts in Africa, on
African issues. This was true for the months before and
after the summit. Since the summit, actions on Eritrea-
Ethiopia, Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and West Africa and our action this morning
with respect to Liberia speaks of a more proactive and
resolute role of the Security Council. It would sound
rather self-congratulatory if we enumerated our
achievements. It will be difficult for the Council to
judge its own performance in an objective manner. The
comments and views of the United Nations
membership are hence essential, and we are happy that
a good number of non-members of the Council
participated in the debate.

Second, "forgotten conflicts". The Council heard
elaborate comments on longstanding disputes from
several delegations. I shall touch upon the question in
connection with the preparedness gap, lest that give
rise to cases of oblivion on the part of the Council. The
situation in Burundi is a case in point, but the Council
has certainly not forgotten Burundi. The situation is
reviewed every month. But possibly we have forgotten
our responsibility to provide, or at least to plan to
provide, a peacekeeping mission there, the situation
permitting, as called for in the Arusha Peace
Agreement. The Council should redeem itself of the
tradition of doing too little too late in the case of
Burundi, which is at hand. Way back in September
2000, the Secretariat was requested to report on the
matter. The report is still awaited.

Third, points three, four and five of the
background paper relating to peace operations. The
timely adoption of resolution 1327 (2000) as follow-up
of the Brahimi Panel report has been acclaimed, rightly
so. With this, a solemn commitment of the summit has
been fulfilled. Attention now needs to be given to the
implementation of the agreed provisions. I shall focus
on the provision under section III of the annex, as it
contains essential operational elements and as most of
the others have been covered by other speakers.

The chapeau of this section calls for
development, within the United Nations system and
more widely, of comprehensive and integrated
strategies to address the root causes of conflicts,
including their economic and social dimensions. The
representative of the United Kingdom has set the limits
and has indicated the framework for such an
endeavour, which the United Kingdom considers
ambitious, a feeling that is shared. We agree with those
observations. The last provision in this section
underlines the importance of enhancing the United
Nations capacity for rapid deployment of peacekeeping
operations and urges Member States to provide
sufficient and timely resources. We would like to
remind ourselves of this commitment on this occasion.

An assessment of the progress in translating these
pledges into practice will require a report by the
Secretary-General with inputs from the Member States.
We hope that part of this, particularly the question
addressing the root causes of conflict, will be covered
in the upcoming report on conflict prevention.

The rest of the section is devoted to strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Council
committed itself to adopting clearly defined, credible,
achievable and appropriate mandates. Has it kept its
commitment? It is better that we hear comments on this
from the United Nations membership outside the
Council.

The Council also agreed to include in these
mandates effective measures for the security and safety
of United Nations personnel and wherever feasible, for
the protection of the civilian population. The safety and
security of peacekeepers is paramount in our mind, as a
troop-contributing country. This does not mean that we
do not accept any risks.

Bangladesh sends its soldiers and other
peacekeeping personnel to United Nations missions
throughout the continents, including in the most
perilous areas. We accept certain sacrifice, along with
other Members of the United Nations, but our concern
here is not to repeat the experiences we had in Rwanda
or in Sierra Leone.

Another pledge was to take steps to assist the
United Nations to obtain trained and properly equipped
personnel for peacekeeping operations. In this
connection, we would recall the observations made in
the Brahimi Panel's report on the question of the
commitment gap and the contribution of those with the
greatest capacity and means. We would also recall the
observations of the Secretary-General in this regard
following the withdrawal of the Sierra Leonean and
Jordanian battalions.

The protection of civilians received a guarded
commitment covered by the saving clause, where
feasible. In the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the reverse concept of operations that we have
supported, we have taken shelter under the saving
clause. We shall be judged by what happens on the
ground to the civilians.

Strengthening consultations with troop-
contributing countries when deciding on peacekeeping
operations was another major commitment. Thanks to
the Singapore presidency, the Council has been
engaged in this matter. The upgrading of United
Nations capacity for planning, establishing, deploying
and conducting peacekeeping operations was a major
commitment in this regard. In December, the General
Assembly approved 95 posts following the Brahimi
recommendations. As this was an emergency
requirement, we hope that the Secretariat is taking
steps to make appointments to the posts in an
expeditious manner, particularly as we know there are
the usual delays.

In conclusion, we would suggest three concrete
steps as a follow-up to today's debate. First, as to the
recommendation of the Secretary-General, we may take
steps to engage our Government, where it is deficient,
for the national implementation of resolution 1318
(2000) and, of course, of the commitments made by our
respective heads of State and Government. We could
possibly also think of involving the legislative branch
of our Governments in our respective countries.

Secondly, concerning the initiative for a United
Nations system-wide follow-up of the resolution, we
have pointed out some of the areas. A report of the
Secretary-General, possibly after six months, will
allow another half-yearly review in a more substantive
manner. The comments of the United Nations
membership and civil society, including the non-
governmental organizations and academia, would
provide useful inputs to the report. The report will be
most useful for a possible ministerial meeting proposed
by Mauritius - a proposal that my delegation
supports. The Council had earlier envisaged such a
meeting in the context of conflict prevention.

Thirdly, we might think of involving the peoples
in whose name the Charter establishes the United
Nations. We spoke of involving the legislative branch.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union is an institution which
could promote follow-up of United Nations resolutions,
in particular the Council's. We could, in our national
context, explore appropriate steps to inform and to
involve our citizens. The power of making major
decisions has to come from the people.

Finally, we are happy to note that the Council is
making a slow but steady departure from the fire-
brigade approach in favour of a comprehensive
approach to peace and security. This indicates the
recognition that the Council cannot go it alone when it
comes to the question of peace and security. We agree
with the constructive competition alluded to by the
representative of the United Kingdom, which would
seek to promote the widest possible partnerships, as
underscored by the United States, for peace.

We have noted some of the major initiatives and
progress. However, there is no room for complacency.
The Council has to do better. Bangladesh will continue
to make its contribution to our collective endeavour.
