Archbishop Auza: I would like to begin by
commending Poland's presidency of the Security
Council this month for organizing today's debate on the
crucial issue of promoting and strengthening the rule
of law in maintaining international peace and security.

The efforts of the United Nations to promote the
rule of law are essential to international peace and
security. As Pope Francis affirmed in his address to the
General Assembly in 2015,

"The work of the United Nations, according to
the principles set forth in the Preamble and first
Articles of its founding Charter, can be seen as the
development and promotion of the rule of law in the
understanding that justice is an essential condition
for achieving the ideal of universal brotherhood"
(A/70/PV3, p.3).

It is by strengthening the rule of law that we will
not only avoid many conflicts but will ultimately avoid
falling into an international relations based on fear and
distrust. The Charter of the United Nations, which is a
fundamental juridical norm, obliges the Organization
to ensure that the rule of law is uncontested and that
we have consistent recourse to negotiation, mediation
and arbitration.

The Security Council has an essential role to play
in the fair and impartial application of the rule of law.
The fundamental importance of that responsibility is
manifested in the legally binding nature of its decisions.
Member States and all other stakeholders must seek
out ways to enable the Council to better shoulder its
responsibilities and ensure respect for the values
enshrined in the Charter. That is why my delegation
believes that today's open debate is being held at a
very important time for us to recall that the primary
responsibility for ensuring prosecution for serious
international crimes and other gross violations of human
rights lies with Member States. We therefore appreciate
the commitment of Member States, expressed on many
occasions, to ensuring that impunity is not tolerated
for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
or for violations of international humanitarian law and
gross violations of human rights law.

That commitment has been manifested in the
creation of ad hoc international criminal tribunals
to investigate possible crimes of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity during past and
ongoing conflicts. That demonstrates Member States'
determination to ensure that such crimes are properly
investigated and appropriately sanctioned, among
other things by bringing the perpetrators of crimes
to justice through national or, where appropriate,
regional or international mechanisms, in accordance
with international law. Accountability is an essential
component in strengthening the rule oflaw and must be
at the centre of our efforts for peacebuilding, sustaining
peace and preventing conflict generally. In that regard,
my delegation appreciates the work of national and
international justice mechanisms in maintaining and
further consolidating the rule of law, as well as in
helping to crystallize legal concepts and establish
jurisprudence that contribute to the positive evolution
of international law and to the rule of law itself.

Accountability for grave injustices and human
rights violations and the need to restore justice cannot
be overlooked or sacrificed in the name of a volatile,
provisional pseudo-stability. Peace can be sustainable
only if it goes hand in hand with justice. Truth-
finding efforts are crucial in the process of peace and
reconciliation, which represent essential building blocks
for the establishment of lasting peace in post-conflict
settings. A multifaceted and properly sequenced
transitional justice strategy is needed to address
violations of human rights and international law, one
that includes prosecutions, reparations and institutional
reform. Priority should be given to ensuring access to
justice for those who often suffer disproportionately in
conflict, particularly women, children and persecuted
religious or ethnic groups, whose voices are most likely
to remain the least heard in peace negotiations and
post-conflict processes.
Together let us work to advance the rule of law.

