Mr. Takht-Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Security Council is meeting today to discuss demining in
the context of peace-keeping operations, a subject of
paramount importance to the success of certain United
Nations peace-keeping operations.

The issue of land-mines, with their lethal nature and
collateral effects, has focused the attention of the world
community and caused it serious concern over the past
several years. The world is shocked by the monumental
number of mines which infest various countries in conflict
and post-conflict phases, as well as by the horrendous
consequences of their indiscriminate use.

This issue defies the human intellect and demands
comprehensive yet prompt solutions. For its part, and as an
affected State, the Islamic Republic of Iran has actively
participated in the work of competent bodies dealing with
land-mines and in principle has supported any genuine
initiative aimed at the prohibition of all types of land-mines
without exception.

My country appreciates the depth and magnitude of
the many problems associated with mine clearance in
post-conflict cases. During the Iran-Iraq war, nearly 16
million land-mines and other unexploded devices were laid
in Iranian territory temporarily occupied in different stages
of the war, covering more than 4 million hectares. Over the
past six years, we have embarked upon a massive mine
clearance operation in order to enable civilians displaced by
the war to return to their homes and resume normal life.
We have succeeded in neutralizing more than one third of
all mines and other unexploded devices laid in our country.
However, lack of access to maps of minefields and to
advanced equipment and technology have not only slowed
down our efforts, but also have caused unacceptable
casualties both among those involved in mine clearance
operations and, more regrettably, among innocent civilians.

It is indeed ironic that despite a world-wide campaign
against anti-personnel land-mines in recent years, no serious
attempt has been made to transfer newer mine-clearance
technologies to mine-afflicted countries. Various types of
equipment continue to be subject to discriminatory and
unjustifiable export control regimes.

We recognize a special role for the United Nations
in this regard. The United Nations needs to ensure that no
restrictions are applied by any State that would hinder or
otherwise impede, in any manner, access to mine
clearance technology. At the same time, all States,
particularly those which have the required technology and
equipment for mine clearance, should declare to the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs the kind of
assistance, both financial and technical, that they can
provide to mine-infested countries and relevant United
Nations programmes. It is indispensable for any serious
United Nations programme to facilitate the access of
mine-stricken nations to the machinery and technology
necessary for speedy and effective mine clearance.

We are also conscious of the serious threat that
mines and other unexploded devices pose to the safety,
health and lives of personnel participating in
humanitarian, peace-keeping and rehabilitation
programmes and operations. In this regard, we note with
satisfaction the inclusion in the mandates of several
peace-keeping operations of provisions relating to mine
clearance work carried out under the direction of the
Department of Peace-keeping Operations in the context of
such operations. The Security Council might consider,
when necessary, including mine clearance as part of the
functions of United Nations peace-keeping operations in
future.

Such mine-clearance work is admittedly of a narrow
scope. Experience and history reveal that the problems
posed by mines remain long after the peace-keeping
operations are concluded. Hence, it is crucial that the
General Assembly continue to develop operational
policies and activities designed to clear mines in affected
countries in the post-conflict period to pave the way for
bringing normalcy to life and for development. It is in
this context that due attention should be paid to the
distinct nature of the demining activities performed by
different United Nations departments, programmes and
bodies. Moreover, mine clearance activities, whether in
the context of peace-keeping operations or outside of their
purview, should be consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular the principles of full respect
for the sovereignty, sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of all States, and of non-interference in their
internal affairs.

 

