Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking Under-Secretaries-
General Herve Ladsous and Atul Khare for their
respective briefings this afternoon.

Iwouldlike to highlight the holding, on 23 September,
of a high-level meeting on the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which
was a good opportunity for exchanging various points
of view on the situation in the country. The situation in
Mali continues to be a source of concern, in particular
with regard to the levels of violence affecting the
civilian population. In the past few months, terrorist
attacks and successive violations of the ceasefire have
been attributed to the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad and the Platform and the absence of State
authority in most of the country.

Some of those conditions were assessed by the
Security Council mission that ook place in March as
part of visits and interviews in Mali. In the light of
this sensitive situation, in June, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2295 (2016), which grants the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) increased military and
police contingents and a considerably more robust
mandate than its previous one. It includes active defence
and prevention capabilities and the ability to combat
asymmetric threats, among other provisions.

Although Uruguay believes that the current
MINUSMA mandate goes beyond what is usually
expected in a peacekeeping operation by including
counter-terrorism activities, my delegation voted in
favour of it, with the understanding that Mali's security
situation is an extraordinary one. Three months after
adopting resolution 2295 (2016), the situation in Mali
remains critical and the security situation on the ground
shows no signs of improving - on the contrary.

We believe that the activities conducted thanks to
financing from the Peacebuilding fund are relevant
and have made it possible to achieve results on the
socioeconomic front conducive to capacity-building.
As indicated by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2016/819), such activities made it possible for 3,856
Malian children to attend school, 650 income-generating
activities for internally displaced persons, refugees and
persons returning home to be created and 460 women
affected by gender violence to have improved access to
justice and security. Thanks to those types of activities,
Mali will have an opportunity to build capacity that
transcends the presence of the United Nations on the
ground.

Uruguay is aware of the challenges being faced
by the Government of Mali, particularly in the areas
of security and the economy, but it should tackle that
problem with a long-term approach, by addressing the
root causes of the problem, giving signs of credibility
to the parties to the Peace Agreement and avoiding
the spread of terrorism in the country. The regional
initiatives to combat terrorism, as the Group of Five
for the Sahel, are crucial in addressing the problem
of terrorism affecting Mali and various countries in
the region. We must recall that such terrorist groups
disregard borders and, as such, approaching the issue
from a solely national perspective would be simplistic.
Therefore, we urge the Government of Mali and the
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad and the
Platform to keep dialogue open in order to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
in the conviction that if these are not achieved, new
flanks facilitating terrorist activities will emerge and it
will be increasingly difficult to re-establish the State's
authority throughout the country.

