The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council congratulates the
leaders and people of Lebanon and welcomes and
strongly supports the agreement reached in Doha
on 21 May under the auspices of the Arab
League, which constitutes an essential step
towards the resolution of the current crisis, the
return to the normal functioning of Lebanese
democratic institutions, and the complete
restoration of Lebanon's unity and stability.

"It commends the efforts of the Arab
League, in particular of the committee of Foreign
the

Ministers, under the leadership of the Emir of the
State of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa
Al-Thani, Qatari Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr
Al-Thani, and Secretary-General Amr Moussa, in
helping Lebanese leaders reach an agreement.

"The Security Council welcomes the
agreement to elect a president of the Republic, to
establish a national unity cabinet and to address
Lebanon's electoral law, in accordance with the
Arab League initiative, as well as the decision to
continue the national dialogue on ways to
reinforce the authority of the State over all its
territory in such a way as to guarantee the
sovereignty and the safety of the State and the
people of Lebanon. It welcomes the agreement to
ban the use of weapons and violence as a means
to settle disputes, irrespective of their nature and
under any circumstances.

"It calls for the implementation of this
agreement in its entirety, in accordance with the
Arab League initiative and in conformity with the
Taif agreement and all relevant Security Council
resolutions and statements of its President on the
situation in Lebanon.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
support for the territorial integrity, sovereignty,
unity and political independence of Lebanon
within its internationally recognized borders and
under the sole and exclusive authority of the
Government of Lebanon over all Lebanese
territory."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/l7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4 p.m.
08-35008

