Mr. Machar Teny-Dhurgon: I am very grateful
for the opportunity to address the Security Council on
this important and most auspicious occasion. At the
outset, I wish to convey to the members of the Council
the profound gratitude of the people and Government
of the Republic of South Sudan for having just
recommended to the General Assembly that the
Republic of South Sudan be admitted as the newest
Member of the United Nations (see S/PV.6582).

I am particularly grateful to you, Mr. President,
and to the German Government, for having
championed this process and for presiding over that
historic vote. I would also like to recognize Germany's
efforts as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, and in particular its
advocacy with regard to the demobilization of child
soldiers, which we also fully support.

I also wish to thank the many Council members
that have already recognized the Republic of South
Sudan and to acknowledge the role of the United States
and the United Kingdom in having provided
stewardship for the Council's consideration of the
situation in the Sudan over a number of years.

By virtue of my President's letter to the
Secretary-General dated 9 July 2011 (S/2011/418, annex), the Republic of South Sudan has accepted the
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
and has undertaken to fulfil them. The Republic of
South Sudan will be a responsible member of the
international community and will respect its
obligations under international law. We are working to
accede as quickly as possible to all relevant
international conventions and treaties, not the least of
which to those related to human rights.
My Government remains completely committed
to the full and final implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), particularly
in respect of Abyei and borders. At this important
juncture, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our sincere thanks to all of those who
contributed to the negotiation and signing of the CPA,
including the United States, Kenya, Ethiopia, the
United Kingdom, Norway and many others, including,
of course, the United Nations itself.

The CPA implementation process has involved
many challenges and we are grateful to President
Thabo Mbeki, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios, among others, for their dedicated work in
support of the process. We also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his constant focus on the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

We express our appreciation to the members of
the Security Council for establishing the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
and to the Government of Ethiopia for committing
forces to this mission. We call for their rapid
deployment.

The Agreement on Temporary Arrangements
between the parties on Abyei needs to be implemented.
We also call on the Council to ensure that the political
and security road map for the two areas, which was
signed in Addis Ababa by the Republic of Sudan and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North, is
fully implemented.

We also thank the Council for adopting resolution
1990 (2011) mandating a new peace consolidation
mission in South Sudan. We look forward to working
closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Hilde Johnson, on the
modalities for the United Nations presence in our
country.

It is our deepest and most sincere wish to resolve
all outstanding matters between North and South
swiftly and peacefully. We remain committed to
working out our differences through dialogue and in a
spirit of cooperation, and we welcome the support of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel in
this regard. In particular, we must agree on
mechanisms for continued cooperation, the five
remaining disputed areas of the border, demarcation
1141279
and mutually beneficial management of the common
border, and the final status of Abyei. We will also
continue to work together with the Republic of the
Sudan to ensure that there is justice for the people of
Darfur and Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
There can be no stability in either the Sudan or South
Sudan without a new political dispensation in the two
areas and Darfur, as well as the full implementation of
the Abyei Protocol.

Our fundamental hope and desire is to see
peaceful coexistence between the two neighbouring
States of the Sudan and South Sudan. We will strive to
build a future in which our two countries can work
cooperatively, live in peace with one another and be
mutually supportive.

At home, we must first and foremost fulfil our
responsibility to provide security and extend the rule of
law, and we welcome the support of the new United
Nations Mission in this regard. We have made a solemn
commitment to democracy, pluralism, inclusiveness,
the rule of law, and freedom of thought, belief and
expression. We will embrace tolerance and unity. Our
new permanent constitution will fulfil the aspirations
of all of our people.

We now dedicate ourselves completely to the task
of building our nation. We thank the members of the
Security Council for their continued focus on and
interest in our country, their concern for our citizens
and their dedication to peace and security in our
region. We look forward to continuing to work closely
with all of the members of the Council in the years to
come.

