Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
wish to thank the President for convening today's
meeting. We are also grateful to the Presidents and
the Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their useful
briefings and comprehensive assessments pursuant to
resolution 1534 (2004). I would also like to take this
opportunity to commend the work of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals under the
leadership of Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala.

Today's briefings have noted the developments that
have taken place during the last six months, and we
acknowledge the progress made in the implementation
by both Tribunals of their respective mandates.

We commend the efforts undertaken by the Tribunals
to complete the outstanding proceedings within the
established timeframes, while fully respecting and
safeguarding due process. We welcome the launch of
the Arusha branch of the Residual Mechanism of the
International Criminal Tribunals as an important step
towards completing the work of the Tribunals and
ending impunity.

We note the progress made in the transition of
the Tribunals' functions to the Residual Mechanism.
The ICTR appears to be on track, with the projected
completion of its work on the trial level by the end of
this year, and it has already completed the trials of
almost all the remaining accused, with one remaining
judgement to be delivered late this month.

The ICTY has also advanced on its path to transition
and has to date transferred one Tribunal function to the
Mechanism and concluded proceedings against 128 out
of 161 indicted individuals. As the report notes, the
ICTY anticipates concluding all trials in 2013, with the
exception of three individuals whose arrest occurred
later.

We also note the referral of cases and the transfer of
accused persons by the Tribunals to national authorities
in the context of the Tribunals' efforts to ensure a
smooth transition to the Residual Mechanism. Such
measures not only reduce the overall workload of the
Tribunals, but also strengthen the capacities of national
judicial systems and reinforce the rule of law at the
national level.

The cooperation of States remains a critical pillar
of the work of the Tribunals and constitutes an essential
component of appropriate regional ownership. It is
therefore important that States remain committed to
meeting their relevant obligations towards the Tribunals
and that they continue to cooperate with them and to
contribute to safeguarding and further developing their
legacy.
The activity and jurisprudence of the Tribunals
have helped to develop international law, in particular
the law on war crimes and crimes against humanity, and
have contributed to advancing the rule of law and the
restoration of peace. Having said that, we wish to note
several concerns in regard to recent decisions of the
ICTY Appeals Chamber. Without commenting on the
specifics of those decisions, it is nonetheless essential
to recall the importance above all of the human rights
doctrine, which is based on the need to respect human
dignity and consequently to punish all those who
seriously attack that dignity. Indeed, the establishment
of the true and gross violations of human rights and
of international humanitarian law, the provision of
adequate and effective reparations to the victims, and
institutional action to prevent the repetition of criminal
offences are all necessary adjuncts to the true resolution
of conflicts and imperative in regard to the effective
and politically uncompromising system of international
criminal justice.

We are confident that the rule of law will continue
to be the guiding principle of the Tribunals.

