Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
today's meeting, and Ms. Sellassie for her briefing.

The situation in the Sahel region is a source of
concern and requires greater input and integrated
approaches by the international community. China
wishes to highlight the following four points.

First, the international community should start by
tackling hot-spot issues in the Sahel region by actively
supporting the efforts of the countries of the region to
undertake political processes aimed at achieving steady
progress towards peace, stability and development in the
region. It is necessary to actively support the relevant
parties in Mali in their efforts to comprehensively
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
signed last June and to promote steady progress in the
peace process in Mali. Close attention must be paid
to the spillover effect of the crisis in Libya and other
hot-spot issues outside the region by promoting the
resolution of relevant issues and reducing the impact of
complex external factors on the region.

Secondly, the relevant counter-terrorism bodies
within the United Nations system should provide greater
input with respect to the Sahel region and promote the
counter-terrorism efforts of the countries of the region.
The international community should actively support
the countries of the region in their efforts to speed up
capacity-building in the area of security and support
the counter-terrorism efforts of the countries of the
region. Such efforts must adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and other
fundamental norms governing international relations.
There should be no double standards, nor should they
link terrorism to any specific religion or ethnicity.

Thirdly, we hope that countries in the Sahel region
will take the opportunity of the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to formulate
a development agenda and strategy tailored to their
national conditions. The international community
and international financial institutions should provide
greater assistance for development and actively help
the countries in the region to improve their indigenous
capacity for development. The relevant agencies of
the United Nations should carry out in-depth studies
of the actual needs of the countries in the region,
formulate a clear and achievable list of projects as well
as measures and a timetable for implementation, and
promote tailored input from international donors in the
provision of assistance and cooperation, so as to speed
up socioeconomic development in the region.

Fourthly, the United Nations should further
strengthen its communication and coordination with
the five countries in the region, the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
other countries and organizations in Africa, with a
view to linking the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel with national and regional strategies so
as to leverage their respective advantages, strengthen
resource consolidation and create synergy in their joint
efforts to resolve the issues facing the Sahel.

In 2013, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the Presidents of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank madejoint visits to the Sahel region
and achieved positive results, thus initiating a new
model ofjoint efforts by the international community
aimed at resolving regional issues. The relevant parties
should consider visiting the region again so as to assess
the status of implementation of the outcomes reached
during recent visits and make new commitments for
assistance.

The Chinese Government attaches great importance
to relations between China and Africa, as reflected in
its provision of bilateral assistance and its participation
in peacekeeping operations. China has been making
unremitting efforts to promote peace, stability and
development in Africa. Next month, the second summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, under the
theme "Africa-China Progressing Together: Win-Win
Cooperation for Common Development", will be held
for the first time in Africa. Leaders from China and
African countries will gather in Johannesburg to draw
up a joint plan for the development of China-Africa
relations and cooperation over the coming three years.
China will take advantage of this opportunity to make
greater efforts to strengthen its cooperation with African
countries in the five priority areas of industrialization,
agricultural modernization, public health, people-to-
people exchanges, and peace and security, with a view
to bringing about tangible benefits to African countries,
including the countries of the region, as well as to carry
out win-win cooperation for common development.

