Mr. Djedje (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ambassador Ismail Wais, Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) Special Envoy for South
Sudan; and Ms. Nasiwa, for their respective briefings
on the situation in South Sudan. We also thank you,
Madam President, in your capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan, for your briefing on
the Committee's activities within the framework of the
implementation of the sanctions regime involving that
country. Those briefings apprise us of the continued
threats that are hindering the process of exiting the
crisis in South Sudan. My statement will focus on the
following issues: the political process, the security
situation, the humanitarian situation and the human
rights situation in South Sudan.

Concerning the political process, my delegation
regrets the lack of genuine commitment by the parties
to the conflict to search for a viable solution to the
crisis in South Sudan, despite repeated calls from
the international community and initiatives taken
by IGAD, which Cote d'Ivoire commends for its
tireless work. My delegation welcomes the diplomatic
efforts of Ambassador Wais, as well as those of the
representatives of the IGAD Council of Ministers,
aimed at holding consultations with the parties to the
conflict so as to overcome their differences and thereby
facilitate discussions during the resumption of the
High-level Revitalization Forum on the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. C6te d'Ivoire hopes that those consultations will
enable actors to reconcile their differences concerning
the governance and security issues that came up during
the second phase of the Revitalization Forum, held in
Addis Ababa from 5 to 16 February. My country urges
the parties to demonstrate political will and become
meaningfully involved in finding a political solution
so as reach sustainable agreements on sharing power
among members of the Transitional Government of

National Unity and on security issues at the third phase
of the Revitalization Forum, to be held from 17 to
21 May 2018 - in less than 10 days - in Addis Ababa.
The people of South Sudan have suffered for too long
and deserve peace and stability at long last. It is time
for the parties to the conflict to give the peace process
a meaningful chance.

Concerning the security situation, it is clear that,
almost five years since the conflict in South Sudan
began, the security situation remains worrisome.
Despite the fact that the parties to the conflict signed
the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians and Humanitarian Access on 21 December
2017 and their renewed commitment to respect it during
the second phase of the Revitalization Forum on the
peace process in February, the protection of civilians
and humanitarian access are significant challenges
that need to be addressed. My delegation is concerned
about continuing clashes and reports of high levels of
violence in Unity, Jonglei and Equatoria states. It is also
concerned about the magnitude of the ethnic dimension
of the conflict. My country therefore calls on the
warring parties to cease hostilities and to respect the
commitments made during the first two phases of the
High-level Revitalization Forum on the peace process.

Concerning the humanitarian dimension, Cote
d'Ivoire is concerned about the escalation of violence
and clashes in certain areas, which has led to the
displacement of thousands of people and hindered
humanitarian work. With more than 4 million displaced
persons and refugees and more than 7 million people
at risk of food insecurity, the humanitarian situation
in South Sudan is one of the most dire of its kind in
the world. Given that, it is urgent that the international
community and humanitarian organizations be
allowed to respond to humanitarian needs and provide
assistance to those populations in urgent need within a
secure environment. My delegation reiterates its appeal
to the various parties to respect unconditionally the
agreement of 21 December 2017, which demands, inter
alia, unhindered access for humanitarian workers. In
that regard, my country firmly condemns the detention
of humanitarian workers, as well as any other act aimed
at preventing the delivery of humanitarian aid.

With regard to the human rights situation, Cote
d'Ivoire is concerned about allegations of continued
human rights violations and the destruction of
property and the livelihoods of the people. My country
encourages the South Sudan Transitional Government
of National Unity and the African Union Commission to
step up the establishment of the Hybrid Court of South
Sudan, responsible for prosecuting those responsible
for crimes under the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Cote
d'Ivoire continues to believe that the establishment and
operationalization of the Hybrid Court will contribute
to bringing about peace and decreasing human rights
violations. We welcome the release by armed groups of
more than 200 children on 17 April. While we remind
all those involved in the South Sudan conflict that
the recruitment or use of children in armed conflicts
is prohibited, my country urges them to do more to
protect children and to speed up the release of those
who remain in their charge.

My country congratulates you, Madam, for the
work that you have done in your capacity as Chair of
the 2206 Committee and reaffirms its support for your
forthcoming visit to South Sudan and other countries
in the region.

In conclusion, my country calls on Members of
the United Nations, in particular the countries of the
region, to ensure strict compliance with the sanctions
imposed on South Sudan. That would contribute to
bringing stability to a country devastated by conflict
that has gone on too long.

