Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its gratitude to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs; Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom of the Netherlands, as Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015); and
Mr. J 0510 Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, on behalf of the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, as Coordinator of the Joint
Commission, for their comprehensive briefings.

Almost three years ago (see S/PV.7488), the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2231
(2015), which endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), thereby marking a fundamental
change in its consideration of Iranian nuclear issues
and building a bridge to foster trust in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian programme. The
Government of Equatorial Guinea shares the positive
view of the Secretary-General on this agreement in
his report (S/2018/602). We also applaud the efforts of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
monitoring the agreement, as it has made apparent that
the successes and the work of the last 20 years have
been worth it.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has shown its
total commitment, pursuant to the JCPOA, to
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
My Government welcomes that achievement, as
characterized by the IAEA. Like the Secretary-General
in his report on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), we encourage the authorities of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to conduct an in-depth review of the
concerns of the Commission and other States with
regard to the use of ballistic missiles. Even though that
issue is not covered in the Plan, it affects the overall
perception of the Plan, which is key to the effective and
efficient implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

On 8 May, President Donald Trump announced the

withdrawal of the United States from the Plan and the
reimposition of all sanctions that his country had lifted
on Iran. Although that decision is a regrettable setback
to significant progress in the implementation of the
Plan, the Government of Equatorial Guinea urges all
parties to continue carrying out their responsibilities
and obligations, thereby preserving an agreement that
has contributed to regional and international peace
and security.

Iranian authorities must abstain from any activity
that could undermine the full implementation of the
resolution 2231 (2015). We encourage all parties to
the Plan to continue honouring it. Any discrepancy
with regard to the implementation of the Plan must be
resolved through negotiations.

Finally, we wish to stress once again our
understanding that the agreement ensures the peaceful
uses of the Iranian nuclear programme and helps
consolidate the nuclear non-proliferation regime in
the region.

