Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the representatives of the
Secretariat, first and foremost Assistant Secretary-
General Menkerios, for having presented the Secretary-
General's report on Somalia (S/2008/709). We also
listened carefully to the statements made by the
Secretary-General of the International Maritime

08-6107]

Organization and the representatives of the African
Union and Somalia. We are grateful for their
assessments and considerations.

Recently, the Security Council has devoted
increasing attention to the situation in Somalia. A set of
resolutions and presidential statements has been
adopted in support of the political settlement in the
country and the fight against piracy. Today we adopted
a new, important resolution on a mechanism of targeted
sanctions against those who obstruct the peace process
and continue to supply arms to Somalia in violation of
the arms embargo. We expect the resolution to be
effectively implemented and to promote the
stabilization of the situation in and around Somalia.

In Moscow, we welcomed the signing of the
Djibouti agreement between the Transitional Federal
Government and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of
Somalia. We call upon both sides to comply with the
agreements achieved. We encourage those
representatives of parties who did not join the
agreement to do so as quickly as possible. We also
welcome the signing by the Somali sides, on
26 October 2008 in Djibouti, of an agreement on the
cessation of armed confrontation, which provides for a
ceasefire regime. We expect all participants in the
conflict to cooperate constructively to fully honour
their obligations, promote the process of strengthening
society, and restore state authority and lasting peace in
Somalia.

The main responsibility for overcoming the
protracted crisis lies first and foremost with Somalis
themselves. There is a need to enhance the
effectiveness of the work of State organs of power to
resolve the complex issues facing Somalia. The
Russian Federation supports the efforts undertaken by
the Transitional Federal Government aimed at restoring
the rule of law, achieving national reconciliation and
ensuring State sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of the country.

The current realities are such, however, that
despite these efforts and the often selfless activities of
the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM), the
situation remains especially complex. We are
especially concerned by the continuing deterioration of
the security situation in Somalia and the increasing
danger that the conflict will spread throughout the
region. Any escalation in tensions clearly risks
destabilizing a very complex situation in the Horn of
Africa. We note increased cases of violations of the
arms embargo in Somalia, which fans the flames of
conflict in Somalia. We call upon all States to halt any
supply of arms to Somalia. Neighbouring countries can
and must play a constructive role in settling the crisis.

Unfortunately, we are forced to note an increase
in the numbers of attacks against the staff of
humanitarian organizations and United Nations staff
working in Somalia and an increase in the number of
casualties among the peaceful population. Of special
concern is the increased number of children killed or
injured as a result of the use of force.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
about the difficult humanitarian situation in Somalia.
This year, the Government of the Russian Federation
provided $1 million as a contribution to the trust fund
of the World Food Programme to provide food supplies
to the population of Somalia. We have also provided
humanitarian assistance.

The Russian Federation is especially concerned
about the growing number of acts of piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia. In their criminal
activities, pirates are using increasingly sophisticated
methods and means and their ambition is growing. The
Russian naval fleet is participating actively in
international efforts to combat piracy in the region,
pursuant to resolution 1816 (2008). The Russian
minesweeper Nyeustrashimy is currently patrolling off
the coast of Somalia in cooperation with the military
vessels of other Governments cooperating with the
Transitional Federal Government. The Russian
Federation will continue to take additional measures in
this field.

We are convinced that, if the anti-piracy measures
approved by the Security Council are to be effectively
implemented, there is a need for agreed and well-
coordinated action between States. Heightened
attention must also be paid to issues related to the
detention of individuals who participate in piracy and
armed robbery on the high seas and to determine the
jurisdiction for those individuals.
I must agree with the opinion voiced here today
that the use of force alone, no matter how effective,
will not resolve the problem of piracy. I share the view
that was voiced that the successful long-term socio-
economic rehabilitation and political stabilization of
Somalia are the key factors that will determine the
effective resolution of the problems of piracy.

Undoubtedly, the use of force will be required and it
will have to be used in accordance with the relevant
decisions of the Security Council.

We continue to support the activities of AMISOM
in Somalia. The full-fledged deployment of the
Mission will, of course, promote the creation of
conditions for the effective promotion of the process of
national reconciliation. At the same time, we maintain
our belief that the prospect of the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia
continues to depend directly on the dedication of the
Somalis themselves to peace and on there being
significant improvement in the security situation and
serious progress in political reconciliation. Thus far,
unfortunately, no such conditions have been
established yet in Somalia. We recognize the efforts
there, first and foremost, the efforts of Somalis
themselves, but, I repeat, thus far, the necessary
conditions are absent.

We share the view that a full-fledged
implementation of the Djibouti agreement will become
an important step in creating such conditions. Quite
clearly, there is a need to continue relevant preparatory
work within the framework of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, the absence of any marked improvement
in the security situation thus far casts doubt on the
possible success of an operation involving a
multinational force. We are carefully following
discussions regarding this problem. However, in our
view, achieving tangible progress regarding the
Djibouti agreement could be an important factor that
could prompt potential troop-contributing countries
and suppliers of materiel to provide such resources for
a multinational force.

So, the key factor today remains the need to
achieve progress in the political field. We believe that
all Somali players should make the requisite efforts to
this end.

