Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to sincerely thank Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Taye-Brook
Zerihoun, Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
and Mr. Mauro Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their valuable briefings.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General for Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Jose' Vegas Filho, on
assuming his new position. We wish him success in
that role and assure him of our full support. I should
also like to thank the outgoing Special Representative,
Mr. Modibo Toure, for his achievements. We wish him
every success in his future endeavours.

A year and a half has passed since the signing of
the Conakry Agreement, and we are pleased to see
practical, positive steps being taken by all parties
towards establishing an environment conducive to
the implementation of the remaining provisions of the
Agreement. In that regard, we welcome the decision
by President Jose Mario Vaz to select a consensus
Prime Minister, form an inclusive Government and
set November as the date for legislative elections. We
urge all the parties concerned to continue with that
constructive approach and pursue implementation of
the outstanding provisions of the Agreement.

With regard to the parliamentary elections, we urge
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau to provide the necessary support for
holding the elections pursuant to its mandate under
resolution 2404 (2018), ensure that all sectors of
society participate in the election process and monitor
the situation closely to prevent any incidents that could
undermine the process. We welcome the continued
efforts by the Peacebuilding Commission to mobilize
funding in support of the election process, which now
amounts to $7.7 million.
It would be remiss of me not to commend the efforts
of regional and international organizations working in
Guinea-Bissau to facilitate the implementation of the
Agreement. The Economic Community ofWest African
States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the United
Nations, the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries have made great
efforts with all stakeholders to implement a number of
the provisions in the Agreement, especially in the light
of regional conflict-resolution initiatives.

We welcome the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission to support the roles of women and civil
society. We also commend UNODC's role in fighting
drug-trafficking and organized crime.

The recent positive developments in Guinea-Bissau
have been made possible by the work done by regional
organizations to enhance progress on the ground. That
requires the Security Council's support. We call on
ECOWAS to continue its efforts in this area. We are
now looking forward to seeing the national conference
on constitutional reform provided for in the Conakry
Agreement held at the end of the year.

