Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased in many ways at seeing you, Sir,
presiding over the Security Council for this month of
December. I would like to assure you of the full
cooperation of my delegation. I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Patricia Durrant, for the outstanding work
accomplished during her presidency last month.

The delegation of Guinea is grateful to you,
Mr. President, for having put the situation in West
Africa on the Council's agenda today. We believe that
consideration of this issue is very timely, since that part
of Africa, long considered an area of peace and social
harmony, has become the arena for a cycle of conflict
that has affected the entire subregion. From Liberia,
through Guinea-Bissau to Sierra Leone - to mention
just the most serious crises - West Africa has, for
more than 10 years, been prey to the consequences of
many conflicts. Other conflict situations, latent or
known, persist that are also a cause for concern.

These conflicts have severely tested subregional
equilibrium, resulted in the loss of thousands of lives,
led to major destruction of infrastructure and forced
hundreds of thousands of people into exile. They have
slowed the pace of socio-economic integration, which
the States of the subregion had embarked upon under
the auspices of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).

We no longer have to demonstrate that these
conflicts are subregional in scope. It now appears that
only a comprehensive approach can preserve peace,
security and harmony in West Africa. That is why my
country welcomed with great interest the Secretary-
General's initiative to send an inter-agency mission to
the subregion. The mission was led by Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, whose presence here today I would like to
welcome. The mission submitted a series of very
relevant recommendations for the preservation of peace
and security in West Africa. These have enabled us to
identify the subregion's real needs for lasting peace.
We would like to support the recommendations in the
Fall report, particularly those relating to readjustment
of the various mechanisms for drawing up the different
strategies and policies of the United Nations system
and to creation of a mechanism for systematic and
regular consultations between the various agencies in
the United Nations system.

We support the idea of effectively taking into
account national and subregional problems in
programming strategies as this will facilitate the
preparation of comprehensive programmes. The
preparation of coherent strategies requires greater
cooperation between, on the one hand, Governments
and entities within the United Nations system and, on
the other, the United Nations system, ECOWAS and
other subregional organizations.

In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
imminent opening of the United Nations Office for
West Africa. This new partnership will certainly
provide another United Nations point of support, which
can strengthen the Organization's cooperation with
ECOWAS and the main actors working to resolve
conflict and establish good governance in the
subregion.

We believe that the elaboration of a
comprehensive United Nations framework plan to help
in developing the region, including a strategic plan of
action for peace-building and recovery in our countries,
is an absolute necessity. An emergency plan could be
implemented to provide massive aid for reconstructing
countries devastated by war and those that have
suffered particularly from the consequences of conflict.

My delegation would like to stress the leading
role of ECOWAS in preventing and resolving conflict
in the subregion. In Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-
Bissau, ECOWAS and its intervention force, the
Monitoring Group, have certainly made a considerable
contribution to resolving crises. Today, the Mano River
area is a source of serious concern to us.

Significant progress has been made over the past
few months, however. As a result of a civil society
initiative, a constructive dialogue has begun among the
leaders of the three countries. The forthcoming meeting
between the heads of State of Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea will, we hope, enable the following objectives
to be attained: first, the restoration of trust among the
three Governments; secondly, the neutralization of
rebel groups operating in the subregion; and, thirdly,
the re-launching of the activities of the Mano River
Union.

However, to back up the encouraging results in
the Mano River area, my delegation would like the
Council to continue to monitor the situation carefully.
In this context, the Council should give special
attention to the recommendations contained in the
report of the Panel of Experts on Liberia, in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 1343 (2001).

Furthermore, my country is following very
closely the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme in Sierra
Leone. While welcoming the encouraging progress
made in this area, my delegation would like to
encourage the international community to provide full
support for this process. Peace-building does, indeed,
depend on that.

As you are aware, Mr. President, the absence of a
genuine policy of national reconciliation and the failure
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme in Liberia, with the consequent
proliferation and uncontrolled circulation of weapons,
have resulted in new fighting, including in Sierra
Leone and, recently, along the border of the countries
of the Mano River Union. Finally, my country
encourages the involvement of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone in organizing the forthcoming
elections there with a view to enabling that country to
finally re-establish lasting peace.

In conclusion, my delegation would like once
against to reiterate the willingness of the Government
of Guinea to provide full support for the various
initiatives aimed at transforming West Africa into a
zone of peace, security and cooperation.

