Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.

The fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (S/2017/467)
covers many important aspects related to international
counter-terrorism efforts. It includes specific
proposals, but also reflects the existence of a number
of gaps that should be focused on in future. We call on
the Secretariat and the members of the Council to pay
attention to them.

Allow me to summarize these gaps through a
number of queries and observations.

First, paragraph 5 of the report notes that the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters from many regions to Iraq
and Syria has slowed and that the return and relocation
of foreign terrorist fighters from conflict zones to
other regions poses a threat to international security.
We would like to have greater elaboration and more
detail on these two points, in particular, how do foreign
terrorist fighters still manage to reach Syria and Iraq?
Which routes do they follow to get there, and how
do they go from Syria and Iraq to other countries or
regions? These are questions that should be answered.

Secondly, in the context of the problem of foreign
terrorist fighters, paragraph 48 mentions that transit
States are facing a challenge as they cannot detain,
prosecute or extradite suspected foreign terrorist
fighters on their territory in the absence of sufficient
legal grounds and admissible evidence, and that there is
therefore a risk that foreign terrorist fighters stopped in
transit States will remain free to travel to other places.

The question here is, how can the Security Council
address these security and legal gaps in its counter-
terrorism efforts? We look forward to receiving
specific proposals from the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat as soon as possible.

Thirdly, paragraph 6 of the report refers to the use
by ISIL of the Internet and social media for terrorist
purposes. There is also a general recommendation
in paragraph 61 on the importance of effectively
monitoring the exploitation by terrorists of information
and communications technologies. In this respect, there
should be specific recommendations to stem the flow of
terrorists and stop the capacity of terrorists to recruit.

Fourthly, the report also indicates that although
ISIL's financial situation has steadily declined over
the past 16 months, it continues to rely on the same
two revenue streams, in particular hydrocarbons and
taxation. IfISIL is continuing to trade in hydrocarbons,
who is consuming this oil? What are the means of
moving oil from Syria and Iraq to the consumer or the
buyer? We would also like information on the nature of
financial transactions related to these activities.

Fifthly, pursuant to Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2161 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253
(2015), all Member States have an obligation to prevent
terrorists from benefiting, directly or indirectly, from
ransom payments or from political concessions. In that
vein, it is everywhere in the news that Qatar paid up
to $1 billion dollars to a terrorist group active in Iraq
in order to obtain the release of members of its royal
family who had been kidnapped and detained in Iraq by
that group while they were on a hunting trip. If proved
to be correct, that alleged violation of Security Council
resolutions will definitely have a negative bearing on
counter-terrorism efforts on the ground. It represents
clear support for terrorists. We therefore would like to
know the Secretariat's view on the matter, namely, a
Da'esh-linked group gaining access to such a sum of
money at a time when efforts are being undertaken to
liberate Mosul. We also want to know how the Security
Council will respond to such flagrant violations of
its resolutions. We propose that the Council launch a
comprehensive investigation into the incident and other
similar incidents. We look forward to incorporating the
results of such investigations into the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on the efforts to counter Da'esh.

Finally, my delegation wishes to see greater
accuracy in the use of terms and concepts that have
been heard recently at the United Nations. One term
that has not appeared in our documents is "Islamic
extremism". We hope that everyone realizes that there is
no such thing as Islamic extremism. Islam is a religion
that does not know extremism. There are individuals
who use religion - the religion of Islam, or any other
religion - as a cover for the terrorist ideology they
wish to espouse. We therefore believe that the Council
has taken a very important step in countering such
ideology through the adoption of resolution 2354 (2017)
and the Comprehensive International Framework to
Counter Terrorist Narratives.

