Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Madam President, we thank
you for having convened this meeting and express our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing.

May I also join my colleagues in expressing our
deep sorrow and condolences to you, Madam, and to
the Government and the people of the United States on
the loss of life resulting from Hurricane Florence. Our
condolences also go to China and the Philippines, and
our prayers and thoughts are with the families that lost
loved ones.

I also wish to welcome our colleagues from Japan
and the Republic of Korea.

I understand that the Council had the opportunity
to discuss the issue of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea last month. We all have been observing the
developments following the recent summit meetings,
whose outcome had given us some sense of hope for
progress towards the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula and the advancement of peace in North-
East Asia.

There may indeed be challenges in the area of
implementation, and we understand that this will not be
an easy task. We hope that all the relevant parties will
maintain the momentum generated recently with a view
to finding a comprehensive and peaceful diplomatic
and political solution to the issue of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea that is in line with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

The Council must continue to support such
endeavours. In this regard, the talks on a follow-up
summit between the leaders of the United States and
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as well as
plans for the holding of a third inter-Korean summit,
are encouraging.

In the meantime, the implementation of the
sanctions regime remains critical. We have noted from
the recent mid-term report of the Panel of Experts that
there have been implementation gaps in relation to the
sanctions imposed by the Council. In this regard, the
work of the Panel of Experts of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) continues to contribute significantly to the full
implementation of the Council's resolutions. This calls
for continued cooperation on the part of Member States
and for support for the work of the Panel of Experts.

Finally, preserving the unity of the Council in
addressing the issue of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea remains of vital importance. We
should continue to encourage dialogue and the quest
for a comprehensive diplomatic solution, with the
ultimate objective of achieving the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula.

