We thank the speakers for their briefings and commend the performance of their respective duties. We thank the Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) for the excellent work achieved by him and his predecessor during their two-year tenure. We also express our appreciation for the professionalism, dedication and support of their teams. At the outset, we underscore the importance of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) as a major achievement of multilateralism and the international nuclear non-proliferation architecture. In our view, it is the only option for guaranteeing the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme through a rigorous system of monitoring and verification by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) under the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol thereto. The JCPOA is therefore an integral component of regional and international security. In that regard, we commend the impartial and objective verification work the IAEA continues to carry out, guaranteeing the exclusively peaceful uses of nuclear energy, despite the restrictions imposed by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Regarding the information reflected in the tenth report of the Secretary General (S/2020/1177), we regret that, since mid-2019, Iran has pursued a policy of reducing its nuclear commitments, including by exceeding the uranium-enrichment and -storage levels established in the JCPOA. We therefore reiterate our call on Iran to resume full compliance with its commitments under the JCPOA as well as with resolution 2231 (2015). We also urge the parties to resolve existing differences under the auspices of the dispute settlement mechanism, especially in the light of the significant challenges currently facing the JCPOA. In that regard, we welcome the efforts by Germany, the United Kingdom and France to resolve relevant issues through the mechanism. We also encourage Member States to support and continue making use of the procurement channel as a crucial mechanism for building trust and transparency. Preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons has been the central objective of the Plan, and that has to date been achieved, among other significant outcomes. However, Iran's decreasing compliance with its nuclear commitments is a matter that demands particular attention, representing a serious threat in terms of nuclear proliferation. A viable solution to this matter must be sought through dialogue without delay. The international community must make greater efforts to ensure not only the validity of the Plan but also its full and effective implementation. To that end, we commend the commitment of the participants to safeguarding the Plan and upholding full compliance with the agreed obligations. At the same time, we urge Iran to take into account the concerns expressed by a number of States in the region regarding non-compliance with the provisions on conventional weapons, as well as its alleged participation in destabilizing activities. The concerns of those States must not fall on deaf ears. It is therefore imperative that Iran refrain from any action inconsistent with the established provisions, as well as from engaging in hostile activities that exacerbate existing tensions in the region. In conclusion, upholding the JCPOA requires the parties to show restraint, foster dialogue with a view to reducing tensions, universally implement their obligations and, in turn, guarantee Iran's reintegration into the commercial and banking world as agreed. Preventing nuclear proliferation is not the sole responsibility of the participants in the Plan, but of us all; which means we must work together and strengthen cooperation to that end. As this is the last meeting of the year and of our membership in the Security Council, we wish to take this opportunity to extend a few sincere words of gratitude to the members of the Council for the support and cooperation they extended to me and to the Dominican delegation during the two years of our first term as a member of this important body of multilateralism. At the same time, we thank all the Secretariat staff for their hard work, assistance and availability. We also warmly welcome the newly elected members and wish them every success in the important and arduous task on which they are embarking. We underscore that the Dominican Republic will continue its steadfast support for the international peace and security agenda from the General Assembly.
