Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): Iwouldlike
to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
for his detailed briefing. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement.

Resolution 2210 (2015), which renews the UNAMA
mandate and which we have just adopted unanimously,
marks a new stage of empowerment, accountability and
leadership in Afghanistan under the Afghan authorities.

We welcome the improvements in the political
situation in Afghanistan through the formation of the
national unity Government following the framework
agreement between the two leading presidential
candidates. We therefore note with satisfaction the
reforms undertaken by the new authorities, including
the national reconciliation process aimed at achieving
a lasting resolution of the conflict by the Afghans
themselves. We also welcome the efforts agreed to by
the international community, UNAMA and Afghan
stakeholders during this crucial phase in Afghanistan's
history.

On the security front, we welcome the end of
the transition process, on 31 December 2014, which
affected the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) and the Afghan forces and allowed the latter
to shoulder full responsibility for national security and
enabled the beginning of the new, non-combat NATO
support mission, in accordance with resolution 2189
(2014). We pay tribute to ISAF for the role it played
and the enormous sacrifices it made. We honour the
memory of those who gave their lives and call on the
Afghan Government and its partners to enhance their
vigilance so as to avoid, after the departure of ISAF,
a situation such as that in Iraq, in particular given the
allegiance of certain groups to the Islamic State and the
presence of foreign fighters on Afghan soil.

We deplore the climate of uncertainty brought about
by the political impasse, which has encouraged elements
that are hostile to the Government to seek to undermine
the population's confidence in the Government
throughout the country. We also deplore the astonishing
number of victims of that violence over the past year.
Chad condemns the attacks against administrative and
district centres, security force checkpoints and major
roadways and calls on the Afghan Government and
its partners to enhance their efforts to eradicate the
growing insecurity, in particular in the south, south-
east and east of the country. Chad welcomes the political
and diplomatic efforts at the regional and international

levels, in particular on the part of China, to consolidate
peace and security in Afghanistan, and we encourage
its supporters to continue on that path.

We condemn all the violence and terrorist acts
perpetrated by the armed groups and call on them to
quickly join the national reconciliation process initiated
by the Government for the well-being of the Afghan
people, who aspire only to peace, which is a sine qua
non for the country's development.

In terms of the fight against drugs and drug
trafficking, Chad welcomes the most recent figures
showing a decrease in drug trafficking, which has taken
an incalculable toll on global security. We encourage
the new Afghan authorities to continue to work towards
its complete eradication. Therefore, we reiterate our
encouragement to Afghanistan's neighbouring States
and the international community to intensify their
cross-border cooperation and fight against drugs and
illicit trafficking.

We remain concerned about the deterioration in the
humanitarian situation, in particular that of internally
displaced persons, resulting from natural disasters and
urge the international community to come to their aid.
We also reiterate the Secretary-General's call for an
increase in humanitarian assistance and welcome the
fact that significant numbers of refugees are returning
to Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we hope that the positive steps taken
by the new Afghan authorities at the political and
diplomatic levels will be successful. We send a warning
to all armed groups that attack humanitarian personnel
in order to prevent them from delivering aid to people in
need. Finally, we reiterate our encouragement to all the
personnel of the United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies who, despite the difficult conditions in which
they work in Afghanistan, continue to do their best to
come to the aid of the Afghan people.

