Mr. Ould Hamady (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank the President and the members of
the Security Council for having convened today's
meeting between the African Union (AU) Ad Hoc
High-Level Committee on Libya and the Council. This
meeting marks yet another milestone in the new
partnership that focuses on the action we all are
engaged in, in the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which is aimed at strengthening
the capacity of the AU and the United Nations to better
respond, with the necessary efficiency and flexibility,
to challenges related to peace and security in Africa.
My colleagues, the members of the African Union
ministerial delegation and I are pleased to engage in
this interaction with the Council, which we deem
appropriate and timely.

As the Council is aware, this meeting is being
held in response to the request contained in the
decision on the peaceful resolution of the Libyan crisis
adopted by the extraordinary session of the Assembly
of AU Heads of State and Government, held in Addis
Ababa on 25 May. This represents a unique opportunity
for our Committee to brief the Security Council on the
actions that AU has been taking since the beginning of
the Libyan crisis, to share with the Council our fears
2

and concerns, and to agree upon ways and means of
speeding up the quest for lasting peace in Libya. This
meeting is an integral part of the implementation of the
mandate of the Ad Hoc High-Level Committee, which
is to coordinate efforts and to call for the support of
various partners with a View to rapidly resolving the
cr1s1s.

This meeting is being held at a critical juncture in
the situation in Libya. The conflict that has been
tearing that country apart since February 2011 is now
moving into its fourth month, while the military
operation led by the coalition and then by NATO, in
the context of resolution 1973 (2011), has been
operational for about three months and has now been
renewed for a further similar period.

The humanitarian situation on the ground is of
great concern, as was rightly stressed by Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, speaking
before the Council on 9 May (see S/PV.6530), and later
in Geneva on 19 May. As we gather here today to
discuss the situation in Libya, we are in duty bound to
keep in mind not only the indescribable suffering
inflicted upon the Libyan civilian population, for
whose protection resolution 1973 (2011) was adopted,
as well as the fate of the African migrant workers and
others desperately seeking to escape from Libya, of
whom hundreds, if not thousands, have already died at
sea.

The prolongation of military operations in Libya
daily gives rise to fresh challenges, as much with
respect to the likelihood of a successful democratic
transition in Libya as to the security and stability of the
countries in the region. The situation requires the
attention of the United Nations and the AU, in line with
their primary mandates - the promotion of peace,
security and stability. It also underscores once again
the moral and political imperative to urgently seek a
solution aimed at relieving the suffering of the civilian
population, creating conditions conducive to the return
of sustainable peace in Libya, and sparing the region
new tribulations that could plunge it back into
instability, with all the resultant consequences.

The African Union is particularly concerned by
the current turn of events. Our concern is all the greater
because the crisis in Libya is clearly taking on a
regional dimension, and because the countries
neighbouring Libya, in North Africa and in the Sahelo-
11-37191
Saharan strip, are bearing the brunt of the current
situation and would pay the highest price if the conflict
were to continue and intensify.

Tens of thousands of African migrant workers
have had to return to their countries of origin without
any real prospects of socio-economic reintegration,
given all the various difficulties facing our countries. It
is clear that the burden thus imposed on many of our
member States will bring about social tensions that
could degenerate into political crisis. Reliable
information relating to the proliferation of arms
originating from Libyan arms depots has only further
deepened our concern, especially since certain
countries in the region are currently facing latent or
emerging rebellions, coupled with the scourge of
terrorism.

We are convinced that, when all is said and done,
only a political solution can respond to the legitimate
aspirations of the Libyan people and promote lasting
peace in the country. That conviction has inspired the
approach we have taken since 10 March 2011, when
the Peace and Security Council, meeting at the level of
heads of State, outlined a road map for the resolution
of the Libyan conflict. Previously, following the
developments that occurred in Libya after the first
popular uprising, the Peace and Security Council had
firmly condemned the indiscriminate and excessive use
of force and weapons against peaceful demonstrators,
as it considered this to be a violation of human rights
and of international humanitarian law. It therefore
appealed to the Libyan authorities to ensure the
protection and security of their people, and
underscored the legitimacy of the Libyan people's
aspirations to democracy, political reform and justice.

Although the key elements of the AU road map
are well known to the Council, it is nonetheless useful
to recall them, as there may have been
misunderstandings, here and there, as to the objectives
pursued and the real intentions of our continental
organization. These elements are as follows: the
immediate cessation of all hostilities; the cooperation
of the relevant Libyan authorities in facilitating the
effective delivery of humanitarian aid to populations in
need; the protection of foreigners, including African
migrant workers living in Libya; and the adoption and
implementation of the political reforms necessary to
eliminate the causes of the current conflict.
11-37191

Clearly, nothing in the road map could be
legitimately interpreted as stemming from an
inclination to support any given party. Quite to the
contrary, it is a matter of giving Libyans an opportunity
to freely elect their leaders and to set up a political
system that meets their aspirations and is in line with
the relevant instruments of the African Union, in the
spirit of a beneficial endeavour at renewal and
consensual democratic transformation that is initiated
and led by all the Libyan sensitivities.

Since its establishment, the Ad Hoc High-Level
Committee has concentrated on facilitating the search
for a political solution. The efforts undertaken include
in particular the holding of several meetings, both at
the level of heads of State, members of the Committee
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
as well as that of Ministers and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security. There was also a visit to Libya on
10 and 11 April, during which the Committee met with
Colonel Al-Qadhafi and representatives of the
Transitional National Council (TNC) to discuss the
African Union road map and the ways and means to
rapidly end the crisis. That visit was followed by
several meetings with the Libyan parties, held in Addis
Ababa at the end of April and the end of May, to
pursue ongoing dialogue. Just before coming here this
morning, we held another meeting with the TNC. There
was also a ministerial meeting of the Peace and
Security Council on 25 and 26 April, as well as an
extraordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government on May 25.

Allow me to add that His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, Chair of the Ad Hoc
Committee, has been in constant touch with his
colleagues, as well as with Libyan parties and
international partners. In addition, with the agreement
of the Ad Hoc Committee, President Jacob Zuma of
South Africa visited Libya and discussed with Colonel
Al-Qadhafi ways and means to quickly bring the crisis
to an end.

On its part, the African Union Commission also
embarked on a certain number of initiatives within the
framework of the relevant decisions of the African
Union. Those included the convening, in Addis Ababa
on 31 March, of an experts meeting with the United
Nations, the League of Arab States, the European
Union and the Organization of Islamic Conference. The
meeting discussed the establishment of a ceasefire and
the request contained in paragraph 1 of resolution 1973
3
(2011), including modalities for oversight. Commission
representatives were also invited and participated in
three different meetings of the international contact
group on Libya. And the Commission continued a
constructive dialogue with international partners, both
bilateral and multilateral.

The African Union Ad Hoc High-Level
Committee seized the opportunity presented by the
extraordinary session in May to interact once again
with the Libyan parties. On that occasion, Government
representatives, having reaffirmed their unconditional
acceptance of the road map, presented in detail a
previously submitted document on the mechanisms and
means for the implementation of the road map. On
their part, the representatives of the TNC presented a
document entitled "General framework of negotiations
aiming to fulfil the legitimate demands of the Libyan
people aimed at establishing a democratic
constitutional order".

The holding of an extraordinary session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government a month
before the holding of the ordinary session in Malabo
demonstrates the seriousness of our concerns over
developments in the situation in Libya, as well as our
overriding desire to end the suffering being endured by
the Libyan people. The extraordinary session reiterated
the African Union's conviction about the need for a
political solution to the current conflict. To that end, it
adopted the road map towards a resolution of the crisis
in Libya and expressed its full support for the Ad Hoc
High-Level Committee. The session also once again
emphasized the need for an immediate end to all
attacks against, and abuses of, civilians, as well as for
an immediate ceasefire.

I would also like to underscore that a ceasefire
should lead to the establishment of a political process
and, in particular, a consensual and inclusive transition
during which the necessary reforms are carried out,
leading to democratic elections to enable Libyans to
freely elect their leaders.

While reiterating the commitment of the African
Union to resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), the
session stressed the obligation of all Member States of
the United Nations and other concerned international
actors to fully comply with the letter and spirit of those
resolutions. The Assembly expressed deep concern
about the dangerous precedent being set by one-sided
interpretations of those resolutions of the United
Nations and about the consequences that may result for
international legality.

As the Security Council is already aware, the
extraordinary session expressed Africa's surprise and
disappointment at attempts to marginalize the continent
in the management of a conflict that is primarily its
concern. It also recalled that the role of the Ad Hoc
High-Level Committee is formally recognized by the
Security Council in paragraph 2 of resolution 1973
(2011). That role falls under the overall context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, on
the role of regional arrangements in the settlement of
disputes among and within Member States. In addition,
as I emphasized earlier, the African continent and the
countries of the region, in particular, will suffer most
from the impact of the conflict in Libya, both on the
security front as well as in socio-economic terms. We
cannot be mere spectators to calamities that befall us.

Today more than ever, we are determined to
pursue our active efforts motivated by the same
conviction, namely, that there is a need for a political
solution and that Africa can make a particular
contribution to resolving the conflict besetting Libya.
It is in that spirit that the African Union will actively
participate in the meeting scheduled to be held in Cairo
on 18 June between the five international organizations
involved to facilitate the drafting of a joint action plan
to move forward in the search for peace in Libya. In
addition, the next summit of the African Union
Assembly, to be held in Malabo, will be an opportunity
to decide on the steps to be taken in the light of
developments in the situation and the report that will
be presented by the Ad Hoc High-Level Committee.

We are here today to reassure the Council of our
commitment to an inclusive political solution that will
enable Libyans to agree on an approach that is as
consensual as possible to meet their aspirations for
democracy, the rule of law and respect for human
rights. The legitimacy and justice of those aspirations
can never be overemphasized.

We are here to say to the Council how important
it is that such a process be conducted and owned by all
Libyans and that it include mutual concessions as part
of a dialogue without predetermined conditions. Its
outcome should be that the democratization of their
country is the result of their own efforts and the
consensus they arrive at. Experience has shown us time
and time again that this is a precondition for lasting
democratic change, as well as to ensuring that there is
no reason for the fratricidal upheaval that is tearing
Libya apart to continue.

We are here to make a plea for an immediate
humanitarian pause so that the pressing needs of
affected people can be met. Such a pause should be
followed by a ceasefire linked to the political process
and, in particular, the beginning of an inclusive and
consensual transition.

We are here to reaffirm that a lasting solution to
the crisis in Libya requires a significant contribution
from Africa and close coordination between all
stakeholders concerned. We would also like to
underscore the particular contribution that the Ad Hoc
High-Level Committee could make to the search for a
peaceful resolution to the conflict in Libya in
accordance to the objectives of resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011).

Finally, we are here to illustrate the solemn
commitment of Africa to working closely with
multilateral partners, in particular the United Nations
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
Libya, in the spirit of paragraph 2 of resolution 1973
(2011) and in line with international legality.

In the management of the Libyan crisis, the time
is long overdue to articulate a solution together that
judiciously combines the priorities of the moment
concerning the need to protect civilians, the objective
of a democratic transformation in a country whose
political system has not experienced the institutional
evolution that Africa has in terms of governance since
the beginning of the 1990s, and the promotion of
lasting peace and stability in Libya and the region. The
momentum for a change in governance that is apparent
in Libya today brings to the fore political reforms that
will definitely be reflected in the future.
11-37191

We need to work urgently in the short term,
without losing sight of what is required in the long
term. We need to tackle the priorities dictated by the
situation on the ground while at the same time
inscribing our action in a vision that is focused on the
long term and founded on the need to find lasting
solutions that will be approved and adhered to by all
Libyan parties, without marginalization or exclusion. It
is only under this condition that our service will be
useful to Libya and that the concern of the
international community towards Libya will be
translated into terms of peace, security, reconciliation
and democracy.

The African Union - whose action is motivated
only by the objectives of the aspirations of the Libyan
people and the legitimate concerns of the countries in
the region with regard to their long-term security and
stability - will never hide from its responsibilities. It
will be a loyal and efficient partner to the United
Nations, and to the Security Council in particular. It
will serve as a faithful and attentive friend to the
Libyan people, under all circumstances.

Now is the time, more than ever before, for
action, action that is concerted in the service of the
shared values on which our partnership is founded.

