Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would also like to extend
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-
Taranco for his very lucid briefing on the situation in
the Middle East. I would like to limit my comments to
three issues, namely, political developments, security
and humanitarian assistance.

On the subject of political developments, we
believe that last month the Security Council lauded the
resumption of direct talks between Israel and the
Palestinians, facilitated by the United States and the
Quartet. Although the resumption of talks was greeted
with a great sense of relief and hope, no one was under
the illusion that moving the peace process forward
would be easy. Mindful of the enormity of the task
ahead, we emphasized the need for compromise and
flexibility by the parties to pave the way for the
achievement of desired results.

It is disheartening to note that in the weeks
following the resumption of the talks difficulties have

arisen, resulting in a stalemate. Indeed, many had
hoped that Israel would heed the appeals for the
extension of the lO-month freeze on housing
construction in the West Bank Jewish settlements as a
positive confidence-building measure. Instead, the
Israeli Government's approval of 238 new homes in
East Jerusalem announced last Friday will not only
enflame passions on the Palestinian side. The decision
could also be interpreted as a move to kill the direct
talks and thereby complicate the peace process.
Coming at a time when the Palestinian Authority has
accepted the compromise of a two-month extension on
the moratorium, the announcement would have
profound impact on the United States-backed
negotiations with the Palestinian Authority.

Against that background, the Council, the
Quartet, the Arab League and bilateral partners should
sustain the pressure on the parties to remain engaged
through dialogue. They should also be encouraged to
remove all impediments to a negotiated settlement that
would result in a two-State solution and agreement on
all final status issues within two years.

The parties themselves must increase their efforts
in both words and deeds to create the conditions
conducive to a lasting peace. Provocative action on
either side at this delicate juncture does not serve the
interest of peace. We therefore urge Israel to rescind
the decision to construct new homes in Ramot and
Pisgat Ze'ev.

With regard to security, we believe that the
volatile situation in the region remains a matter of deep
concern. The series of attacks in August and September
that led to the death and injury of several Israelis,
including two pregnant women, are deplorable. It is
indeed regrettable that a group of Hamas militants
initiated some of the attacks in order to disrupt the
peace talks.

Reports that Hamas and Hizbullah continue to
threaten the peace talks are indeed troubling. There is
no justification for actions by either of the parties that
contradict the rules of engagement and international
war conventions. Soldiers and combatants alike must
be held to the highest professional standards. We thus
welcome the recent ruling by an Israeli court that found
two Israeli soldiers guilty of reckless endangerment
and of improper conduct. The use of children or
civilians as human shields should not be condoned in
any situation.
We hope that Israel's announcement of indirect
talks with Hamas leaders on prisoner swap will help to
ease the tensions.

While we welcome the marginal increase in the
amount of goods and materials allowed to enter the
Gaza Strip, we wish to reiterate the need for the
complete removal of the blockade by the Israeli
Government. The unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza would
facilitate the Palestinian state-building process. It
would also reduce tensions and the threat to Israel's
security. Indeed, the determination by aid vessels to
break the blockade - most recently by the aid vessel
Irene - would be unnecessary were the blockade on
Gaza to be completely lifted. Until that goal is
achieved, we call on all aid vessels to avail themselves
of the legitimate crossings provided for persons, goods
and materials into the Gaza Strip to avoid unpleasant
consequences.

Nigeria believes that for the negotiations to have
a successful outcome, there must be mutual trust and
confidence between the parties. The parties must also
abide by and recommit to their Road Map obligations.
We call for the increased commitment and involvement
in the peace efforts from regional partners to help
secure the process. We welcome the support of the
Arab League for the peace process and its decision to
engage in discussions on the way forward.

The time is indeed ripe for a comprehensive and
holistic discussion of the decades of crisis in the
region, including the Israel-Syria and Israel-Lebanon
conflicts.

