Mr. Kai-Kai (Sierra Leone): I am honoured to
participate in today's open debate on peace and security
in Africa and strengthening peacekeeping operations
in Africa. I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November, and also thank you for
convening this important meeting. And I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union (AU) for their
insightful briefings this morning.

Sierra Leone conveys its deepest condolences to the
Government and the people of the Republic of Malawi
and the United Republic of Tanzania for the recent loss of
some of their peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We must pay tribute to the gallantry,
bravery and courage of peacekeepers by giving them the
appropriate tools and mandate to expand the frontiers
of global peace, security and stability.

Strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa is
immensely important to the international community.
That is especially so given that Africa's efforts to
maintain regional peace and security are fraught
with well-documented challenges, including a lack of
sustainable, adequate and predictable financing and the
difficulties of operationalizing the establishment of the
African Standby Force and implementing sustainable
post-conflict reconstruction and development
initiatives. The attention and support of the Security
Council and the wider international community is
therefore required in order to address the challenges
of strengthening peacekeeping operations across the
continent. And addressing those challenges requires
an effective political strategy. In our View, the political
strategy should incorporate the need to increase the
role that eminent regional leaders can play through
their good offices in resolving conflicts, as well as
the political engagement of all parties to conflicts for
inclusive solutions.

Sierra Leone commends the Secretary-General
for his reform agenda, which prioritizes the primacy
of political solutions in addressing the root causes
of conflicts and their prevention, and through that
achieving sustaining peace. Sierra Leone also welcomes
the signing of the Joint United Nations-AU Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, and
we look forward to a more constructive and productive
engagement in that regard. In that context, Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, which provides
for cooperation between regional organizations and
the United Nations in addressing matters of peace
and security on the continent, should be central to
peacekeeping mandates. That will require a more
coordinated and integrated approach to resolving
conflicts in Africa. In that regard, we should focus
on African initiatives emanating from the AU Peace
and Security Council, decisions adopted by the AU
Assembly and the role of subregional organizations in
resolving conflicts. We therefore acknowledge with
appreciation the Secretary-General's annual report
(S/2018/678) on strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the AU, particularly on the
importance of meeting the financing requirements of
AU peace operations.

Given the evolving role of subregional organizations,
it is important to cascade that partnership down to
subregional economic communities, in view of their
effectiveness in addressing and promoting subregional
and continent-wide initiatives for conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. The performance of Africa's regional
organizations, particularly subregional economic
communities, in ensuring peace and security on the
continent through peacekeeping operations cannot
be overemphasized. In that regard, it is important
to further build on and strengthen the mediation
capacities of the African Union and the subregional
organizations, as well as civil-society organizations
engaged in mediation efforts.

The funding of peacekeeping operations in all
their complementary aspects, including peacebuilding
and State-building efforts, remains a huge challenge
to the work of silencing the guns in Africa. In that
regard, it is imperative to ensure that the international
community seeks lasting solutions to the problem of
the funding constraints that continue to inhibit the
success of peacekeeping operations. Sierra Leone
therefore supports the Security Council's future
adoption of a resolution aimed at establishing United
Nations assessed contributions for financing Council-
mandated AU peace support missions. The launch of
the AU Peace Fund on 17 November is integral to the
AU's ongoing reforms and a clear indication of Africa's
commitment to resolving conflicts on the continent. It
will substantially increase the capacity of the African
Union as a first responder in the areas of mediation,
preventive diplomacy and peace operations.

Sierra Leone applauds the Secretary-General for the
launch in March of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
as well as the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which has so
far been endorsed by more than 150 Member States.
For Sierra Leone, as a troop- and police-contributing
country, the Declaration of Shared Commitments
resonates with our commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security. While the Declaration
aims to strengthen peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations and the international community, in addition
to providing funding, should make greater efforts to
assist African troop- and police-contributing countries
with the requisite technical support, including training
and equipment, that they need to enhance their
peacekeeping capabilities.

In conclusion, if we are to strengthen peacekeeping
we must also understand and appreciate the nexus
between peace, security and development both during
and after peacekeeping operations. That is critical to
building the resilience that can prevent relapses into
conflict, which in turn is essential in order to protect
the investments made in peacekeeping.

