Ms. Keita: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in South
Sudan and the ongoing peace process since the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General on
14 June (S/2018/609).

Let me begin by condemning in the strongest
possible terms the killing of a peacekeeper of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) earlier this week. Let there be no doubt
that this is a war crime. In the coming days, we will
engage all possible stakeholders to identify those who
are responsible for heinous acts and expect the South
Sudanese authorities to bring them to justice.

The security situation on the ground remains a
serious concern with parties to the conflict in consistent
breach of the cessation of hostilities agreement that they
themselves pledged to honour. In the context of this
fighting, UNMISS has documented gross violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law,
particularly in central and southern Unity. Reporting
on security incidents and the situation on the ground
is a mandated task of UNMISS, and the Mission uses
various tools to report on them. However, a distinction
must be made between incidents reported by UNMISS
and the reports of the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, which
is mandated to verify ceasefire violations and then
report on them.

Since the publishing of the Secretary-General's
report on 14 June, UNMISS has recorded various
security incidents. In Unity, between 5 and 6 June, the
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A)
in Opposition forces reportedly fought in Guar, Koch
county, followed by attacks on Buok, Bieh, Leah, Lual,
Botha and Padeah villages, in Leer, Mayendit and
Koch counties. Reports of military attacks resumed
on 12 June, with an alleged attack by Transitional
Government of National Unity forces on Dablual,
Mayendit county. Those were followed by further
alleged attacks by Transitional Government of National
Unity forces on Buaw, Koch county on 13 June and on
the SPLM/A in Opposition positions in Mirmir, Ruol
and Rubnor, Koch county, on 14 June.

During the alleged attacks from 12 to 14 June, a
number of civilians were reportedly killed and injured,
civilian homes burned, and cattle and food looted. Also
on 14 June, two men in a pickup were reportedly killed
by a rocket-propelled grenade fired at their vehicle
near Malal, north of Koch. The weapon was allegedly
fired by SPLA in Opposition forces in the area. On
18 June, Transitional Government of National Unity
forces, accompanied by a tank, allegedly attacked
SPLM/A in Opposition forces in the area of Pilling,
Thonyor-Kuidak in Leer county. On the following
day, Transitional Government of National Unity forces
allegedly attacked Thonyor and Pilling. Fighting
continued near Thonyor on 19 June, which reportedly
resulted in civilian deaths and injuries.

On 17 June, in Western Equatoria, SPLM/A in
Opposition forces reportedly attacked the SPLA
barracks at Makpandu. Fighting was also reported
between Transitional Government of National Unity
and SPLM/A in Opposition forces at Wadhalelo in
Jur River county and Ngobaggari in Wau county
from 14 to 16 June. On 18 June, in Western Bahr el-
Ghazal, UNMISS continued to receive information on
ongoing attacks since 14 June on pro-Machar SPLA
in Opposition positions in Baggari in Wau county
and Wadhalelo in Jur county by the SPLA. Allegedly,
the SPLA now occupies both locations, which were
formerly under control of the opposition.

On the same day, during an UNMISS patrol to
Masna, in Wau county, ongoing fighting in Wadhalelo
in Jur county was confirmed, as artillery and small
fire arms were heard. On 20 June, UNMISS received
information that, due to continued clashes between
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition and SPLA forces in
Saura and Li-Rangu, 10 and 17 kilometres to the north
of Yambio, Western Equatoria, respectively, many
people from the Ndavuro. Makpara and Yabongo areas
of Yambio fled to Yambio town. In addition, civilians
from Ikpiro and Napere reportedly took refuge south
of Yambio, in Masia and Kuze. On 23 June in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, UNMISS once again received reports
of fighting between the SPLA and the pro-Machar
SPLA in Opposition in areas near Wau. The SPLA
reportedly deployed troops and military equipment,
including tanks, into Baggari and Mboro. The fighting
reportedly took place in Baggari, Wadhalelo, Mboro
and Biringi, near Wau.

In the course of preparing the Secretary-General's
report pursuant to resolution 2418 (2018), UNMISS
requested the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism to share its
verified reports. UNMISS received the Monitoring
Mechanism reports on 26 June, which concluded that,
since 1 June, there have been 11 verified incidents
of fighting among parties and 12 other potential
incidents that are under investigation. The Monitoring
Mechanism report will be shared with the Council as an
annex to the Secretary-General's upcoming report, and
on July 5 Under-Secretary-General Lacroix will brief
the Council thereon.

The continued fighting in South Sudan has had a
direct impact on the humanitarian situation, in general,
and food security, in particular, such as displacement
from agricultural land and the destruction of food
stocks; and an indirect impact, such as disruptions to
food systems and markets and reduced water supply.
The people of South Sudan are heavily suffering, as the
country is rapidly approaching the peak hunger season
of this year. Hunger and malnutrition have reached
record levels, and 1.75 million people are on the brink
of a catastrophe. By late July, more than 7 million
people could be severely food insecure in the absence of
sustained assistance and access, according to the latest
food security analysis. It has been estimated that more
than a million children under the age of five will be
malnourished in 2018. That is a heavy and unfair price
being paid by the most vulnerable members of society
though no fault of their own. Moreover, in 2017, 30 aid
workers were killed as a consequence of the conflict,
and 7 have been killed since the beginning of this year.

The past two weeks have seen significant activity
Vis-a-vis the peace process led by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). On 21 June, the
IGAD Council of Ministers met to discuss the way
forward, which led to the first face-to-face meeting
between President Kiir and Mr. Machar in Addis
Ababa. The same day, an Extraordinary Summit of
IGAD Heads of State and Government was held, during
which it was decided that the two leaders would meet
again in Khartoum under the auspices of the Sudanese
President Omer Al-Bashir to be followed two weeks
later by another meeting hosted by President Kenyatta
in Nairobi. The meeting in Khartoum took place on
25 June and was also attended by President Museveni
of Uganda. In Khartoum, both President Kiir and
Mr. Machar pledged to work for peace, and they have
begun to discuss some of the contentious issues related
to power-sharing and security arrangements.

On 27 June, President Salva Kiir Mayardit,
Mr. Riek Machar Teny and representatives of the
South Sudanese Opposition Alliance, SPLM. "Former
Detainees" and other political parties signed the
Khartoum declaration of agreement among parties to
the conflict of South Sudan. Although the Declaration
broadly deals with all the contentious issues, further
discussions are needed to iron out details to ensure that,
this time, the parties implement the agreement under
an effective implementation mechanism. Yesterday,
the Secretary-General welcomed the signing of the
declaration and urged all parties to demonstrate the
political leadership required at this critical juncture of
the peace process and commit to reaching agreement
on the outstanding issues of governance and security
arrangements in moving towards a fair, inclusive and
implementable agreement.

The engagement by the regional leaders and face-to-
face meetings between President Kiir and Mr. Machar
are positive developments that must be supported and
capitalized upon. However, peace in South Sudan will
not be achieved or sustained merely based on a bilateral
deal between the two leaders. While the outcome of
regional and international efforts to deliver a political
settlement remains unclear, I must reiterate that peace
will be sustained only if the revitalized agreement
is inclusive and fair, addresses the root causes of the
conflict and engages all stakeholders, including women
and young people. In that regard, I wish to acknowledge
the efforts exerted by the Office of the IGAD Special
Envoy for South Sudan to enhance the participation of
women in the revitalization process.

Lastly, let me emphasize that the process will also
require the constant support and engagement of the
Security Council so that all stakeholders understand
that a peaceful South Sudan will be supported by the
international community, with consequences for those
who continue to fuel the conflict.

