The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/610, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to documents
S/2008/597 and S/2008/603, containing respectively
the texts of two letters dated 9 September 2008 and
12 September 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam


The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1833 (2008).

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


