Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Bildt, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Balkans, for his
candid and exhaustive statement on the situation in the
region. I believe that the approach he advocated in his
statement to finding a solution to the crisis in the Balkans
is based on an in-depth knowledge of the situation in the
region and is marked by its comprehensive nature.

My country has followed closely the developments in
the Balkans and welcomes the efforts of all of the parties
that are actively working to establishment peace, security
and stability in that region. We would like in particular to
encourage all the peace missions in the Balkans which are
achieving positive results despite the very difficult
conditions.

The question of refugees and displaced persons is at
the heart of the Balkan issue and enables the international
community to assess the development of the situation. We
wish to express our concern as to the fate of the refugees
and displaced persons, and we appeal to all of the parties
to promote their return and to find a solution to this
important issue. In this connection, we welcome the
commendable efforts of all of the humanitarian agencies,
in particular those of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

My delegation believes that the Stability Pact for
South-Eastern Europe proposed by the European Union
represents an opportunity for the Balkan region to
promote peace and security. It is a suitable framework
which should be implemented rapidly in order to be
translated into reality through the promotion of political
and economic reforms, development and the strengthening
of security in the region.

I believe also that the inclusion of the region in a
wider area will promote integration by marginalizing all
types of extremist forces.

We would like also to pay tribute to the Charter of
good-neighbourliness, stability, security and cooperation
adopted at Bucharest at the Third Meeting of Heads of
State and Government of South-East European Countries.
This opens a new chapter in the history of the region and
attests to the commitment of the parties to respond
positively to the efforts of the international community to
restore confidence in the future of the region.

