Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset to express my delegation's
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open meeting. It demonstrates well the Council's
interest in the question of Bougainville.

Like other speakers, I too would like to thank
Ambassador Noel Sinclair, Head of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), for his
briefing on recent developments in implementing the
Bougainville Peace Agreement. My delegation
welcomes with satisfaction those recent developments,
which confirm the hope aroused by the progress made
in implementing stage II of the weapons disposal plan,
of which we spoke here last March.

We are particularly pleased to emphasize the
importance of having concluded stage II, which is
crucial to the future of the island inasmuch as it opens
the way to the constitutional process that should lead to
autonomy. The report on that subject, officially
submitted to the Government of Papua New Guinea by
the Head of UNPOB on 29 July, makes clear reference
to this.

In addition, the recent deployment to
Bougainville of a civilian Transition Team after the
departure of the Peace Monitoring Group is to be
welcomed because it signals a short-term settlement of
the question of Bougainville and the cessation of
UNPOB activities in December 2003, in accordance
with the Council's earlier decision.

While we should be pleased with the progress
made, my delegation believes that there are still
important challenges to be addressed. The effective
participation of all the protagonists in the ongoing
peace process and the reintegration of former
combatants are priorities, in order to reach a final
settlement of the conflict.

In that context, we are also convinced of the
crucial need to ensure the economic development of the
island, without which peace cannot be a sustainable
reality. That is why we reiterate our appeal to the donor

community to become more fully involved for the
economic and social development of Bougainville.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its appreciation to UNPOB for the tangible
results achieved in implementing the Bougainville
Peace Agreement. Finally, we encourage the civilian
Transition Team in its efforts to restore peace and
stability.

