Mr. van der Vliet (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union and its member States.

I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing this important debate. We also appreciate
the briefings by the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and
we welcome and support the resolution adopted today
(resolution 2171 (2014)).

The primary responsibility for the prevention
of conflicts and the protection of civilian lives lies
with each State. At the same time, the responsibility
for the prevention of conflicts is ultimately shared by
the international community. The United Nations was
founded for that purpose and is well placed to play a
leading role in that regard. A system-wide United
Nations approach to conflict prevention is essential.
Peace, the protection of human rights, justice and
development must be pursued in a comprehensive way.

I would like to focus briefly on three elements - the
preventive tookit of the Security Council, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the protection of human
rights.

In various past efforts, the United Nations has,
through a combination of analysis, early warning, rapid
response and partnerships, been able to help defuse
tensions and crises and assist parties in resolving
disputes peacefully. We commend the work of the
Department of Political Affairs in that regard and would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our continued
support for its work.

In order to be successful in preventive action,
there is also a need for the Security Council to respond
more quickly and decisively to emerging threats to
peace. In that regard, we would welcome the so-
called horizon-scannings, or general briefings, by the
Secretary-General on emerging conflicts and possible
volatile situations as a more regular and permanent
feature on the Council's agenda.

Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
provides a clear mandate to investigate any situation
that might endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security and offers a range of tools to settle
disputes peacefully before they escalate. It is important
that the Council make full use of those tools, including
the serious consideration of the idea of preventive
missions.

Peacekeeping missions also have an important
peacebuilding component that focuses on stabilization
and preventing the emergence of new conflicts. The
Netherlands commends the rule-of-law aspects of
such missions, including capacity-building efforts and
human rights protection, mass atrocities prevention,
accountability mechanisms and the principle of the
responsibility to protect. All of that helps to prevent
further escalation of conflicts. In that regard, we
welcome the Secretary-General's commitment to a
review of United Nations peacekeeping and recommend
that that aspect receive ample attention.

The Netherlands reiterates the crucial role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
In that regard, we would like to commend the efforts
of the United Kingdom to increase the participation
of women in United Nations peacekeeping missions
through the creation and support of a senior women's
talent pipeline.

On the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands is deeply committed
to their peaceful settlement and is proud be the host
country for, inter alia, the International Court of Justice
and the Permanent Court of Arbitration. We strongly
encourage the Council to take measures to expand the
use of the peaceful settlement of disputes, in relation to
both State and non-State actors.

Under Articles 34 and 36 of the Charter, the
Council can recommend that parties settle their disputes
peacefully through various means of dispute resolution.

The Council can also suggest the specific form it deems
most suitable for the occasion and request to be briefed
about the results. Where the jurisdiction of the Court has
been established, the Council can also strongly urge the
parties to take their dispute to the International Court
of Justice. Furthermore, the Council could encourage
parties to come to an agreement to accept the Court's
jurisdiction for their particular dispute even when that
jurisdiction has not yet been established.
In that context, we particularly welcome the recent
visit of the Security Council to The Hague and its
historic meeting with the International Court of Justice.
We are confident that that visit contributed to increased
mutual understanding and future cooperation between
those two principal organs of the United Nations.

Finally, on human rights, one of the most essential
factors in preventing conflict and avoiding tensions
within societies is ensuring and protecting the basic
human rights of all parts of the population, providing
redress for grievances and ensuring accountability for
mass atrocities. In that regard, the Netherlands would
like to take this opportunity to commend the work of
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We especially want to honour the High
Commissioner, Ms. Navi Pillay, for the way in which
she has fulfilled her important mandate over the past
years. Ms. Pillay has been a cornerstone of the efforts
that the United Nations has made to address human
rights issues worldwide. Her tireless dedication, clear
and insightful viewpoints, and especially her courage
to say what is needed when it is needed, have been an
example to us all.

