Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): May I first of all, on behalf of my delegation,
say how pleased we are to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council this month and in particular over this
historic meeting of the Council.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania and Slovakia
associate themselves with the content of this statement.

Since the beginning of the crisis in the former
Yugoslavia, the European Union has spared no effort in
the search for a lasting solution through negotiation, and
it was among the first to try to help alleviate the terrible
suffering of the civilian population.

For this reason, the European Union is particularly
pleased at the initialling in Dayton, Ohio, of the Peace
Agreements by the Presidents of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

 

We urge the parties to sign the Agreements at the
Paris peace conference, which will mark the end of the
negotiations and the beginning of a process of stability and
good neighbourliness for the entire region. The ratification
and fulfilment in good faith of the Peace Agreement will be
to the benefit of the peoples that have suffered the horrors
of war for almost four years.

The peace remains fragile and needs to be
consolidated. The bases for mutual recognition between the
States that have emerged in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia have been established. The two resolutions on
the suspension of sanctions and the phased lifting of the
arms embargo, just adopted by the Security Council and
supported by the European Union, will, we hope, lead to
those States' normalizing relations with each other and with
the rest of the international community.

The implementation of the agreements' provisions
concerning regional stability and arms control and the
holding of free and fair elections are crucial for these
efforts. In this context, the European Union gives its full
support to the request addressed to the parties concerned to
assist in locating the two French pilots missing in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to ensure their immediate and safe
return.

The wounds must be stanched, and together we must
make peace last. The human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rights of persons belonging to minorities
must be strictly respected throughout the former
Yugoslavia. The parties must also cooperate with the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

The right of refugees and displaced persons to return
to their homes in safety and to recover their property or, in
any event, to receive fair compensation must be guaranteed.
The perpetrators of violations of human rights and of the
norms of international humanitarian law must be held
responsible for their acts. That is the only way to put an
end to the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia.

Many aspects still remain to be resolved. The
multinational force to monitor the implementation of the
agreements in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region of
Eastern Slavonia must be deployed as soon as possible. The
civilian aspects of the peace plan will have to be
implemented and the enormous task of reconstruction
begun, particularly in the most affected areas. The
European Union hopes that the issues relating to the
succession of States in the former Yugoslavia will also be
speedily and constructively resolved.

The European Union remains steadfastly willing to
make its contribution and to participate, together with
other countries and organizations, in the work of
reconstruction. In this regard, the European Union will
give its full support for the success of the forthcoming
London conference on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement and that of the conference of donor countries
to be held in Brussels.

In any event, the parties must bear in mind that it is
up to them to consolidate peace and prevent the
resurgence of conflicts. The assistance of the international
community will be fully effective only if it can rely on
the firm political resolve and cooperation of the parties.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
negotiators, who, with their dedication and enthusiasm,
made the Dayton agreements possible; to the parties, for
having finally opted for peace; and to the women and
men of the United Nations and other international
organizations who, sometimes by sacrificing their very
lives, have helped to mitigate the tragic consequences of
these conflicts and have laid the groundwork that has
made possible this moment of hope that we are
experiencing today.

