Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Following the
release on 26 November of the Secretary-General's
periodic report (8/2014/852) on the activities of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), I should like to update the Council
on the latest developments in the peace process in
Darfur and the current security and humanitarian
situation in the region. I would also like to take this
opportunity to describe the measures that the United
Nations has taken, in consultation with the African
Union and UNAMID, in order to implement the
Council's recommendations in resolutions 2148 (2014)
and 2173 (2014), aimed at strengthening the mission so
as to streamline its operations.

On the political front, and with regard to the
peace process, direct talks between the Government
of the Sudan and armed movements in Darfur - the
Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi and the Justice
and Equality Movement-Gibril Ibrahim - began on
23 November in Addis Ababa, and for the first time
were held under the auspices of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel. Council members
will recall that the Panel is facilitating the talks with
the goal of promoting a cessation of hostilities between
the armed movements and the Government of the
Sudan, and in this way to enable the movements to take
part in a future national dialogue. The negotiations
were suspended on 30 November to allow the parties to
consult with their respective leaders and bases on the
format of future negotiations.

Concerning relations between the Government
of the Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement,
we note that they clearly both feel the need to speed
up finalization of the Movement's disarmament
verification process. I should also note the information
we received yesterday on a joint political statement
calling on the Sudan to establish a State based on
citizenship and democracy and signed by a number of
groups, including Minni Minawi. We will have to study
its wording, because its various elements include the
groups' determination to form a united front, and a call
for a boycott of the elections scheduled for April 2015
and for popular resistance. I repeat that it is too soon to
draw conclusions, but I believe it deserves more careful
scrutiny.

Regarding security, the report before the Council
describes a precarious situation, with clashes
between the Government of the Sudan and the armed
movements, deadly intercommunal conflicts and
increased criminality and banditry, all of which has
inevitably had a significant impact on civilians across
all five States of Darfur. While there has undoubtedly
been an overall decrease in military operations in recent
months, most likely as a result ofthe rainy season, there
have nonetheless been intermittent clashes between
Government forces and armed movements, as well as
reports of aerial bombardments. The report gives a
figure of 55 cases of violence and attacks on civilians
recorded by UNAMID during the period under
consideration, of which 16 were allegedly perpetrated
by Arab militias, 23 by Government forces and the
remaining 16 by unknown armed elements. Internally
displaced persons, in particular, have continued to
express concerns about the deteriorating security
situation, particularly in the camps in North and West
Darfur.

That insecurity, along with the continuing
restrictions on movement imposed by the Government
forces, armed movements and militia groups, has had an
effect on the Mission's ability to implement its mandate,
particularly regarding the protection of civilians. It
also continues to pose serious problems for the safety
and security of both our personnel and humanitarian
workers. There have been major concerns throughout
the reporting period about our inability to get direct
access to all the vulnerable populations in need of
protection. While the restrictions on movement have
unquestionably decreased - the rainy season being a
factor - the issue of obtaining free and unhindered
access to communities in need remains a concern
and an obstacle to implementation of the mandate. I
therefore continue to strongly urge the Government to
honour the terms of the status-of-forces agreement and
to give Mission personnel full and unhindered freedom
of movement throughout Darfur.

One incident that was given particular attention by
the media on 2 November was the alleged rape of over
200 women and girls on 30 and 31 October in Thabit,
North Darfur. Following repeated requests over a
number of days for access to the village and surrounding
areas in order to interact with the local community and
determine a factual account of events, a verification
mission was sent a week later, on 9 November. The
team's findings, however, remain inconclusive and
require further investigation, in part due to the heavy
presence of military and police in the village. I
underscore that only a fully independent investigation
by UNAMID will effectively shed light on these serious
allegations, and I therefore urge the Government of the
Sudan once again to grant UNAMID immediate and
independent access to Thabit and its population so that
these reports can be verified.

Another deep concern is the continuation of
violent attacks by armed assailants against UNAMID
and United Nations personnel, in which three of our
peacekeepers and one national staff member have died
since our last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7250).
I take this opportunity to express my condolences to
the Ethiopian and Rwandan Governments and to the
families of those killed and injured in such attacks.
The Government of the Sudan must continue to do
everything in its power to identify and hold accountable
those responsible.

Intercommunal violence continues to affect and
displace civilian communities. In particular, the
conflicts between the Rizeigat and Ma'alia in East
Darfur, the Beni Hussein and Northern Rizeigat in North
Darfur and the Fallatta and Habbaniya in South Darfur
represent the most significant tribal conflicts. While
there was a reduction in the number of confrontations
during the reporting period, the clashes were markedly
more deadly, with a total of 377 fatalities recorded,
as compared to 93 confirmed deaths in the previous
period.

Criminality remains a major concern, with attacks
on villages and incidents ofrape, hijacking and abduction
continuing throughout Darfur. In response to concerns
over the rising number of criminal incidents, on 15 July
the Government of South Darfur introduced emergency
measures, which included a state-wide curfew, a ban
on the movement of armed civilians, extensive search-
and-detain operations in camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs), and the establishment of a court to try
emergency cases.

While some of these measures have undoubtedly
helped to improve, howsoever modestly, the security
situation in South Darfur, the displaced have firmly
resisted all the Government's attempts to enter the
camps. This includes the case of the Kalma IDP camp,
where in mid-August UNAMID engaged both with
state and local authorities in an attempt to de-escalate
tensions and avert violence, while it also intervened with
the camp's leadership to reassure them of UNAMID's
protection should search operations be conducted. As a
result, no search operations have been conducted in the
camp to date.

The humanitarian situation remains dire and
very worrisome. The number of people displaced by
conflict since the beginning of the year has risen to
more than 430,000, with close to 300,000 remaining in
displacement, in addition to some 2 million long-term
IDPs. The reporting period was also characterized
by heavy rains and floods that affected thousands of
IDPs in August. While humanitarian access remains
severely problematic, there were some improvements,
with several inter-agency field missions undertaken
in all five Darfur states to assess needs and deliver
assistance. UNAMID continued to work closely with
humanitarian agencies to facilitate the delivery of
assistance to vulnerable affected communities through
the provision, inter alia, of escorts and logistical
support. I believe that this assistance has proved to be
very useful.

Over the past months, the Mission has further
recalibrated its activities towards the three strategic
priorities defined early this year. It has conducted
a comprehensive assessment and adjustment of
its structures, personnel and material capacities,
as reported in the letter dated 16 September from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of Security Council (S/20l4/670). The UNAMID
personnel streamlining exercise has been completed.
In that connection, 1,260 posts have been identified
for abolition - 770 posts in the current budget year,
and the remaining 490 posts to follow in the next. An
additional 56 posts will be nationalized this budget
year. I also note that UNAMID's aviation fleet has
been reconfigured through a reduction of four fixed-
wing aircraft and two helicopters, while 400 UNAMID
vehicles are being deployed to the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response.

UNAMID and the United Nations country team
have developed an integrated strategic framework
for 2014-2016, which is the principal mechanism for
planning, implementing and monitoringjoint UNAMID
and United Nations country team initiatives. It focuses
on the three strategic priorities and is consistent with all
other relevant documents, including the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2012-2016, the
humanitarian strategic response plan for 2014 and the
Darfur Development Strategy.

I turn now to the matter of collaboration and
coordination between UNAMID and the Government
of the Sudan, which is necessary if we are to bring our
task to fruition. In that connection, it should be noted
that there were tensions between the Government and
the mission during the recent period, including with
regard to a problem I have already mentioned - access
by staff to Thabit to ascertain facts.

I should also point out that, on 23 November,
UNAMID received a note verbale demanding the
immediate withdrawal of two human rights experts
stationed at the mission's liaison office in Khartoum,
where they had a long-established role with the Sudan's
National Commission on Human Rights and other
organizations on all issues related to Darfur. We had
no choice in the matter, but such a demand is clearly
unacceptable.

Moreover, the Government of the Sudan publicly
called for UNAMID's exit - in those very words. I
should say that we currently have a strategic assessment
team in Khartoum that began its meetings over the
past two days. In particular, the issue of UNAMID's
exit from the Sudan was discussed. I think that the
Government has clearly established that this is not
about leaving tomorrow, but that we need to agree on
a strategy. That is what we are attempting to pursue,
in line with the spirit of the Council's latest resolution.
The strategic assessment will make it possible for us to
brief the Council on the progress we have made or not
made - I do not know yet either way - on the three
issues of strengthening military capacity, the level
of cooperation received from the Government of the
Sudan and the capacity to move forward along with the
country team, the agencies and the programmes.

Nevertheless, the fact itself that such a public
statement was made is something that colours the
overall picture somewhat. I also point out that last week
we received another note verbale from the Government
of the Sudan directing us not to deal further with any
Sudanese body without first turning to the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs. We need to assess the impact of that
demand, but it is certainly also something that is part
of the backdrop.

In conclusion, we must regret the security situation
and the fact that protection for the local population
remains weak. It is true that the main cause of all this
are the ubiquitous inter-communal tribal clashes, with
the attendant displacement of people they generate.
While the mission is making every effort to address
the problems facing humanitarian actors in the short
term, it is clear that concrete lasting solutions for the
population of Darfur are linked to progress on political
issues being addressed in the course of the discussions
recently begun in Addis Ababa. In practical terms, that
implies the aboslute need for a genuine ceasefire and a
comprehensive peace agreement.

