Mr. Inzko: Allow me to begin by thanking the
members of the Security Council for their continuing
support and attention to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The question of Bosnia and Herzegovina does not,
fortunately, have the immediate security dimensions
of the other issues that the Security Council is dealing
with. But I am sure that the Council will agree with me
that what happens to Bosnia and Herzegovina matters
far beyond its borders. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
country that in so many ways has come to symbolize
our shared commitment and quest for an integrated
European continent rooted in lasting peace, stability,
prosperity and tolerance. As we strive to achieve that
vision, we should, of course, take pride in the progress
that has been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina
following the tragic wars of the 1990s. But we must
also recognize that the job is not yet done and that our
engagement remains essential if we are to safeguard
the progress made thus far and build on it to reach our
common goal.

I regret to inform the Council that in the six
months since my previous report (S/2012/8l3), Bosnia
and Herzegovina's political leaders have continued
to fail the citizens of the country and fell short of
the very limited expectations of the international
community. As a result, the country has fallen further
behind its neighbours as a region. Serbia and Kosovo
are normalizing relations following a historic deal
negotiated by the European Union's (EU) foreign policy
chief, Baroness Ashton, and Serbia appears poised to
open accession talks with the European Union.

Croatia is now just seven weeks away from full
membership, having served as a shining example to
others in the region of what can be achieved if change
is delivered through reform. Montenegro's progress
is also impressive. The region is moving on, and, in
seven weeks, Bosnia and Herzegovina will have 1,000
kilometres of common borders with the European
Union.

Meanwhile, regrettably, Bosnia and Herzegovina
is stagnating. Year after year it is let down by its
political leaders, who continue to fail to reach the
healthy compromises that are necessary to meet the
requirements of Euro-Atlantic integration and to
tackle the very serious economic and social challenges
facing the country - all this despite the very generous,
progressive and reinforced engagement of the EU on the
ground. I should to like mention in particular the tireless
efforts of European Union Special Representative Peter
Sorensen.

The sad reality of Bosnia's politics was brought
home again in April, when the country's leaders failed
to reach agreement on the implementation of a key
ruling from the European Court of Human Rights
that would unlock the next stage in the EU integration
process. In that regard, I should like to ask the political
leaders: what should have been easier to solve - the
implementation of the Sej die-Finci human rights ruling,
or the historic issue of Serbia and Kosovo?

A similar dynamic has played out over the past two
years with regard to the country's NATO aspirations,
where little concrete progress has been reached to
register military property in the name of the State,
the requirement to unlock the country's entry into the
Alliance's membership action plan. Both tasks are
simple and straightforward, involve little or no material
cost and could be achieved within days with a minimum
of political courage and an understanding that reaching
healthy compromises through political dialogue is a
win-win situation for all involved. Yet the zero-sum
approach to politics continues unabated year after year.

That approach must change, and it must change now
if the next 16 months are not to be lost to unproductive
election campaigning.

Before reviewing the main political developments
of the last six months from the perspective of my
mandate, I want to make clear in no uncertain terms
that the fundamental reason for the country continuing
to lag behind its neighbours is the fact that elected
officials and political parties continue to put their own
narrow personal and party political interests before the
interests of the citizens and the country at large.

The fact that the pull of Euro-Atlantic integration
processes has so far not proved strong enough to
overcome this should be of concern to all of us and
cause for serious reflection on the elements of our
united strategy moving forward.

Turning now to the political developments of
the last six months, it is the deepening political and
constitutional crisis in the Federation, linked to a new
parliamentary majority being formed in this entity,
that has dominated events. Despite its majority, the
new coalition, which has a clear and legitimate right
to seek to reshuffle the Government, has not been able
to remove the existing Government, as some parties
have used constitutional blocking mechanisms that are
actually designed to protect the rights of constituent
peoples to block the adoption of a no-confidence vote.
The crisis is further complicated by the fact that the
institution responsible for resolving the blockage - the
so-called Vital National Interest Panel of the Federal
Constitutional Court - does not function due the four-
and-a-half year failure of the competent authorities to
appoint missing judges to the Panel.

As if these developments were not a serious
enough distraction from the pressing difficulties facing
the authorities in the Federation, the President of the
Federation was arrested on 26 April and remains in
detention.

The smooth reshuffling of the Republika Srpska
Government in March stands in sharp contrast to the
situation in the Federation. The ruling coalition in
Republika Srpska elected a new Prime Minister and
replaced a number of ministers, seemingly in response
to a worsening economic situation, which included
public sector strikes. In contrast with the Federation
Government, the Republika Srpska Government has
continued to meet regularly as it seeks to tackle the
many economic and social challenges it is facing.

However, from the point of view of the mandate
given to me under the Dayton Peace Agreement and
reflected in successive Security Council resolutions,
I remain deeply concerned about fundamental
challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina coming from
some representatives of Republika Srpska, including
entity President Dodik. Six months ago, I signaled that
the issue of growing advocacy for the dissolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina by Republika Srpska officials
deserved the special attention of the international
community. My assessment in this regard has not
changed. Statements made and actions taken during the
reporting period, which are catalogued in my report,
have in my View represented a continuation of this
worrisome policy.

Just last month and again a few days ago, the
Republika Srpska President said that Bosnia and
Herzegovina "has absolutely no possibility to survive"
and described Bosnia and Herzegovina as a

"sufferer on its last breath, into whom the
international community is still throwing capsules
of oxygen claiming that it has to survive".

This is just one of many such statements cited in
my report, and they have continued since this reporting
period ended. Also symbolic of the retrograde politics
that continues to prevail, statements denying that
genocide was committed in Srebrenica have also
continued.

In sharp contrast, Serbia's President Tomislav
Nikolie, Prime Minister Dacic' and Deputy Prime
Minister Aleksandar Vucie, expressing the sentiments
of the Belgrade authorities, have in recent weeks
shown the kind of political leadership that is worthy
of the highest praise. When President Nikolie explicitly
apologized for Srebrenica and other war crimes
committed by individuals in the name of the Serbian
State or people, he took a courageous step towards
regional reconciliation that, if followed up, could open
the way to further improvements in relations between
Sarajevo and Belgrade.

It is also worth noting that, upon the initiative of
Turkey, a meeting is taking place today between the
Presidents of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Turkey. Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu came
personally to Sarajevo last week to prepare that historic
meeting. These efforts are extremely important not
only to regional cooperation, but also to regional
reconciliation. Of course, they enjoy my full support.

In general, I also remain concerned about a pattern
of disregard for the rule of law that has emerged over
the past couple of years, not least in the Federation. For
this reason, I submitted a special report to the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council on the rule
of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The ongoing failure
of local institutions to implement the November 2010
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court decision
on Mostar's electoral system is a case in point and
represents a violation of the Peace Agreement, which
states that decisions of the Court shall be final and
binding. As a result, residents of Mostar were unable
to vote in the 2012 local elections. The two largest
parties in Mostar bear most responsibility for the
failure to reach an agreement, and I expect these two
parties to start compromising. Perhaps not surprisingly,
given the overall climate, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities again failed to make concrete progress on
the outstanding objectives set by the Steering Board of
the Peace implementation Council as prerequisites for
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

Not all the news has been bad. I have already
mentioned some positive aspects coming out of
Republika Srpska. Additionally, the State-level Council
of Ministers, which underwent a party reshuffle in
November, has met regularly. The State budget for 2013
was adopted on time, for the first time in two years.
In general, however, the State-level coalitions have so
far been unable to deliver much needed progress on the
legislative front.

A stable security situation is the starting point for
everything else, and through their continued presence
the European Union and NATO military missions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have both continued to reassure
citizens that the country remains safe and secure, despite
the difficult political situation and at a time when senior
politicians have repeatedly and openly called the future
of the country into question. In advance of the Security
Council's deliberations in November, I would like to
take this opportunity to express my strong belief that
the presence of the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina under its existing mandate is
essential to support ongoing international community
efforts and my ability to fulfil my civilian mandate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's political leaders and
the parties they represent are faced with a choice that
is growing increasingly stark with each passing day.
There can be no more excuses and there is no place
for them to hide from their responsibilities. The choice
is simple. They can succeed together or they can fail
together. I know them all. I know that they can do much
better, and I call on them from this most distinguished
of stages to show the courage to finally reach the healthy
compromises that will enable the country to progress.

For our part we must continue to assist those
in Bosnia and Herzegovina who want the country to
progress, while also standing firm against all those
who seek to reopen the wounds of the past. Bosnia and
Herzegovina can go forward only if it looks forward and
not backwards. Accordingly, I hope that when I report
to the Council in six months that we can look forward
to a 2014 full of progress and not of deepening crisis.
For Bosnia and Herzegovina, we need not only the
continuous attention of the international community,
but also patience and a long-term approach. New
generations are arising and ready to commit themselves
to that wonderful country.

