Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2268
(2016), which endorses the cessation of hostilities
agreement in Syria, which will enter into force in less
than one hour. France has lent its full support to the
adoption of the resolution, which offers hope for an
immediate improvement of the situation of the Syrian
people.

Throughout the nearly five years ofthe Syrian crisis,
France's position has remained constant in support of
the primacy of diplomacy over war in order to find a
political solution that meets the aspirations of the Syrian
people. For four months and since the first meeting in
Vienna in October 2015, France has fully supported the
diplomatic process that enabled the establishment of
the International Syria Support Group, the adoption of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the beginning in January of
formal inter-Syrian negotiations under the auspices of
the Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.

France wants to see a process that will lead to
tangible results for the Syrian people, not a process for
the sake ofa process. It certainly does not wish to see a
process that would merely serve as a smokescreen to hide
a military escalation, the main victims of which would
be the civilian population and moderate opposition. We
are of the firm belief, which was solidly and explicitly
recalled by the Secretary-General in his letter of
17 February to the Security Council (S/2016/152), that
as long as Syrians see no difference in their daily lives
the negotiations will have no credibility. In that context,
the cessation of hostilities agreed by the United States
and Russia on 12 February should be welcomed as a
contribution to the de-escalation and a step towards the
settlement of the Syrian conflict. France, as I have said,
fully supported the adoption of resolution 2268 (2016)
endorsing the parameters of the cessation of hostilities.

This milestone is both a sign of hope and a test.
It represents the hope that, for the first time, Syrians
will see a decrease in the violence and bombings that
haunt their daily lives, and a test of the good faith of
the parties on the ground, including foreign Powers,
that have accepted the cessation of hostilities. The
role of the Security Council is therefore to support
without hesitation anything that might lead to a lasting
reduction in violence. However, the Council should also
be realistic and exacting. As such, everything must be
done to implement the agreement on the ground. To that
end, France deems it necessary to exercise the utmost
vigilance on two points.

First, the implementation of the agreement should
be closely monitored, as mistrust between the parties
on the ground has never been higher. In that regard,
we recall that only those terrorist groups explicitly
designated by the United Nations are excluded from
the cessation of hostilities. Strict interpretation of that
point should be observed as, without it, peace cannot
be established. The International Syria Support Group
task force, which will report to the Security Council,
will be the collective judge of its implementation. As
long as the parties to the conflict remain the sole judges
of violations and the resumption of hostilities, the whole
structure will remain fragile.

The second point concerns attaining an effective
and sustainable reduction in violence. In order for
the inter-Syrian Geneva negotiations to resume on a
credible foundation, we must ensure that the obligations
recalled in resolution 2254 (2015) and the Munich
communique - in particular the full, safe, unhindered
and unconditional access of humanitarian assistance
to affected populations - are fully implemented. As
the Secretary-General himself indicated in his letter of
17 February, negotiations can succeed only if based on a
credible and solid foundation. It will be up to the Special
Envoy to determine whether these conditions are met
on 7 March. The resumption of talks will be possible
only if the commitments undertaken are scrupulously
applied by the regime and the outside Powers that
support it. In that regard, we are very concerned about
the intensified bombings carried out by Syrian and
Russian armed forces right up to the final hours before
the entry into force of the cessation of hostilities.

France will encourage the opposition High
Negotiations Committee to return to the inter-Syrian
negotiation table as soon as the full and lasting
implementation of international obligations has
been noted, in particular humanitarian access to all
besieged areas, as well as the effective implementation
of the cessation of hostilities. The High Negotiations
Committee is a major stakeholder and plays an essential
role in the success of the negotiations. In that context,
we deeply regret that it is not mentioned in the text
of the resolution, whereas it enjoys and should retain
our support.

If the cessation of hostilities holds, an initial
step will have been made towards a settlement to the
Syrian crisis. Nevertheless, as long as the cessation of
hostilities is not supported by political progress towards
a transition consistent with the Geneva communique
(S/20l2/523, annex), it will remain fragile and
reversible. In other words, the cessation of hostilities,
which is fragile by nature, should move towards a
ceasefire, which is more durable.

Resolution 2254 (2015) sets clear objectives. Allow
me to briefly recall its terms. A ceasefire can take

place only alongside a political process that includes
the implementation of the first stages of the transition.
When the inter-Syrian negotiations between the regime
and the negotiators of the High Negotiations Committee
resume, the parties should begin to formulate the
terms of a compromise in order to set up a transitional
authority with full executive powers, in accordance
with the Geneva communique. France will continue to
contribute fully to the diplomatic efforts of the Council
and the International Syria Support Group with a view
to allowing diplomacy prove its effectiveness for the
benefit of the Syrian people.

