Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this briefing. It is very
good to hear from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, and I thank
him for everything he said. I want to start by also
thanking him for restructuring the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and for the enormous progress
made on opening the offices. As he said, that is really
important. It is a good signal of the international
community's engagement with the people of Libya
and what is happening there. I thank the German
Ambassador as well for the sanctions report. Germany
is now co-penholder with us on Libya, and obviously
we look forward to working even more closely together.

I want to reiterate my Government's strong support
for what the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations are doing on the ground
and our thanks to them for all their efforts. In particular,
we support the approach of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the national conference. We
believe it is the best way to reach an inclusive political
settlement that stabilizes the country. We hope that all
Libyans will come together and engage in that process.
In particular, we hope that a broad spectrum of Libyan
society will be represented at the national conference.
We think we should work to ensure that. We look for
participants to be drawn from as broad a political,
regional, tribal and ethnic spectrum as possible. As the
Council always says on these occasions, we look for
proper representation of women.

The Council has been united pretty well so far.
We hope that we can rally around the United Nations
action plan and that we can help other members of the
international community and ensure that the United
Nations Mission is able to implement the outcomes of
the national conference.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
referred several times to spoilers. The pattern of attacks
he described and the sporadic clashes throughout the
country are obviously of great concern. The Council
needs to be very clear: Libya's future cannot and will
not be determined by spoilers who wish to maintain
the status quo purely for their own gain while ordinary
Libyan citizens continue to suffer. The deteriorating
security situation that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General described simply underscores how
unsustainable the status quo is.

We therefore believe that Libya's political
institutions need to work with the national conference
and take account ofits outcomes. That would signal they
have the best interests of the Libyan people at heart and
that they are committed to finding a durable political
solution to the crisis. The Libyan people will find it
very hard to understand if those institutions continue to
fail to do what has been asked of them.

With regard to the economy, I was very interested
in what the Special Representative said about oil. We
have got to support the United Nations Mission and the
international financial institutions in putting in place
further economic reforms. We need even more targeted
and effective sanctions against spoilers. The progress
that has been made with the Central Bank of Libya is
also very welcome, but obviously it needs to take place
in parallel with work to reunify the Central Bank in the
capital with that in the east.

Finally, with regard to security, the ceasefire is
welcome, but it looks fragile. A sustainable security
architecture across the country will be necessary for
Libya's stability.

