Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by expressing the condolences of the Republic
of Senegal to Turkey following the terrorist attack that
struck that brotherly country yesterday.

Senegal would also like to commend the efforts of
the penholder of resolution 2295 (2016). We welcome
and thank Foreign Minister Abdoulaye Diop's for
participating in today's meeting.

Senegal co-sponsored and voted in favour of
the resolution, as we are convinced that through it
the Security Council is giving the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) a much more robust and effective
mandate, in line with the wish that was clearly expressed
by the States members of the Economic Community
of West African States at the summit meeting held in
Dakar on 4 June 2016. The Council gives MINUSMA
the means to provide all necessary support to the
Government of Mali in its efforts to re-establish its
sovereignty throughout its territory and also in its
efforts to deal with the asymmetric threats the country
is facing. That is why my Government would like to
thank all Council members for their cooperation, which
has made it possible to produce this resolution. Senegal
would also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
its full support for Mali's territorial integrity and
sovereignty over its entire territory.

Senegal would also like to express its full support for
the efforts of the Armed Forces of Mali to re-establish
the country's sovereignty over its entire territory
and combat the terrorist groups that pose a threat to
all countries in the region. We therefore welcome the
efforts of the Malian Government to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and
take this opportunity to call on the parties to be more
committed to the implementation of the agreement,
particularly by providing the necessary information on
cantonment andjoint patrols.

Senegal remains committed and will spare no effort,
as it has done until now, making every contribution
to the effort to restore security and stability to this
country, which is our neighbour, brethren and friend.
That explains the additional effort provided by my
country through the redeployment of the quick reaction
force. I take this opportunity to once again call on the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole to spare no effort in continuing to guarantee its
full support to Mali, which is in need of that support
in this particularly critical period, during which it is
coping with extremely serious threats that imperil not
only Mali but the entire region and the world.

