Mr. Sato (Japan): Let me begin by thanking
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his statement to the
Council yesterday on the situation in the Sudan. I
would also like to thank the President for his creative
and timely initiative to organize this important
meeting.

In the past two years, in my capacity as
Ambassador in charge of conflict and refugee-related
issues in Africa, I have visited the Sudan five times.
My most recent visit took place in September, when I
went to Darfur and eastern Chad as a member of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) donor mission led by High
Commissioner Ruud Lubbers. The refugees and
internally displaced persons whom I met eagerly hope
to return to their homes as soon as circumstances
permit. However, what is crucial in that regard is not
only to assist them in their return, but also to make
their return sustainable and to create an environment in
which they are, first and foremost, able to feed
themselves. The peace process must be advanced in the
Sudan as a whole. I would like to discuss three points
in that connection.

First, Japan has been monitoring with great
interest the developments in the negotiations taking
place here in Nairobi aimed at reaching a
comprehensive peace agreement in the Sudan. As an
incoming member of the Council, Japan is determined
to assume a constructive role in the discussions aimed
at the establishment of a United Nations peace-support
operation in the Sudan. Japan urges the parties to the
north-south conflict to immediately end their civil war

and to strive for national reconciliation and
reconstruction. We fervently hope that a
comprehensive peace agreement will be reached by the
end of this year, at the latest. It is for that reason that
we welcome the adoption of today's Security Council
resolution.

Through the Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD), we have been
advocating the importance of ownership by African
countries and partnership with the international
community to promote Africa's development. In this
context, Japan highly appreciates the initiatives taken
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in the Naivasha peace process, as well as those
taken by the African Union in the Abuja peace
negotiations and its dispatch of a monitoring mission to
the Sudan.

Thirdly, Japan places importance on providing
assistance in a seamless manner in post-conflict
situations during the transition from the emergency
humanitarian assistance phase to that of development
assistance. In order to achieve that objective, it is
crucial that the parties to the conflict demonstrate their
genuine commitment to the development of the Sudan
by signing and actually implementing the
comprehensive peace agreement.

I would like to take this opportunity to briefly
touch upon the situation in Darfur. In order to resolve
the ongoing humanitarian crisis, all the parties
involved in the conflict must adhere to their
commitment to establish security by immediately
halting the violence, protecting the civilian population
and giving their full cooperation to the African Union
mission. In this regard, Japan welcomes the signing of
the protocols on the improvement of the humanitarian
situation and on the enhancement of the security
situation in Darfur. It is essential that the parties
redouble their efforts to bring about the political
solution to crisis in Darfur. Alleviating the suffering of
the vulnerable segments of the population such as
refugees and internally displaced persons is a key
element of Japan's response to the crisis in the Sudan,
which is focused on promoting human security. Based
on this concern over the humanitarian crisis and from
the viewpoint of human security, Japan had dispatched
a survey mission to eastern Chad as early as last May.

In his address before the United Nations General
Assembly this year, our Prime Minister, Junichiro
Koizumi, pledged to provide humanitarian assistance
for Darfur in the amount of $21 million. Japan has
acted speedily to fulfil that pledge by providing steady
assistance to the refugees and displaced persons in the
Sudan and eastern Chad through various international
organizations, including the UNHCR, the World Food
Programme and the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Additionally, we have provided in-kind
assistance of 700 tents for the Sudanese refuges in
Chad in response to the request of the UNHCR.

Security Council members must continue to
speak in one voice and in sending a strong message to
the parties to the conflict if we are to achieve and
consolidate peace in the Sudan. Allow me to close by
emphasizing that Japan, together with the members of
the Council and others in the international community,
is ready to make an active contribution to the
consolidation of peace and economic development in
the Sudan.

