Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings. I
would like to warmly thank Ms. Pillay, since this is the
last time that we will have the pleasure of welcoming
her as High Commissioner. I would like to pay tribute
to her commitment and to the influence that she has had
on the Council. We can say that during her term, human
rights have become an essential part of our agenda. We
can still do better, but that development is irreversible
thanks to her.

Conflict prevention is at the heart of the Security
Council's mandate and one of the primary tasks of
the United Nations. However, with the increase in the
number ofcrises in several regions ofthe world, we recall
how much we still need to improve our prevention tools.
In some cases, the threat was identified but the Council
did not act owing to a lack of consensus. Clearly, I am
thinking of Syria, where the blocking of early action by
the Council and the United Nations allowed the crisis
to reach the current level of seriousness. In other cases,
the risk was not sufficiently understood owing to a lack
of early warning. I am thinking of South Sudan, where
the increasing tension and violence did not receive an
appropriate response until the outbreak of hostilities.

All the tools established by the United Nations
system should be used in order to allow the Security
Council to have the best information. At the heart of
that provision, as many of us have said, the Secretary-
General plays a crucial role, as set out in Article 99 of
the Charter of the United Nations. On his own initiative,
the Secretary-General may in particular bring to the
attention of the Council any situation that may threaten
international peace and security. In the same spirit, the
regular briefings by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights have demonstrated their usefulness. In that
regard, I would like to say that we support the proposal
made earlier by the High Commissioner for a monthly
briefing to the Security Council. That is fully within
her mandate and that of the Council. The same applies
to briefings by the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide.
From the first signs of the crisis in the Central
African Republic, Mr. Adama Dieng warned the Council
about the seriousness ofthe crisis and helped to mobilize
the international community. Such interventions should
therefore be more frequent and the Council should
make more systematic use of the information provided
to it. The Council should, for example, make good use
of the information gathered by the special procedures
of the Human Rights Council. As many of us have said,
we should also increase the involvement of external
actors, such as regional organizations and civil society,
including in the context of Arria Formula meetings.

In conclusion, once the early warning signs have
been received, the Council must clearly be able to act.
To that end, the Council has additional tools - referral
to the International Criminal Court, the imposition
of sanctions and mediation, for example, can make
it possible to defuse tensions, restore calm and
stabilize the situation. The Council's ability to act
along those lines is therefore decisive. To prevent is to
act - a concept to which all States Members of the
United Nations committed by adopting the concept
of the responsibility to protect in 2005. In that spirit,
France made a commitment to limit the abusive use
of the veto by the permanent members of the Security
Council in the case of serious crimes. We again call
for the joint approach of the five permanent members.
Such an approach, I am glad to say, has been broadly
supported by civil society and by many States Members
of the Organization. I thank all those that have spoken
in favour of such a measure.

