Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Allow me to thank the
presidency of the Republic of Korea for taking the
initiative on the vitally important issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. In our view, the topic is
often at the core of the Council's primary mandate with
regard to threats to international peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their interventions.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier this afternoon by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to make additional remarks in my
national capacity.

While international humanitarian law establishes
a comprehensive legal framework to protect civilians
from the effects of military operations, that stands in
stark contrast to the situation that civilians in conflict-
affected areas face on the ground. Nowadays, in the
conduct of armed conflict, it is civilians who more
often than not become the targets of armed attack and
atrocities, such as murder, deportation, ethnic cleansing,
rape and sexual violence, not only as a consequence
of war but as a method and means of conducting war.
Such atrocities were once the exception in the conduct
of armed conflict, while today they have frequently
become the rule.

Individual States have the responsibility to protect
their populations from the atrocities I have mentioned.
At the same time, the international community also has
the responsibility to help protect populations and to
take collective action through the Security Council if
and when national authorities manifestly fail to protect
their population. Therefore, Croatia firmly believes that
those violating human rights in armed conflicts today,
including in Syria, should know that they will face
justice tomorrow. From that perspective, we joined the
appeal to the Security Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court, as requested
in the Swiss letter of 14 January (S/20l3/19, annex).

Unfortunately, our own experience during the early
1990s has taught us that the impact and experience
of such conflict are not the same for all civilians but
can vary enormously among members of the different
groups, depending on whether they are men or women,
young or old, or living in an urban or a rural area. Not
least, it will depend on the conduct of the combatants
and the extent to which they endeavour to target or
to protect civilians during hostilities. In that regard,
Croatia is particularly committed to the protection of
those most vulnerable, namely, women and children.

Regrettably, the reality of children being affected by
armed conflict is inevitable. The unlawful recruitment
and use of children as soldiers continue to be a
widespread problem. A further and growing concern
related to the protection of children is the attacks
against schools and other educational facilities. In that
respect, as an emerging donor, Croatia, in collaboration
with local partners, has focused its assistance in
Afghanistan on the education of girls.

Equally alarming is the increase of attacks on
humanitarian workers, as well as the widespread
lack of respect for medical missions during armed
conflict. Also, the increase in deliberate attacks against
journalists working in conflict zones is a serious
concern that must be addressed.

Croatia would also like to stress the need for further
emphasis on the use of mines and explosive remnants of
war. Croatia has much experience in the issue of mine
clearance at the technical level and the rehabilitation of
mine victims. One needs to keep in mind that such silent
killers kill and maim long after the end ofa conflict and
that their victims often tend to be civilians.

On the basis of our experience, we are convinced
that United Nations peacekeeping activities should
contribute to the enhanced protection and security of
civilians, as well as the reduction of atrocities directed
at the civilian population. In our view, that is clearly
one of the important aspects and goals ofpeacekeeping.

We strongly believe that, in the future, there
should be even more emphasis on civil and military
cooperation and civilian engagement in United
Nations peace missions and operations, with the aim
not only of ensuring the effective preservation of
peace and sustainable post-conflict reconstruction and
development but also to provide adequate focus on
the protection of civilians and to create a favourable
environment for the enjoyment oftheir human rights and
fundamental freedoms. In that regard, a comprehensive
and integrated approach should be ensured that allows
for the active involvement of the police, judicial
officials, diplomats and other members of civil society
in peace, reconstruction and development efforts and in
protection-of-civilian activities.

