Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): As this is the first time
that I have taken the floor before the Security Council
since I took office in the Permanent Mission of
Indonesia this month, please permit me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for July. We look forward to working with you
for the rest of the month, and we wish you every
success. I should also like to thank Special
Representative Amos Ngongi and European Union
High Representative Javier Solana for their briefings.

My delegation is pleased to align itself with the
Security Council's commitment to peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This meeting
comes against the backdrop of the recent visit of the
Council to that country in the continued quest for peace
in the area - a tour that, I am happy to say, is in
accord with the wishes of my delegation. In principle,
there is no doubt that such a visit offers a tremendous
opportunity for the members of the Council to gain a
deeper understanding of the issues and the players,
thereby contributing to the formulation of the best
possible conflict-resolution strategies.

Domestically, it comes as a great relief to learn
that the Transitional Government announced by
President Joseph Kabila on 30 June 2003 has become a
reality with the swearing-in of the Vice-Presidents. The
new Government is a viable basis for unifying the
country and for bringing into the centre all parties and
elements relevant to the search for peace.

In addition, it is the hope of Indonesia that, with
the agreement on the distribution of military command
posts, the final obstacle in the path of the Transitional
Government has been eliminated. In that connection,
my delegation would like to highlight the involvement
of an Indonesian contingent in the peace process, not
only as a demonstration of the commitment of my
Government to peace in the country, but also as a
symbol of Indonesia's continued faith in United
Nations peacekeeping and of its constitutional
commitment to international peace.

I now turn to the question of violence and human
rights violations. The situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - where both
violence and allegations of violations of human rights
and of international humanitarian law have become
routine - has been of tremendous concern to the
international community for several years. The picture
of an area where violence and impunity reign and
where security of life and of property is at a minimum
cannot be reconciled with the conditions necessary for
development.

It is in that connection that we return to the
political structures now being set up in the country. The
Transitional Government holds the key to the
resolution of the crisis; in its hands rests the ability to
reconcile this divided country and to return peace to
the people. Given the fair distribution of posts to
relevant parties in the traditional administration, there
may now be full and representative national
participation in the political process, leading to free
and fair elections. The concept of an inter-Congolese
dialogue has always been important in the search for
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the Transitional Government - in itself an exercise of
the political expression of the entire nation - is truly
positioned to organize the proper forum for such a
dialogue.

Similarly, in view of the issues that have arisen in
the course of this conflict, we share the View that the
Security Council should establish a National
Observatory for Human Rights and a National Truth
and Reconciliation Commission without delay. Beyond
the pursuit ofjustice, there is an equally critical reason
why the work of those bodies is indispensable, and that
is the vexing question of impunity. It is obvious that a
part of the reason why there have continued to be such
persistent violence and violations of human rights and
of international humanitarian law is that there is no
dissuasion of any sort with regard to the actions of
armed parties. That is a legal, philosophical and
practical loophole that must not continue to exist. It is
critical that anyone intent on committing human rights
crimes recognize that there will be serious
consequences for such crimes.

I cannot conclude these remarks without paying
due tribute to the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) as an
institution and to the men and women who make it
work. Despite all the difficulties it has encountered,
MONUC has been instrumental in the progress that has
been made thus far by the United Nations in the search
for peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Mission is a demonstration of the potential of the
United Nations in the search for international peace, a
potential and a tool that the international community
must continue to nurture and treasure.

My delegation is gratified at the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 57/337, on the prevention
of armed conflict, which recognizes the important role
that the United Nations should continue to play in the
prevention of armed conflict by promoting conflict
resolution and dispute settlement. Further, it
encourages the continued strengthening of the process
of the peaceful settlement of disputes and efforts to
make it more effective.

While the support of the international community
is vital in the situation unfolding in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, what is even more important is
the determination of the Congolese to overcome the
obstacles to peace that have haunted their country for
so many long years and have denied them the
opportunity to turn the vast resources of their land
towards development. The challenge before them is to
demonstrate a genuine thirst for peace in their country,
for there can be no commencing the building of
development without the foundation of peace.

