Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the latest report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(S/2015/942), which provides a good overview of
developments in the country. We wish to thank the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Nicholas Hayom for their ongoing work.

Afghanistan is now one year into its transformation
decade, a crucial period for strengthening Afghan
security and moving beyond aid dependence through
the implementation of the National Unity Government's
self-reliance reform agenda. Canada remains committed
to working with the Afghan Government to implement its
reform agenda and is making significant commitments
through 2017. These include $227 million in bilateral
development assistance to support programming
in education, health, women's and girls' rights and
empowerment, humanitarian assistance and capacity-
building in disaster management.

Social and economic outcomes are improved when
all citizens are able to participate in and contribute
to the societies in which they live and to have a voice
in the decisions that affect their lives. Afghanistan's
full potential cannot be fully realized without the
participation of all of its people. We therefore call on
the Government of Afghanistan to fully implement
the law on the elimination of violence against women
and to make every effort to ensure the participation of
women in all facets of Afghan life. Canada stresses that
Afghan laws must offer strong protections for women
and girls, as guaranteed by the Constitution and in
line with Afghanistan's international commitments to
protecting human rights, and in particular to protecting
women and girls from sexual and domestic violence
and child, early and forced marriage.

(spoke in English)

Improved security and stability remain central to
the achievement of Afghanistan's long-term economic
and development goals. Canada participates in broader
NATO-led security efforts by providing $330 million
over three years to help sustain the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces. Canada agrees with the
conclusion of UNAMA's assessment that the Afghan
security forces have stood strong in the face of
considerable challenges, but the brief fall of Kunduz
and the Taliban expansion in other areas of Afghanistan
cannot be overlooked. These are worrying signs of a
broader deterioration in the security situation - one
made more complex by the entrenchment of affiliates
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Civilians
continue to bear the brunt of the violence, with incidents
up 19 per cent this year, including the targeting of
United Nations staff and humanitarian workers.

Peace and reconciliation remain a necessary
foundation for long-term security, stability and
prosperity. Canada supports an Afghan-led peace
process and welcomed the initiative in Murree this
summer as a first step towards peace negotiations.
We were heartened by the Afghanistan-Pakistan talks
in Paris, aimed at reinvigorating this process, as well
as recent discussions at the Heart of Asia meeting in
Islamabad. While peace will not come easily, we are
encouraged by these steps and urge further efforts to
revive the peace talks.

Terrorism knows no borders. What threatens one
state threatens its neighbours, and what menaces its
neighbours menaces us all. With this interconnectedness
in mind, it is imperative that we work together to
confront Afghanistan's security challenges and to
ensure that militant groups are not able to exploit areas
of instability to gain footholds from which to propagate
their violence on a regional or global scale.

Canada recognizes that Afghanistan's long-term
economic development requires not only improved
security and stability, but also large-scale private sector
engagement, a skilled labour force, infrastructure
development, enhanced social service delivery and
good governance. Canada continues to stand with the
Afghan people as they strive for a more secure and
more prosperous future for their country. We call on
Afghanistan's leaders to redouble their efforts to work
collaboratively for and with all Afghans to improve
security, bolster democracy and the rule of law, increase
transparency and uphold and protect human rights for
all Afghans.

