Mr. Berger (Germany) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, allow me to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacic', Prime Minister of Serbia; His Excellency
Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo; His
Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo; and His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.

Like the speakers who have gone before me, I
should like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his detailed
briefing. Over the past three months, we have witnessed
two major political events in Kosovo and in the region,
which I would like to touch upon today.

First, presidential and legislative elections in Serbia
were held in May, and led to the establishment of a
new Government in Belgrade. We are pleased that a
wide majority of Serbians - 75 per cent - supported
parties advocating a strengthened integration of Serbia
with the European Union (EU). I would like to assure
Mr. Dacic that Germany shall continue to be a reliable
partner ready to closely cooperate with his Government
and support the process of necessary reform.

We also welcome the fact that Serbian citizens of
Kosovo were able to participate in elections without
having encountered any major security issues. That is
the result of pragmatic cooperation between all parties
involved and the noteworthy support of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo
police, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
(EULEX) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR).

The Government of Kosovo took the opportunity
presented to demonstrate that it actively took into
account the interests of the Serbian minority in the
country. The elections also demonstrate that it is
possible to make compromises on practical issues when
there is a political will to find a solution that benefits
both parties.

After the establishment of a new Serbian
Government, we hope that dialogue mediated by the
EU between Belgrade and Pristina will swiftly resume.
Given the possibility of EU membership for both Serbia
and Kosovo, such dialogue continues to be the most
effective means of contributing to keeping peace and
stability in the region going.

Therefore, we fully back the initiative of the High
Representative of the EU, Catherine Ashton, which has
the objective of raising the dialogue, under the auspices
of the EU, to a political level so as to accomplish
tangible and sustainable progress in normalizing
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We welcome
the fact that Prime Ministers Dacic' and Thaci have
noted that they were ready to engage in such dialogue.

(spoke in English)

The swift and full implementation of existing
agreements, for example on integrated border
management and on the representation of Kosovo in
regional organizations, remains key. As a second step,
agreements need to be reached in areas that have not
been tackled yet, like energy and telecommunications.

On his recent, very timely visit to Kosovo and
other countries in the region, including to places
of symbolic importance such as Srebrenica in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Prizren and the Visoki
Decani Monastery in Kosovo, the Secretary-General
consistently highlighted the need for the resolution of
existing tensions through dialogue and closer regional
cooperation. With regard to Kosovo, we hope that both
sides will respond to the Secretary-General's call by
constructively engaging in the high-level dialogue
process, as a necessary step towards fulfilling their
countries' European aspirations.

The second major political development that I
would like to touch upon today is the decision taken
by the International Steering Group on 2 July to
end the supervision of Kosovo's independence and,
accordingly, to close the International Civilian Office
in Kosovo. Ending supervised independence, which still
requires the adoption of the necessary constitutional
and legislative amendments by the competent Kosovo
authorities, is based on our firm conviction that Kosovo
has grown into a democratic and multi-ethnic State
through the implementation of its obligations under the
Ahtisaari plan. Those obligations include, inter alia, the
adoption of laws on the rights of ethnic minorities, on
cultural and religious heritage and on decentralization.

However, certain challenges persist. We condemn
all acts of inter-ethnic violence by all parties and
reaffirm our strong support for continued cooperation
between the Kosovo police and EULEX in that regard.
Other parties, including Serbs in northern Kosovo,
need to refrain from violence and enhance their
cooperation with EULEX as well. However, the report
provided by EULEX clearly indicates that acts of
violence against perpetrators of all ethnic backgrounds
are being investigated and prosecuted. Statements
making different claims are therefore simply false and
dangerously misleading.

We welcome UNMIK's focus on the challenges
faced by minority communities in Kosovo and on the
question of voluntary returns to Kosovo. However, any
future analysis of the question of voluntary returns will
also need to take economic and demographic factors
into account.

Finally, I would like to touch briefly upon the
situation in northern Kosovo, where the security
situation remains volatile. Owing to roadblocks and
repeated physical attacks on EULEX staff and vehicles,
the free movement of EULEX remains impaired. We
strongly condemn ongoing roadblocks and threats
against EULEX staff and call upon all parties, especially
the Serbian authorities, to use their influence on the
responsible actors in northern Kosovo to allow EULEX
to fully carry out its mandate.

We also strongly condemn continued acts of
violence against KFOR, such as the use of firearms by
Serbian protesters against a group of KFOR soldiers on
1 June in a clear attempt to severely injure or even kill
the soldiers.

Ultimately, the problems in northern Kosovo can
only be solved politically. Building confidence between
the local population and the competent authorities in
Pristina remains indispensable. In that context, we
commend the Government of Kosovo on its decision to
establish an administrative office in north Mitrovica.
That decision marks an important step in a broader
strategy to reach out to the Serbian population in the
north. We encourage all actors on the ground, including
UNMIK, to support Pristina's outreach initiative.

Let me once against stress that Germany takes the
allegations contained in the so-called Marty report
seriously. We are therefore very pleased that the
important work of the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force has progressed significantly since our last
debate in May (see S/PV.6769). The passing of a law
that enables the Task Force to conduct full, fair and
independent criminal investigations in Albania has
been a major step. The Task Force has also intensified
its cooperation with other relevant counterparts in the
region and with the International Criminal Court for
the Former Yugoslavia. We therefore call on all sides
to stop engaging in discussions about reporting lines,
roles and responsibilities, and rather unite behind the
Special Investigative Task Force's important work.

