Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic):
Since this is the first time I have addressed the Council
under your presidency, Sir, allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to extend sincerest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
There can be no doubt that your diplomatic skills and
knowledge of the issues will greatly enrich our work and
help us achieve the expected results.

I also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia, and to the members
of his delegation for the exemplary way in which they
conducted the work of the Council last month.

I should also like to associate myself with the eloquent
words that you, Mr. President, addressed to the Ambassador
of France, who is closing out his assignment, as the
Permanent Representative of his country, on the Council. I
feel that you were speaking for all the members of the
Council in this regard.

I should like straight away to express my delegation's
sincerest thanks to the Secretary-General for his submission
of a complete report, dated 9 September 1995, the twelfth
in the series of progress reports on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). We also wish to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for Liberia, Mr. Nyakyi, as well as
to the leaders of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), especially the leaders of Nigeria and
Ghana, for their tireless and unceasing efforts to arrive at
a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Liberia.

My delegation is pleased to see that the responsibilities
set out in resolution 1001 (1995) of 30 June 1995 have to
a great extent been met. In our opinion, the peace process
in Liberia has recently shown signs of the progress which
we have long awaited. The Abuja negotiations culminated
in the signing by the Liberian factions on 19 August of an
Agreement which stipulated the parties' commitment to
restoring and respecting the cease-fire and to establishing a
new Council of State that would lead the country towards
elections to be held next August. This Agreement also
provided a timetable for its implementation.

My delegation is gratified by these important events,
which allow us to hope that a peaceful solution will be
found to the Liberian conflict. It is true that the Secretary-
General, in his report which forms the basis of today's
draft resolution, informs us that at least 10 peace
agreements had already been signed and abandoned by
the leaders of the warring Liberian factions since 1989.
Nevertheless, we have considerable grounds for optimism,
since the leaders are now determined to end the civil war
that has engulfed their country over the past six years. It
seems that this time they will not, as they have done in
the past, allow this unique opportunity to restore peace to
the country to elude them.

My delegation is therefore pleased with the draft
resolution which we are about to adopt, which extends the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL), in accordance with the Secretary-
General's recommendation, for a period of four additional
months to 31 January 1996. The goal is to enable the
Mission to help monitor observance of the terms of the
Abuja Agreement in accordance with the agreed
timetable.

My delegation eagerly awaits the report which the
Secretary-General intends to submit to the Council in
October. We are also eager to see the report's
recommendations on the new concept of operations. We
hope that the report will register further progress in the
implementation by the Liberian factions of the peace
process in their country.

In conclusion, aware as we are of UNOMIL's role
in the area of cooperation with the Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in monitoring the Liberian
parties' observance of the Abuja Agreement, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

