Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire thanks the presidency of
Kazakhstan for convening this ministerial-level debate
on the issue of peace, security and development in
Central Asia and Afghanistan, which is a source
of major concern to the Security Council and to
all the States of Central Asia, and beyond. I would
like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, who is presiding over our work today,
and the other Ministers and Vice-Ministers and State
Secretaries in attendance today.

I would also like to pay tribute to Afghanistan for
allowing the Council to see at first-hand the situation on
the ground in that great country. I take this opportunity
to thank the Afghan Government for its welcome
and hospitality.

I would also like to commend the Secretary-General
on his informative briefing on today's agenda item.

The subject of today's meeting serves to highlight
the close link between security and development in a
regional context strongly dominated by major security
concerns. That issue, which is ofa global scale, is at the
core of the Afghan crisis, which has lasted for 30 years
and is markedly regional and global in nature. A global
solution must therefore be put forward.

The situation in Afghanistan elicits serious concerns
because of the complexity of security, economic and
humanitarian challenges facing the country. The
Security Council must therefore support the various
national, regional and international initiatives to
create the conditions necessary for peace and stability,
which are essential for economic prosperity. In that
context, it is important to understand the stakes and the
challenges to the stabilization of Afghanistan in three
aspects: political and security, economic, and regional
and international.

In political and security terms, the conflict in
Afghanistan is a breeding ground for terrorism in all
its forms. The increasing level of terrorist activities
carried out by the Taliban and the Afghan faction of
the Islamic State in the country's various provinces
contributes to the ongoing degradation of the security
situation, with clear repercussions in the entire region.
That situation of ongoing insecurity urgently calls for
the strengthening of the international community's
capacity to curb the level of violence in the country.
Against that backdrop, Cote d'Ivoire reminds all
parties to the conflict of their responsibility to protect
civilians during military operations and requests that
additional measures be taken to reduce the number of
civilian victims.

My country reaffirms the major role that the
Security Council must play vis-a-vis the Afghan
Government, with a View to reviving and taking
ownership of the national reconciliation process.
The Ivoirian Government therefore welcomes the
adoption of the Afghan national strategy for peace and
reconciliation presented by the High Peace Council,
as well as the measures taken by the Government to
implement the national action plan on peace, security
and the promotion of women's rights.

Cote d'Ivoire also underscores the importance of
the upcoming legislative and presidential elections
and strongly encourages the Afghan authorities to do
their utmost to ensure that the elections take place
as scheduled in a peaceful environment and with the
participation of all Afghans.

In addition to the points already I have mentioned,
regional cooperation should contribute by pooling the
means to combat, and glean information about, illicit
trafficking, money laundering and the trafficking in
weapons, with a view to eliminating those scourges.

At the economic level, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the progress made by the Afghan Government in
combating corruption and reducing its dependence on
foreign aid, and encourages it to continue its efforts to
combat drug trafficking, which is a source of terrorist
financing. In the face of the growing phenomenon of
drug trafficking, the international community must
press for a comprehensive and coordinated approach to
combat that scourge in all its forms.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the development of economic
cooperation in Central Asia and urges Afghanistan and
its neighbours to promote economic integration. In that
regard, Afghanistan's geographic location between
the energy-supplying countries of Central Asia and
the energy-consuming countries of South Asia is an
undeniable asset.

At the regional and international levels, the
challenges to be met require a regional and global
approach. In that regard, C6te d'Ivoire urges
neighbouring countries to cooperate for the stabilization
of Afghanistan and to promote regional cooperation
and economic development. My country reaffirms
its support for the Kabul Process, which provides a
comprehensive framework for the Afghan Government
and its regional partners to arrive at a political solution
and lasting peace in the country. We therefore call
on the States of Central Asia and on Afghanistan to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Ivoirian Government calls for the participation
of all Afghan parties, including the Taliban, in the
next meeting of the political process, scheduled for
February. We reaffirm the need to improve border
control and information-sharing among competent
national organizations in view of the issue of the return
of foreign terrorist fighters, who now constitute a new
threat to peace and security.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the efforts of United
Nations agencies in Central Asia and Afghanistan,
which help the country regain peace and reinvigorate
development, so as to contribute to the prosperity of
Central Asia. My country is in favour of strengthened
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, as well as the relevant regional
organizations, so as to build the region's capacity to
surmount the challenges hampering the restoration of
peace, stability and development in this important and
resource-rich part of our planet.

