Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Since the last time we
met to discuss Ukraine, the results of efforts to end the
conflict remain mixed. On 5 September 2014, under
the auspices of the trilateral contact group, the Minsk
protocol was signed to halt the violent conflict in
eastern Ukraine. It outlined specific steps that, if fully
implemented, would help the people of Ukraine emerge
from the national nightmare that they have endured for
much of this year. As a follow-up, on 19 September,
the Minsk memorandum was signed, which clarified
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. The
Secretary-General joined many other leaders in
welcoming those agreements and urging their full
implementation.

However, despite those important agreements,
we are here today because much more work needs
to be done to ensure that lasting and durable peace
prevails in Ukraine. Initial important steps have been
undertaken by various stakeholders to implement the
Minsk protocol and memorandum, including, notably,
the implementation of the ceasefire, the exchange
of a number of detained persons and the Ukrainian
Government's steps toward decentralization, including
by the adoption of a special status, or interim self-
governance, for certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk.
However, violation of the ceasefire agreement is a
daily occurrence, with a regular loss of life. We must
all collectively make every possible effort to support
the urgent implementation of the Minsk protocol and
memorandum. That implementation is at present very
slow.

While fighting has decreased since 5 September,
sporadic fighting in Donbas continues. It is largely
concentrated around Donestk airport and the areas
around the strategic towns of Luhansk and Mariupol. In
his upcoming statement, Mr. Ivan Simonovie, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, will provide
us with the latest information on the human rights
situation.

The special monitoring mission ofthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), charged
with the responsibility of monitoring and verifying the
ceasefire and other provisions of the Minsk protocol,
is doing its outmost to carry out its crucial mandate,
even in the face of logistical challenges. The United
Nations has engaged continuously with the mission
and the OSCE secretariat to identify specific areas
where United Nations expertise and resources can be of
assistance. The international community should fully
support the OSCE efforts so as to ensure that it has the
full capacity, as well as access, to monitor and to verify
the ceasefire and to observe that the Russian-Ukrainian
border is fully secure.

In recent days, we have seen deeply disturbing
reports on the alleged widespread use of internationally
banned cluster munitions, including references to
12 documented incidents in eastern Ukraine in which at
least six people were killed and dozens others wounded.
On 22 October, in his meeting with Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, the
Charge' d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of Ukraine
to the United Nations reiterated the official assurances
of the Ukrainian Ministry for Foreign Affairs that the
Ukrainian armed forces "have never used and do not use
weapons with cluster warheads". The Charge d'affaires
also underscored the commitment of the Ukrainian
Government to actively assist and participate in an
impartial investigation of such claims.

Such heinous practices, if confirmed, are utterly
unacceptable. The reports should be urgently and fully
investigated, and those found to be responsible should
be held accountable. Those serious allegations serve
as a stark reminder of the need to urgently implement

all 12 points of the Minsk protocol, as well as the
memorandum, to lay the ground for sustainable peace,
recovery and accountability.
The humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine,
particularly with the onset of winter, remains of
the utmost concern. Despite the ceasefire, there are
continuing security challenges, which hamper relief
efforts. The United Nations continues to work to ensure
humanitarian access to all people in need, including in
the more volatile areas of eastern Ukraine. We urgently
need to redouble our efforts to assist the internally
displaced and the refugees to cope with the effects
of the conflict and prepare for the coming winter.
We also need to ensure that the current humanitarian
situation in southeastern Ukraine does not further
deteriorate. Those efforts require the ongoing support
of the international community and a high level of
coordination with the Government of Ukraine.

Today, we meet only two days before the polls
officially open for the early parliamentary elections
in Ukraine. It is more important than ever that the
extraordinary legislative elections and the local
elections, scheduled for 26 October and 7 December,
respectively, can take place peacefully throughout
Ukraine and serve as important milestones in the
efforts to help to stabilize the country and to refocus
national energies on achieving reform, rebuilding and
reconciliation for all Ukrainians.

Reports of alleged violence against several
parliamentary candidates and representatives of
various parties in the upcoming legislative elections
are deplorable. Similarly, inflammatory statements by
armed rebel groups threatening to disrupt voting in
areas of eastern Ukraine and to hold their own elections
on 2 November, in breach of the Constitution and
national law, should be condemned by all.

All national and international stakeholders should
make every effort to support the successful holding
of peaceful parliamentary elections. International
election monitoring efforts - led by the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights with
an estimated 600 observers, as well as an additional
1,700 international observers and 37 domestic
non-governmental organizations registered by the
Central Election Commission - will be critical. The
United Nations also welcomes efforts by the Ukrainian
authorities to ensure that all Ukrainian citizens have
the right to exercise their franchise under the Ukrainian
Constitution.

While the upcoming elections are an important
step forward for Ukraine, they will need to be followed
by the rapid implementation of the comprehensive
political, legal and economic reforms announced by
the Ukrainian Government and by the urgent start of
a comprehensive national dialogue to rebuild cohesion
and to address all outstanding critical national issues.

We must all work together towards the peaceful
resolution of the conflict in a manner that upholds
Ukraine's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. We cannot and should not allow eastern
Ukraine to become just the latest in a string of frozen
conflicts in Europe. Recent discussions on the conflict
in Ukraine on the margins of the 10th Asia-Europe
Meeting, held on 16 and 17 October in Milan, Italy, are
welcome. The continuing bilateral discussions between
the Ukrainian and Russian Presidents on the means to
fully implement the Minsk protocol and memorandum
remain critical.

The Secretary-General remains committed to using
his good offices to help resolve this violent conflict.
We will continue to keep the Council informed of
the collective efforts of this Organization to help the
Ukrainian people and Government to restore peace and
stability to their country.

It has become clear in the past weeks that, despite
the critical agreements reached in Minsk, we are still far
from their full implementation and, therefore, also far
from a sustainable peace in Ukraine. It is incumbent on
all actors to fulfil their responsibilities and to refocus
their efforts in that direction. It is incumbent on all of
us to assist them.

