The President: I thank the Under-Secretary-
General for his clarifications.

Let me say a very brief word of follow-up and
conclusion. Could the Under-Secretary-General pass on
to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General the Council's very warm
thanks for the hard work they are doing on law and
order, on preparation for the elections and on the whole
range of business. We recognize the very hard task they
have, and we thank them for the work they are doing.

The Council will continue to monitor this issue very
closely. Let me just draw from today's discussion the
points on which we will continue to need briefing from
the Secretariat and on which this morning's discussion has
placed emphasis.

Clearly, the elections and the whole political process
constitute a vital area. I think we have brought out this
morning the importance of organizing the elections in a
way that brings the communities together, a point made
by the representative of the Russian Federation and by
many other speakers. The inclusiveness of the political
process is extremely important to the Council in terms of
trying to re-form a multi-ethnic Kosovo. We are glad that
the business of the Serb representative on the Working
Group has been resolved; that is a good sign. And it is
good news that UNMIK is establishing a proper office in
Belgrade, with communication flowing from it and to it.

Law and order is very clearly a priority. The new
pillar I has been formed and is very welcome. Within that
area an accent was put not just on the structures of law
and order and the judiciary, but also on the traffic of
weapons and the illicit traffic in arms. Jamaica and others
referred to that, and we will want to come back to that
point if the Secretariat and UNMIK are having problems
on it, which they probably will.

The whole security issue is, of course, important,
most of all ethnic violence. We are pleased with the
progress that has been made, but there is a huge amount to
do, not least on extremism. We may come back to
extremism when we return to this subject in the Council.
We would like the Secretariat and UNMIK to give further
thought to that. But the representative of Ireland made the
point that community and ethnic leaders must lead on this
issue: stay within the law, within the resolutions, within
the international framework, and take things steadily, with
law and order firmly in mind.

Economic reconstruction is obviously important. It
speaks for itself. I am glad to hear from the Under-
Secretary-General that it is beginning to be in
significantly better shape.

On the humanitarian side, refugees returns,
internally displaced persons, missing persons and
detainees have all been brought up, and we will want to
monitor very closely the progress that is being made in
that respect. Bangladesh made a point about the
rapporteur on missing persons, on which we would like an
answer back to the Council. I think he is reporting to the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, but he might like
to keep the Council informed.

We have not forgotten the whole regional context. It
is a very large context. Macedonia has been mentioned.
Southern Serbia has been mentioned. But we approach
Kosovo in the regional framework and we want to have
broader discussions, maybe privately later this month, on
that issue.

We are very conscious that UNMIK has to work
with KFOR, with the local communities and with the
regional governments, and therefore it is important to us
that we have briefings and information, coming
particularly from the Kosovo Force (KFOR). We will be
in touch with the KFOR leadership to see if we can have
an interchange with them on the subject of security in
particular.

Finally, many members of the Council mentioned
the proposed mission, with support for the idea. That is
something that the United Kingdom presidency will
follow up during the course of this month. We will have
discussions in informal consultations on that, with a view
to a timing that does not get in the way of the preparations
for the elections. I think we will need to be conscious of
that.

I would therefore like to end by thanking the Under-
Secretary-General for his very constructive briefing and
full answers to questions. I think the nature and style of
this meeting has shown its worth in its interactivity.

Just one small word of praise and thanks to those we

do not often praise and thank - in addition to the
interpreters, who have to put with a lot of adlibbing in this
format - and that is to the transcribers and the

stenographers, who also have a much more difficult task
when we are all speaking off the cuff and not from written
remarks. Thank you for the work you do all the time, but
particularly for these particular sorts of meetings.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda. It will
remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.
