Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina abstained in the voting on the draft resolution
before us because, as a State party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, we understand that
we are dealing with a court ofjustice established in order
to help eliminate impunity, and that is complementary
to and not a replacement for the responsibility of every
State - a responsibility that cannot be renounced - to
ensure that justice, truth and memory are served in the
face of atrocious crimes. Those are the central pillars of
Argentina's policy of promoting, protecting, defending
and guaranteeing human rights.

We also abstained having taken into account the
fact that, in complying fully with the Statute of the
Court, it is the responsibility of the Security Council
to analyse the subject at hand in strict interpretation of
article 16 of the Statute. That means understanding that
suspending a trial can be necessary in order to preserve
international peace and security while not implying
a ruling on the substance of a case under the Court's
consideration. We abstained, moreover, because on a
number of occasions we have shared our frustration
and that of others who see the Security Council as a
body that is once again helping to promote the law of
the jungle. As the President of Argentina has said, if
multilateralism is to be genuinely equitable, compliance
with United Nations resolutions is required of weak
countries and strong, small countries and large.

We also abstained because we recognize the
legitimacy of the claim of those of us that have
voluntarily subjected ourselves to the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court by becoming a party to it,
and we see that once again our destinies and the need for
true justice are tied to the decisions of political bodies
such as the Security Council. That is why Argentina
hopes for the universal participation of all Member
States in the Court and that those who defend the fight
against impunity will reflect that in a full commitment
to ratifying the Statute of the Court.

Argentina appreciates the presentation of the
African Union Contact Group of Ministers on Kenya's
understandable concerns and the reasons given for
not supporting the draft resolution. Argentina has
heard them and recognizes the decision of the Kenyan
leadership to cooperate with the Court and assume its
responsibility as a State party to take the route of going
to trial, which would enable a coherent response to
Kenya's concerns.

At the moment, the working group on amendments
of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute
is focusing on negotiating amendments to the Court's
rules of procedure. Argentina is firmly committed to
that process, and it is encouraging that we have been
working closely with Kenya and other African countries.
By historical consciousness and collective fate, we are
of the South and we therefor favour dialogue and the
search for ways to overcome and avoid dead ends. The
people and Government of the nation of Argentina, as
our former President Kirchner said, are the children of
the mothers and grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo,
and that is why we understand that all victims have the
right not to be forgotten or treated with indifference,
including those in Kenya in 2007. They all deserve
justice, truth, reparations and a guarantee that what
happened will not happen again.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Argentina's firm
support for the International Criminal Court, and we
will continue to focus our efforts on the noble task of
its universalization.

