Mrs. Carrien (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on convening this open
debate, which is of great importance to our country, and
to thank you for giving us the opportunity to speak for
the first time as a member-elect of the Council.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Switzerland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group; of
Liechtenstein with regard to the code of conduct; and
of Estonia on the election of the Secretary-General.
In the spirit of the Spanish presidency's call to refrain
from repeating ideas that have already been raised, I
shall not linger on the issues already covered by the
statements of the delegations just mentioned, but
concentrate on a very important point that my country
wishes to highlight.

Peacekeeping operations are fundamental tools for
the maintenance of international peace and security and
are an instrument to which Uruguay has been committed
for decades through concrete contributions to the
system and through its ongoing contribution to policy
discussions held within the Organization with regard
to those operations. Therefore, as an actor committed
to peacekeeping, Uruguay hopes for success in the
processes currently under way to review or consider
United Nations peace operations, peacebuilding and
resolution 1325 (2000).

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and the Secretary-
General's report on its implementation (S/2015/682)
make it clear that the subject of consultations with
troop-contributing and police-contributing countries
remains a priority for improving the effectiveness
of peacekeeping mandates, in particular through
the earlier involvement of those countries in the
process of developing such mandates. The need for
early consultations with troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries in the current context, in
which we are witnessing an increase in direct attacks
on peacekeepers, and when mandates are becoming
increasingly complex, including offensive actions in
some cases, has become increasingly important. This
means that listening to the voices from the ground will
lead to more credible and realistic mandates. Similarly,
the triangular cooperation between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and Member States at large,
in particular the troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries, also needs to be
improved if we are to achieve a true partnership.

As my country has noted in other forums, no
new instruments are needed for consultations to be
conducted in an efficient manner; the challenge lies in
the implementation of the existing ones. The United
Nations Charter, Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1353 (2001), and various presidential
statements establish and refer to these mechanisms,
including provisions for early consultations with TCCs
before establishing or renewing new mandates; ad
hoc meetings at any stage of mandates, at the request
of the TCCs; and information exchange and thematic
discussions. In this regard, we believe that there is room
to improve the use of these tools, such as anything to
do with sharing information, including early access to
the reports of the Secretary-General, which my country
has insisted on in other areas, for example, during our
presidency of the Group of Friends of Haiti when the
first draft ofresolution 1542 (2004), for the mandate for
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, was
being prepared.

Finally, the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations is key to improving the
interaction between those who are establishing and
renewing mandates and those that implement them, as
well as with the Secretariat. In this regard, Uruguay
remains committed to improving the working methods
for the biennium 2016-2017 in which it will sit as a
non-permanent member of this body.

