Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the Cuban delegation, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your team for the
work carried out by the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. We would also like to
express our gratitude for the information conveyed to
us this morning by Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED).

The fight against terrorism is an issue that
reaches far beyond the context of the Security Council.
This problem constitutes a priority for all peace-loving
Member States of the United Nations, not simply for
those who are permanent or temporary members of this
organ.

For Cuba, the fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations is a priority. Our country has
never allowed nor will it allow its territory to be used
for terrorist actions against any State, without
exception. We firmly uphold the View that only
authentic and effective international cooperation that
enables the prevention and combating of all acts of
terrorism will provide an effective and sustainable
response to the scourge of terrorism at the global level.

For years, our delegation has regularly submitted
detailed information to the Security Council and its
Counter-Terrorism Committee on the terrorist actions
of several individuals and organizations targeting Cuba
and on the complicit protection and tolerance that the
United States Government accords them. However, we
do not know whether any action has been taken to even
assess the information that has been submitted, or
whether any investigation of the United States' failure
to comply with the several resolutions adopted by this
organ has been undertaken.

We have made statements in this Chamber on
more than one occasion to warn of the release of the
international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles. We have
repeatedly requested that concrete steps be taken to
prevent the commission of such a despicable act, which
has now become a reality. The CTC has been informed
of this in a timely and detailed manner.

Posada Carriles, who is rightly considered the
most notorious terrorist of the Western Hemisphere,
was released last year, in spite of the fact that there was
enough evidence linking him to some of the most
infamous crimes of the twentieth century, including the
downing of flight 455 of Cubana de Aviacion in 1976,
the Iran Contra scandal and the bombings in Havana
tourist centres in 1997.

Despite of recognizing Posada Carriles' notorious
and reprehensible actions, the United States
Government only charged him with minor migration
crimes. That would have been the right time to indict
him for his lengthy record. There is plenty of evidence
to prove it. Declassified documents of the Federal
Bureau of Investigations and the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) and Posada Carriles' own confessions
are enough evidence to indict him as a confessed
terrorist. There is no doubt today that the true intention
was to prevent the details of his mindlessly destructive
actions under CIA orders from becoming public. The
secrets Posada Carriles knows will come to light
sooner or later. The truth will not be concealed forever.

A new smokescreen was raised on 6 November
2007 when the United States Government filed an
appeal in a federal court to release Posada Carriles.
That act is a further manoeuvre to cover up guilt of that
confessed international terrorist. The appeal fails to
mention his lengthy terrorist record. They insist on
treating the case as a minor migration crime. They thus
ensure the terrorist's definitive freedom and the
withdrawal of all charges against him.

Cuba appears again before the Security Council
to strongly denounce and condemn the complicity and
absolute responsibility of the United States
Government for this individual's release. Next October
will mark 32 years since the atrocious terrorist act
committed by Posada Carriles and his henchmen
against the Cubana de Aviacion airliner that claimed
the lives of 73 innocent civilians.

We must recall that another individual
responsible for the midair bombing of the jetliner,
Orlando Bosch, also enjoys every freedom in Miami,
while he makes public statements bragging about his
numerous terrorist acts against the Cuban people.
Meanwhile, terrorist organizations continue to operate
openly in Miami and other cities of this country,
carrying out recruitment, training and fund-raising
activities, the purchase of arms and the planning and
execution of terrorist acts against our country.

Another example of the United States authorities'
complicity with terrorist actions against Cuba is that
just a few days ago a group of Posada Carriles'
collaborators, including the terrorists Santiago Alvarez
and Osvaldo Mitat, were given laughable sentences for
obstructing the course of justice in refusing to testify
against Posada, when they should have been sentenced,
according United States law itself, for terrorism.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) calls
upon all States to refrain from organizing, instigating,
assisting or participating in terrorist acts in another
State or acquiescing in organized activities within its
territory directed towards the commission of such acts.
It also calls upon all States to, inter alia, ensure that
any person who participates in such acts is brought to
justice. Does this not apply to the United States?

While unscrupulous confessed terrorists remain at
large, the United States authorities continue to hold
hostage in high-security prisons five Cuban
anti-terrorist fighters who, with great altruism and
courage, were only trying to obtain information about
Miami-based terrorist groups in order to prevent them
from committing violent acts and to save the lives of
Cuban and United States citizens. Once again, Cuba
demands the immediate release of Gerardo Hernandez,
Ramon Labafiino, Fernando Gonzalez, Antonio
Guerrero and Rene Gonzalez.

Cuba reiterates its request to the Security Council
and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to promptly pay
heed to the detailed information with which our
country has provided them and to take all appropriate
measures set out in the relevant resolutions. In
accordance with those resolutions, this organ must
demand that the Government of the United States
immediately sentence Luis Posada Carriles for his
terrorist acts or extradite him to the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, whose justice system has been
pursuing him for years.

The fight against terrorism must be carried out in
full. Terrorism must be rejected under any
circumstances. It will not be possible to eradicate
terrorism if only some terrorist acts are condemned
while others are ignored, tolerated or justified, or if the
issue is simply manipulated to promote petty political
interests. Double standards and impunity cannot
prevail in addressing this sensitive issue. The Security
Council cannot maintain its complicit silence in the
face of this gross affront to the victims of terrorism
throughout the world.

As it has done thus far, Cuba will continue to
abide strictly by the provisions of the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, including those
related to the issue of terrorism, and will maintain its
cooperation with the subsidiary bodies created under
those resolutions. At the same time, we hope that this
organ will, without further delay, make effective use of
the copious and detailed information provided by
Cuba.

