Mr. Chicoti (Angola): Madam President, I would
like to congratulate Tanzania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
to express satisfaction at the attention devoted to
Africa. This is in the best tradition of Tanzania's
dedication to the most worthy causes of our continent.

May I also commend Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, for the key role that he and his team are
playing in the implementation of the Great Lakes
agenda.

During Angola's two-year term as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council, this body,
as well as the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, held meetings on
the same issue.

My delegation is therefore very appreciative to
you, Madam President, for keeping alive the interest of
the Security Council, and, through it, the interest of
international community in the problems affecting this
important region.

This is also the right place to thank the
international Community in general and in particular
the members of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes region for their moral and material support to the
Conference. We therefore appeal for the continuation
of this support.

The holding of the first Summit Conference and
the adoption of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration
constitute a turning point in the history of the region.
The full participation in the Conference of all States
concerned is a clear demonstration of the regional
dimension of the problem and also an expression of the
capacity of our peoples to overcome differences when
vital common interests are at stake.

The Great Lakes region, considered in the past as
a disastrous and conflict-ridden area, is gearing up for
an overdue revival that has brought hope back to our
peoples.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo held a
constitutional referendum successfully - an important
step towards the consolidation of the transitional
arrangements before the forthcoming elections.

In neighbouring Burundi, the holding of
presidential elections in August 2005 ended the
transitional period and opened a new era of national
reconciliation and economic recovery. In the Central
African Republic, constitutional order has been
restored. The United Republic of Tanzania has held
successful general elections, while Angola, Zambia and
Uganda are preparing for elections. The peace process
in the Sudan is under way, in spite of the instability in
Darfur, the consequences of which should be
adequately addressed. Those are clear signs of the
commitment of the countries of the region to reach
peace, democracy and development, in conformity with
the goals of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes.

My delegation is deeply concerned, however, by
the continuation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of atrocities committed by criminal groups
responsible for hundreds of summary executions,
rapes, beatings and hostage-taking of civilians. The
national army of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo have taken
action against those criminal groups. We commend that
action. In our View, it represents a sound lesson for the
concept of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
it gives a clear indication of the measures to be taken
against criminal groups that choose to challenge the
international community and the will of a nation to live
in peace.

The sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be respected
and preserved. In that regard, I want to reiterate the
commitment of my Government to continue to train the
Congolese national army, together with other partners,
particularly Belgium and South Africa.

In my own country, in the three and a half years
of peace and the post-conflict era that we have
experienced, the strategic priorities of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation have been
directed towards the social and productive
reintegration of demobilized soldiers and people
displaced during the war, towards improving the
delivery of basic social services to people throughout
the country, and towards macroeconomic stabilization.
As a result of those efforts, the climate of tolerance and
democratic cordiality between the political parties has
been re-established and the country is rapidly
proceeding with the organization of free, fair and
transparent elections following the approval by the
National Assembly of the electoral package in July
2005 and the establishment of the National Electoral
Commission.

In the economic and social fields, considerable
improvements have been achieved. Since the end of the
conflict, the share of the budget allocated to the social
sector has increased from 12 per cent to 60 per cent.
That has enabled, among other actions, the
reintegration of four million displaced people in their
areas of origin or choice, while we continue with the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme. Angola needs the
support of the international community in order to
improve its landmine clearing programme and the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of economic
infrastructures destroyed during the war.

Angola is committed to sharing its experiences of
post-conflict recovery and to contributing to the
materialization of the main objectives of the
International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.

In that connection, in September 2005 the
Republic of Angola hosted in Luanda the meeting of
the Regional Preparatory Committee of the Conference
on the Great Lakes region. The Luanda meeting dealt
with such issues as the joint security management of
common borders, combating transnational crime and
terrorism, the development of border zones and human
security, as well as non-aggression and mutual defence.

The deployment of four United Nations missions
in States members of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes - Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic and the
Sudan - should be duly used to address the cross-
border issues and other challenges, including
monitoring of the arms embargo in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

By working out a protocol against the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the members of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes region
have shown that they are committed to dealing with
that crucial issue. However, the efforts of the region
should be complemented by the implementation of the
relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 1625
(2005), in particular those regarding the illegal
exploitation of and trafficking in natural resources and
high-value commodities.

In our view, finding long-lasting solutions to
African conflicts is also a development challenge,
considering the devastating impact of conflict on
development. That should also be the approach of the
international community towards the problems
affecting the region.

Bearing that reality in mind, the countries of the
Great Lakes Conference are in the process of
negotiating an important legal framework to promote
development, including a protocol on a specific
reconstruction and development zone, as well as a
special fund for the reconstruction and development of
the Great Lakes region.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1631
(2005) opened a new era of cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The African Union and subregional
organizations may play their role if an effective
response is given to the problems of the lack of
resources and of how to make partnerships between the
two mechanisms as efficient as possible. Useful lessons
on the negative impact of the lack of resources should
therefore be drawn from the deployment of the African
Union's missions in Burundi and the Sudanese region
of Darfur, while reflecting on the improvement in
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations.

Before I conclude, allow me to stress that the
coordinated conduct of the process of the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region by the United
Nations and the African Union offers a good example
of cooperation and coordination between the two
organizations.

For my delegation, the newly established
Peacebuilding Commission should also benefit from
the experience and expertise developed in the Great
Lakes process.

Finally, my delegation expresses its full support
for the draft resolution before us.

