Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/376), which once again makes for a sobering
read. The abysmal state of the protection of civilians
is, of course, first and foremost the responsibility ofthe
parties to a conflict, including non-State armed groups.
But it is also clear that the mechanisms developed and
deployed by the international community so far are
not sufficient. We must therefore undertake to develop
effective mechanisms for monitoring compliance with
the core instruments of international humanitarian law.

My remarks today will focus on the issue of
accountability. In addition, my delegation aligns itself
with the statement of the group of friends to be delivered
by the representative of Switzerland.

We commend the Secretary-General for his initiative
to undertake a review of United Nations experience in
international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
mission processes. These investigative tools have
increasingly been used in recent years and have time
and again shown their tremendous value. We agree that
United Nations support for such mandates needs to be
improved and that greater dedicated capacity within the
Secretariat needs to be deployed. Overall, commissions
of inquiry and fact-finding missions should be able
to rely on specialized back-office support and apply
consistent methods and standards, at least to the extent
possible in specific situations. It would also be useful
to have a roster of experts available who may be called
upon to serve on a commission if and when the need
arises.

All of these resources should also, and especially,
be available to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in particular, as the
Human Rights Council has recently emerged as the
leading body in establishing such commissions. We
also strongly agree with the notion that such mandates
should be established early in a crisis in order to prevent
further violations and provide the relevant United
Nations organs with a factual basis for further action.
Commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
may also provide important information for judicial
processes that may be launched as a follow-up, such
as investigations by the International Criminal Court.
They may also form the basis for further action taken
by the Security Council, as was the case in the first-ever
decision to refer a situation to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), with respect to the situation in Darfur.

We fully support the Secretary-General's call on
the Council to begin a dialogue aimed at strengthening
the Council's role in enhancing accountability at
both the national and international levels. That is, in
fact, in line with one of the recommendations to the
Security Council that we had advocated as a member
of the group of five small nations in draft resolution
A/66/L.42 before the General Assembly.

One central element in that regard is a more
coherent use of the Security Council's power to refer
situations to the ICC. That requires predictability
and a degree of consistency in choosing situations
that require investigation by the ICC. In that respect,
it is necessary to underline that the crisis in Syria is
also a crisis of accountability. There is increasing
evidence that atrocious acts amounting to crimes
against humanity are being committed in the country,
possibly by different parties to the conflict. Under these
circumstances, it is the responsibility of the Council
to have a serious discussion of the accountability
dimension of the protection of civilians in Syria.
The Council's past practice with respect to referrals
to the Court, seeking to exempt certain nationals from
the Court's jurisdiction and thus infringing on the
powers of the Court under the Rome Statute, needs
to be reconsidered. Equally problematic is the past
practice of implying that the United Nations may not
contribute to the financing of such referrals, thus
infringing on the powers of the General Assembly under
the United Nations Charter and the United Nations-ICC
Relationship Agreement.

Another central element is greater ownership in
following up on such referrals. Whenever the Council
refers a situation to the ICC, it does so on the basis of
its powers under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. Legally, the Security Council is acting as if it
were establishing its own tribunal, with its own statute,
by imposing the obligations of the Rome Statute - in
its entirety - upon the country concerned, a point that
would perhaps be worth emphasizing in future referral
decisions. That would also imply, as is currently
relevant in the situation in Libya, that Court officials
enjoy immunity from detention under article 48 of the
Rome Statute.

The work of the Court based on Security Council
referrals is thus not very different in nature from the
work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia or the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. Follow-up to referrals, in particular regarding
cooperation, should therefore be much higher on the
agenda of the Council. Non-cooperation with the Court
in the case of Security Council referrals is as much of
a problem for the Council itself as it is for the ICC. In
practical terms, it may be useful to establish a forum
to advance questions of cooperation with the Court at
the level of a subsidiary body of the Security Council,
such as, possibly, a working group on the relationship
with the International Criminal Court. That would offer
a useful and necessary space for concerted action on
all related matters, such as notifications from the Court
on non-cooperation, but also the ongoing situation
regarding the detention of ICC staff in Libya. In that
context, we would like to call on the authorities in
Libya to release the detained ICC staff without delay.
Overall, the Security Council has a very limited record
in following up on the referrals it has made to the
Court - a situation that needs to be rectified.

Let me conclude with a few words on the issue
of reparations and amends. We agree with the
Secretary-General that this issue is often overlooked and
needs greater attention. It also needs a certain degree
of creativity and innovation, since the sheer number of
affected victims often makes individual reparation all
but impossible. In that regard, we would like to commend
the work of the International Criminal Court's Trust
Fund for Victims, which is actively engaged in assisting
affected communities as a whole. We also strongly
support efforts to increase the practice by parties to
conflict of offering amends to civilians harmed in the
context of lawful combat operations, despite having no
legal obligation to do so. Such policies underline the
commitment of conflict parties to legal conduct and
to minimizing civilian harm, and contribute to the
preservation of the human dignity of civilians caught
in the crossfire. An important prerequisite in that
regard is, however, the systematic tracking of civilian
harm, which in itself is indispensable for transparency
and the effective monitoring of the implementation of
international humanitarian law.

