Mr. Fedotov: (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): As this is the first statement by a
representative of the Russian Federation in March, I wish

 

to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I also request the
United States delegation to convey to Ambassador Albright
our gratitude for the way in which she successfully presided
over the Council last month.

The Russian Federation is greatly concerned by the
complex situation in Burundi, which for a long time has
been hovering on the brink of disaster. The severity of the
protracted crisis, which has already cost tens of thousands
of lives, has generated a wave of refugees and displaced
persons. This further exacerbates the situation by
threatening to destabilize the region as a whole. For more
than two years the Security Council has been paying close
attention to the situation in Burundi, and this is the second
formal meeting of the Council on this subject in the first
quarter of this year in which all the Member States of the
United Nations interested in a speedy solution to this
problem have participated. We hope that such a
manifestation of special interest in Burundi by the
international community will give a powerful impetus to
achieving a speedy solution.

The draft resolution before the Council today reflects
the deep concern of the international community over the
situation in Burundi, as well as its readiness to seek
adequate and balanced measures to help normalize it.
Priority is clearly given to preventive diplomacy, with
emphasis on the need for the immediate resumption of a
comprehensive and constructive dialogue and the activation
of the process of national reconciliation. Only this will put
an end to the conflict in Burundi and break the vicious
cycle of violence there.

We consider it important to make optimum use of the
peace-keeping potential of the Organization of African
Unity, other regional organizations, neighbouring countries
of the region and other interested States. We believe that
preparations should be stepped up for a Regional
Conference for Peace, Security and Development in the
Great Lakes Region, with a view to further consolidating
political and economic stability in that region.

At the same time, Burundi extremists of all stripes
must be given a clear warning that, should there be any
broad escalation of violence or any serious deterioration of
the humanitarian situation, the international community
would be prepared, if necessary, to take adequate measures
for a humanitarian response, from the range of appropriate
options available. We strongly urge the parties to the
conflict in Burundi to show common sense and avail
themselves of all opportunities to achieve a speedy,
mutually acceptable settlement, for the good of the people
of Burundi. In turn, the international community, as the
draft resolution stresses, stands ready to render all
necessary support and assistance. Inasmuch as the draft
resolution before us gives proper emphasis to the priority
the international community attaches to overcoming the
crisis in Burundi, the Russian delegation will vote in
favour of it.

