Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes today's
discussion on the role of the United Nations in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of
ex-combatants in a peacekeeping environment as a logical
follow-up to a number of open debates held by the Security
Council over the last two years on the issue of post-conflict
peace-building.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
preparing a truly comprehensive report which contains very
useful assessments, definitions and suggestions on the
matter under our consideration. Taking into account
Ukraine's statements in previous debates in the Council on
closely related subjects and the comprehensive character of
the Secretary-General's report, I will confine myself to
making a few comments and remarks.

It is generally recognized that the relative decline in
the frequency of inter-State armed conflicts in the
post-cold-war era has caused the United Nations to focus
more on the numerous internal conflicts. As a result, the
evolution of United Nations peacekeeping has given birth
to a new set of operations with multifunctional mandates
to assist war-torn societies to move from violent conflicts
towards reconciliation, economic reconstruction and
democratic development.

Over the past decade, the United Nations has begun
to deal more effectively with the problems of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants and accumulated invaluable experience in
this field in a dozen of its peace-support operations
around the globe. Ukraine has contributed to these
international collective efforts, having participated in a
number of United Nations operations and missions under
DDR mandates, including those in Angola, Croatia and
Guatemala. Currently, representatives of Ukraine serve
with United Nations missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Kosovo and Tajikistan. Shortly, our representatives will
join the staff of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor.

We consider that the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants is one of the most
vital elements of ensuring the advancement of the whole
peace process in conflict-riven societies. Like no other
constituent part of international post-conflict efforts, DDR
activities bear a direct relation to a very sensitive human
aspect of the peace process, embracing former combatants
and the entire affected population.

Evidently, the success or failure of the DDR process
as a whole and of its particular elements is crucial to the
further progress of peaceful efforts to achieve the final
resolution of conflicts and to redress their consequences.
We share the view expressed in paragraph 3 of the
Secretary-General's report, contained in document
S/2000/lOl, that the process of DDR

"may have a symbolic and political importance
beyond the sum of its parts",

even if its full completion is hardly achievable.

At the same time, there is no doubt that it is the
parties to a conflict themselves that shoulder the primary

 

responsibility for the implementation of DDR programmes.
We could not agree more with the view of the Secretary-
General that

"the basis for a successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme should be
laid within the peace agreement which provides for
the end of a conflict." (ibid., para. 13)

In this context, I believe, the Kosovo conflict can serve as
an instructive example of the negative effects of the
absence of such a foundation. In our view, had the peace
agreement with the provision on DDR been concluded by
the parties to the Kosovo conflict, the results of the current
peace process as a whole, and the demobilization of the
Kosovo Liberation Army in particular, could by now have
been far more satisfactory.

Therefore, my delegation favours the idea of including
within peace agreements the provisions outlining the
commitments of the parties to a conflict to the DDR
process. In this context, we also look forward to studying
carefully the lessons-learned review of experiences with
DDR, which was recently prepared by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and circulated a few minutes ago.

Ukraine remains gravely concerned about the problem
of the impact of armed conflicts on children. We were
appalled to read in the Secretary-General's report that an
estimated 300,000 children are serving in armed conflicts
around the world today. Again, Ukraine strongly condemns
all acts of violence against children in international and
internal armed conflicts and the horrendous practice of
using children as instruments of war.

Against this background, we agree with the
evaluations and proposals made by the Secretary-General in
his report on the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers. My delegation particularly
welcomes the new initiative of the Secretariat to include the
position of a child protection adviser in two United Nations
operations: in Sierra Leone and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Undoubtedly, this practice should become
permanent for all current and future United Nations peace-
support operations.

We are satisfied with the completion last January,
within the framework of the relevant Working Group, of
the draft Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. Ukraine favours the earliest possible entry into
force of this document, which would significantly
strengthen the legal protection of children who are used
as soldiers.

In the context of disarmament, we support the idea
of troop-contributing countries establishing a database of
experts on DDR. Ukraine is ready to participate in this
work by submitting a list of relevant candidates.

In view of the direct impact of illicit arms flows on
the DDR process in a peacekeeping environment, let me
once again remind the Council of Ukraine's initiative to
convene an meeting of international experts from major
arms-producing countries, with a view to elaborating an
effective mechanism to prevent the reselling of arms by
the end users to third parties.

My delegation remains convinced of the primary role
of the United Nations as a coordinator and originator of
guidelines for the DDR process, which could also be
complemented by the efforts of regional organizations.

In conclusion, I would like to express the support of
my delegation for the draft presidential statement which
the Council will be adopting shortly. We hope that this
document, as well as our discussion today, will further
contribute to strengthening the United Nations capacities
for post-conflict peace-building.

