Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important thematic debate on security
sector reform, which is critical to ensuring sustainable
peace and stability in post-conflict countries. I also
thank His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
statement. Your presence here today, Mr. President, is
an indication of your country's continued commitment
to post-conflict peacebuilding activities in which
security sector reform has been an integral part.

We are always saying, without pride, that more
than two thirds of the agenda of the Security Council is
concerned with African conflicts. What we need to add
is that, in all those conflicts, there has been a failure of
the security forces to protect the national institutions,
the territorial integrity of the country and, worst of all,
civilians. Over the past few years, we have witnessed
situations where the weakness of national armies has
enabled armed groups to make progress and even
overthrow Governments. In other situations, national
armies were used to commit mass atrocities against the
very civilians they were mandated to protect. That was
the case in Libya and Rwanda, where the Forces armees
rwandaises, which had been ethnicized and regionalized
since independence in 1963, were the main perpetrators
of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi, together with the
infamous Interahamwe militias.

Allow me to share with you, Sir, and our colleagues
here our humble experience. Rwanda has learned from
its dark past. After the end ofthe genocide in July 1994,
which was stopped by the Rwandan Patriotic Front,
the country embarked on an unprecedented security
sector reform, starting with the integration in the new
security forces of members of the defeated army. One
of them even became a Minister of Defence. Given the
nearly failed state of Rwanda, the first thing was to
ensure security by integrating and forming a coherent
national defence force. The policy of integrating the
military and the militia into a coherent force - what
would become the Rwanda Defence Force - served as
a role model for the greater society, which had been
polarized and divided. With security in place, it was
easier to start building capacity in all the other sectors.
It is in that context that Rwanda, under the Rwandan
Patriotic Front, found its defining mission: to integrate
and reintegrate its people, beginning with the military.

The move towards security sector reform has been
described as a process for developing professional
and effective security structures that allow citizens to
live their lives in safety. As is the case for other heads
of public institutions, the main military and police
commanders in Rwanda have committed themselves
to achieving clear and measurable targets through an
annual performance contract, which is assessed every
year before the President of the Republic.

Over recent years, research has shown that
most Rwandans have confidence and trust in their
police and army. With its rapid achievements in
institution-building, including in the security sector,
Rwanda decided to actively contribute troops to African
and United Nations peacekeeping missions.

Having said that, this shows that security sector
reform should be a priority endeavour in order for
the security sector to gain credibility and trust and
for the population to identify with it. That is possible
with the delivery of effective and efficient security
and justice services by security sector institutions that
are accountable to the Government and the people and
operate without discrimination and with full respect for
the rule of law.

We believe that re-establishing the Government's
authority and control in all sectors in the aftermath
of conflict is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
stability. State-building at all levels is therefore a key
policy objective in the international community's post-
conflict intervention.

We also recognize security sector reform as
an essential but not sufficient condition for lasting
peace and security. It needs to be part of broader
democratization and reform processes in any post-
conflict setting. That is why we are of the View that
security sector reform should be integrated as early
as possible in peace processes as one of the essential
elements of conflict prevention, early recovery,
peacebuilding and sustainable development.

On the SSR process itself, there is a need to focus
on three issues that we are believe are crucial to the
successful implementation of SSR and that the Council
should encourage in this record. They are national
ownership, coordination, and capacity-building.

Once initiated, it is vital that the SSR process be
based on national ownership and be aligned to national
security needs, as defined by the Government. We are
aware that national ownership also entails national
responsibility and commitment. This responsibility
includes the effective use of donor support, as well as
the planning and implementation of the process with
long-term security outcomes. Furthermore, national
ownership cannot be viable or realistic if the financial
burden for reform is borne exclusively by external
actors and partners. Member States implementing
SSR should also commit some national resources to
the process. Given the multiplicity of actors involved,
coordination between national Governments, regional
and subregional organizations, the United Nations
and other international organizations is very critical.
Such coordination should be streamlined in a way that
prioritizes building national capacities for the Member
States to eventually take over.

The United Nations must do more to help build up
expertise outside the United Nations system, particularly
those of regional and subregional organizations
working to address the challenges around them. We
appreciate the efforts and work of the United Nations
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force and
the SSR Unit in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in advancing those endeavours, and we call
on the Secretary-General to strengthen both entities.
We also call upon the Council to ensure that issues
of peace agreements, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, and other SSR components are
considered when it authorizes peacekeeping operations
so to ensure that they contribute to the restoration of
sustainable security. The Council should take SSR as
one of the cornerstones of sustainable peace.

The Peacebuilding Commission should encourage
the coordination and coherence of SSR efforts in
countries emerging from conflict and advise the
Council, where appropriate of important steps to be
taken when it is considering initiating SSR processes.
That will ensure that the involvement of the Council
in security sector reform remains country-specific and
is derived from a comprehensive United Nations SSR
strategy for the establishment of peace and stability,
while at the same time ensuring that the United Nations
delivers as one.

