Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Before taking the floor in my national capacity as
representative of Mexico, I would like to thank Alistair
Harrison for his work and his contribution to the
Council's duties, not only because of his very good and
always well-received sense of humour but also because
of his dedication and his work. We will miss him, and
we wish him luck in his new duties.

I would now like to make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Mexico.

I would like to join other speakers in thanking
Mr. Annabi for his briefing and the information that he
has given us. My delegation believes that the beginning
of the process of the transfer of additional
responsibilities to the Kosovo Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government is, in general, a positive
development. At the same time, we agree with the
observation made in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/42l) that if, as we hope, this process is to be
sustainable, it must be conducted in a phased manner
and take into account the capacity of the Provisional
Institutions. It is crucial that the transfer of
responsibilities take place in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and within the Constitutional
Framework and that this transfer not affect the
authority of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the international
Kosovo Security Force (KFOR) or the powers and
responsibilities reserved to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General under chapter 8 of the
Constitutional Framework.

The Provisional Institutions must be built on the
basis of the principles of multi-ethnicity and a culture
of inter-community tolerance. There is the danger that
in the process of transferring responsibilities, the trend
towards constructing a mono-ethnic project will be
reinforced. A worrisome sign of that was the recent
adoption by the Kosovo Assembly of a higher
education law that excluded the Serbian minority.
Mexico supports the decision of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
Steiner, to declare that law invalid. It is important that
Kosovo Albanian leaders adopt the project of a multi-
ethnic society as their own, as it is the only way for the
province to achieve sure and lasting peace. The rule of
law is a basic condition for achieving stability, security
and economic development of Kosovo. Therefore, my
delegation views with satisfaction progress made in
that area, such as the hiring of additional judicial
personnel, including members of minority
communities. We also welcome the fact that the
parallel courts continue to be dismantled.

However, we are concerned by the fact that so far
this year there has been an increase in the activities of
organized crime and by the fact that ethnically
motivated violence has reappeared and is on the rise. It
is worrisome that just when the season for the return of
refugees and displaced persons to Kosovo is beginning,
there was an incident as serious as the bombing of a
railway bridge, perpetrated by the so-called Albanian
National Army. We condemn that incident, and we
support the measures taken by Mr. Michael Steiner. It
is important that the Kosovo Albanian leaders and, in
particular, the Assembly join Mr. Steiner's
condemnation of that incident.

We welcome the fact that in recent months there
has been an increase in the constructive participation of
the municipal authorities in the sustainable return of
displaced persons, although the situation in most of the
municipalities in Kosovo is still unsatisfactory. The
return of displaced persons on the basis of sustainable
conditions, and the participation of the minorities in
social, political and economic life, are crucial to
ensuring a democratic and multi-ethnic society.
My delegation agrees that it is of fundamental
importance for all of the communities of Kosovo to
participate in a meaningful way in the Provisional
Institutions and the municipal bodies. We also agree
that the continued existence of parallel mono-ethnic
structures is seriously obstructing the path towards the
creation of a multi-ethnic society.

It is clear that the leaders of all the
communities - Kosovo Albanians as well as
minorities - have a particular responsibility to ensure,
on the one hand, greater receptivity on the part of the
majority to the participation of minorities in official
administrative structures, and, on the other, the
effective and early participation of minorities, in
particular Serbs, in those structures. It is also clear that
cooperation from the Belgrade authorities in this area is
necessary.

As for the relationship between Belgrade and
Pristina, we hope that the Government in Belgrade and
the Provisional Institutions of Kosovo will, as soon as
possible, begin a direct dialogue on the practical issues
that affect them.

I would like to take this opportunity to ask
Mr. Annabi two questions, prompted by my reading of
the Secretary-General's report.

The first refers to the section on freedom of
movement. I am not clear what impact the reduction of
police and military escorts has had on minorities, since
one part of the report states that the practice has not led
to a worsening of security conditions, while another
part states that in some municipalities it has resulted in
a considerable decrease in the movement of minorities.

My second question relates to the section on the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), in particular the local
non-governmental organization, Friends of KPC. I
would like to know whether Mr. Annabi believes that
the fund-raising carried out by that organization - a
task that has been entrusted to it - will contribute to
the objective of turning the Corps into a multi-ethnic
body with a civil mandate, given that those funds come
from local sources and from the diaspora, which, as I
understand it, means that they come primarily from the
Kosovo Albanian community.

I would be grateful for any answers that
Mr. Annabi could provide.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro, on whom I
now call.

