Mr. Amendola (Italy): Our generation faces
unprecedented attacks against and destruction of
cultural heritage by terrorist groups in situations of
armed conflict. This is not only an attack against the
past, but also against our collective future. It affects
people's identity and hampers post-conflict recovery
and peacebuilding. It undermines values such as
tolerance, respect and inclusivity. It deprives minority
groups of their roots. It fuels conflicts.

The destruction of cultural heritage by terrorist
groups and in situations of armed conflict can amount
to a war crime or a crime against humanity. Together
with the unprecedented scale of organized looting and
illicit trafficking in cultural objects, such acts provide
a source of income for terrorist groups, support their
recruitment efforts and strengthen their operational
capability to organize and carry out attacks.

For those reasons, and for the sake of our history, the
protection of cultural heritage is a long-standing pillar
of Italian foreign policy, and Italy is at the forefront
of international efforts to safeguard and protect
cultural heritage - including thanks to the specialized
Carabinieri unit. We are also a staunch supporter
of UNESCO and the outstanding commitments of
Director-General Bukova. We promoted the adoption
of a resolution on culture in conflict areas and support
the implementation of the "Unite4Heritage" Campaign,
including through our national Task Force, as we just
heard from General Parrulli.

As the current Chair of the Group of Seven (G-7),
at the end of March we will host the first-ever meeting
of G-7 Ministers of Culture. As partners of the global
coalition against Da'esh, we co-Chair, along with the
United States and Saudi Arabia, the counter-Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant finance group, whose
work includes promoting the swift implementation of
resolution 2199 (2015) to prevent terrorist groups in
Iraq and Syria from benefiting from trading in oil,
antiquities and hostages. We also chair its subgroup
on illegal trafficking in cultural property. Among
the major bilateral projects in which we are engaged,
allow me to mention our successful cooperation with
the Government of Iraq on safeguarding its immense
cultural patrimony.

As a Security Council candidate, we made cultural
heritage an overarching theme. Together with Jordan,
UNESCO, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and INTERPOL, we organized a series of
seminars aimed at raising awareness and considering
improved responses. As a Security Council member, we
are convinced that this organ should pay more attention
to the protection of cultural heritage, in the belief that
the Council and the international community can, and
should, unite around this issue.

For those reasons, and thanks to Ms. Azoulay,
France and Italy promoted this briefing and proposed
a Security Council resolution specifically dedicated
to the issue. I thank all the members of the Security
Council for the constructive engagement that led to the
adoption of the historic resolution 2347 (2017), as well
as to the United Kingdom presidency for scheduling
the meeting in its programme of work. I also wish to
acknowledge all the Member States that co-sponsored
the text.

The destruction of cultural heritage by terrorist
groups and organized criminal networks is a reality,
and this resolution addresses it with clear language
and concrete operational measures. But this issue has
a broader relevance in the maintenance of international
peace and security, one that goes beyond attacks by
terrorist groups. Today the Council is sending a clear
sign of commitment and an important response to the
destruction of cultural patrimony during crises and
conflict. The resolution is a balanced instrument that
addresses both preventive initiatives and measures
devoted to countering illegal excavation and the looting
of, and trafficking in, cultural heritage at the domestic
and international levels.

States are encouraged to adopt appropriate
measures, in line with their national systems and with
international frameworks and standards. Harmonized
legislation and coordinated operational solutions are
indispensable to provide an effective response. The
Security Council is committing itself and the dedicated
United Nations bodies to assist Member States and to
strengthen all forms of cooperation. We are confident
that this effort will contribute to preventing and
countering actions that destroy and damage cultural
heritage and that provide important financial support
to criminal and terrorist groups.

Integrating the cultural dimension into the
prevention and settlement of conflicts is not only a
moral obligation, it is also a political and security
imperative. Raising awareness and mobilizing
international efforts are necessary, but not sufficient.
Bringing to justice perpetrators of crimes against
cultural heritage is also crucial, including to prevent
future attacks, as highlighted by the historic judgment
of the International Criminal Court last September
in the case of The Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al
Mahdi relating to the destruction of cultural heritage
in Timbuktu.

All over the world the cultural heritage passed
down from previous centuries represents a message of
tolerance, cultural understanding, religious harmony
and respect. Totalitarian elements want to destroy the
remarkable historical patrimony of our humanity. With
this historic resolution we reaffirm the basic values of
our civilizations.

