Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. I wish you and your team good luck
in the coming months. Let me also commend you,
Sir, on the initial statement that you delivered and the
very concrete example of your own country and how
mercenaries have threatened its security.

I would also like to thank the Dominican Republic
for its accomplishments as the previous President
of the Security Council in January and to commend
the representative of the Dominican Republic for
the statement on mercenaries that he just delivered,
which included an impressive list of the behaviour of
mercenaries, in particular towards women and children,
which he aptly described as "barbaric".

Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, referred to the "scourge
of mercenaries" in describing and summarizing their
activities. I believe that that is absolutely the right
description and, as we have heard in the discussion
around the table so far, there is strong unity among
Member States. Everyone recognizes that not only do
mercenary activities pose a threat to regional stability
and security in Central Africa but they also represent a
symptom ofbroader trends in conflict situations - they
are exacerbated by, and are closely linked with, trends
related to terrorism, violent extremism and national
organized crime, including trafficking in weapons.

In looking at the root causes, we see that one of
the main reasons for joining a mercenary group is
the lack of economic alternatives and opportunities,
especially for young people. In addition, the lines
between mercenary groups, organized crime and
terrorist groups are blurred. I believe that we have to be
honest and admit that any solution to this challenge will
not be found overnight. There are no easy solutions to
the problem of mercenaries in Africa. That is why we
need to take a more nuanced and long-term approach.
From Germany's perspective, there are six potential
strategies for addressing the problem.

The first involves enabling State actors and security
forces. In his statement, the Secretary-General made a
very strong point of reminding us that the monopoly
over the use of force should reside with national
Governments, and not with mercenaries. We should
enable State actors and security forces to effectively
provide security for the population throughout the
entire territory, while of course respecting human
rights and the dignity of individuals. We need strong,
capable security institutions that follow the rule
of law. We need to strengthen the security sector
arrangements through various initiatives, particularly
under Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16, which
was also highlighted by my United Kingdom colleague,
United Nations regional envoys and, more broadly,
regional and subregional cooperation. Security sector
reform, capacity-building and training are, in our View,
key instruments for progress.

Secondly, with regard to non-proliferation and
disarmament, weapons and ammunition are the hard
fuel of conflicts, and their illicit flow is certainly an
important source for mercenaries. Non-proliferation
and disarmament are therefore important elements
in the strategy to stop mercenary activities. Under
the leadership of the African Union (AU) and
in close cooperation with Africa's subregional
organizations - such as the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Regional Centre on
Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes
Region, the Horn of Africa and Bordering States - a
continental plan of action for the control of small arms
and light weapons was developed. That plan is also part
ofthe AU's Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, which
we applaud. Germany strongly supports all activities in
that context. We are working with the African Union
to cut the flow of arms into areas of conflict, improve
control over arms and ammunition in fragile States and
train a new generation of experts to take the lead in
arms control. We therefore very much look forward to
the discussion to be held at the end of your presidency,
Mr. President, on the subject of silencing the guns. We
also look forward to supporting you, Sir, and lending
our support to your activities with a view to adopting a
draft resolution on the issue.

Thirdly, I would like to underline the role of
sanctions and expert monitoring as a concrete response
to mercenary activity. With respect to sanctions
specifically, designation criteria exist within the United
Nations that can serve as the basis for the listing of
individuals involved in mercenary activities, including,
for example, criteria related to human rights violations.

Fourthly, on accountability, we must ensure
that human rights violations and abuses committed
by mercenaries are duly investigated and that those
ultimately responsible are held accountable. I am very
encouraged that, for instance, the Foreign Minister
of Cote d'Ivoire, who I would like to welcome here,
also underscored the importance of punishment. Our
Russian colleague also mentioned the importance
of prosecution. We need to enhance the capacity and
responsiveness of national and international criminal
justice systems and national and regional human rights
mechanisms. That must explicitly include instances
where mercenaries act at the direction of a State.

Fifthly, on private military and security companies,
they must be distinguished from mercenary activities.
Many of those companies follow legitimate objectives.
But I would like to return to what Chairperson Moussa
Faki Mahamat clearly said earlier, that private military
and security companies pose many challenges. A
number of colleagues around the table also mentioned
concrete cases, including the representatives of France,
Poland and the United Kingdom. We have to make
sure that private military and security companies
follow legitimate objectives. We also must prevent
abuse, strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as
promote transparency, the principle of the rule of law
and effective regulation of the commercial military and
security providers.

In that context, I would also like to highlight
the international code of conduct and the Montreux
Document, the adoption of which was actively
supported by Germany, and we encourage all States and
stakeholders to align themselves with those documents.

Sixthly, we must provide a secure space in which
young people can work peacefully towards their own
future, thereby reducing the appeal of mercenary groups
as an employer for disillusioned youth. We can build on
efforts that have already been undertaken, such as the
SDGs, as I already mentioned. I also want to mention
last year's General Assembly resolution on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, which now serves
as a good point of reference and stresses

"the importance of addressing the socioeconomic
dimension of youth unemployment, as well as
facilitating the enhanced participation of youth in
decision-making processes" (General Assembly resolution 72/31], para. 32).

Lastly, in line with our strategic focus on
prevention, the importance of which the President of
Equatorial Guinea mentioned, we must address the
conditions that are conducive to mercenarism in the
Central African region and beyond. They include
challenging humanitarian situations, high numbers of
displaced people, the surge in terrorist activities and the
devastating effects of climate change on the livelihoods
of millions, only to name a few of the root causes.

In conclusion, the topic of mercenaries serves as a
very good example of the urgent need for the Security
Council to move towards a more thematic, preventive
and cross-cutting discussion on threats to international
peace and security. The root causes of violence and
conflict deserve the focused attention of the Council,
and we remain committed to their presence on
the agenda.

