Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), contained in document
S/2012/818. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for having
introduced the report, and Mr. Ivan Mrkic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for
their statements.

We support the dialogue between the parties aimed
at achieving a definitive solution to the question of
Kosovo. We welcome the two recent high-level meetings
between the parties, facilitated by the European Union.
We are pleased by the constructive and pragmatic
attitude of Serbia. In that regard, we note a number of
positive developments in the activities being undertaken
to implement the agreements achieved through that
dialogue. We underscore the importance ofthe dialogue
regarding crossing points.

This leads me to the situation in northern Kosovo,
which remains a source of concern to my delegation.
We call on the parties to act with restraint in order to
reduce the risk of political setbacks or a resurgence of
instability. In that regard, we were surprised by the
change with regard to the local administrative office
in Mitrovica. In his previous report, the Secretary-
General expressed concern at the deviation by the
Pristina authorities of Kosovo budget funds intended
for UNMIK administration to a local administrative
office. The current reports conveys this as a fact, even
though that administrative office does not enjoy the
support and trust of the public.

I would like to highlight the importance of
confidence-building measures between the parties. We
also support the efforts of the Special Representative to
maintain close relations with key political actors at the
community level, including in Belgrade and Pristina, to
promote constructive contact.

Nonetheless, one area in which sufficient progress
has not been made is the situation of minority
communities in all areas of Kosovo. In that regard, we
should like to receive more specific recommendations
on how the Security Council can support UNMIK
in carrying out its mandates. This is also crucial to
improving the rate of voluntary returns to Kosovo.

Similarly, I would like to refer to the work of
the Special Investigative Task Force charged with
analysing allegations of human rights violations and
organ trafficking in Kosovo. We are closely following
the progress in that regard. We note the report on the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (S/2012/818, annex I). We continue to
believe that it would be best to find an arrangement
that involved the United Nations in investigating those
allegations.

In conclusion, despite the extensive presence of
UNMIK on the ground, the report of the Secretary-
General reveals that it continues to play an irreplaceable
function as a guarantor of stability and neutrality
in Kosovo and in the region. We must see to the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), which is the
basis of the legal framework that must be applied to
Kosovo and respect for international law. We reiterate
our support to UNMIK for the neutrality with which it
carries out its duties as the key liaison for coordination
with international organizations. Furthermore, a strong
presence is still necessary as a result of the situation on
the ground, especially in the north of Kosovo.

