Mr. Hinds: I, too, wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to speak along with my colleagues on
the critical contribution of the United Nations police
on the protection of civilians in peace operations. Let
me also express my gratitude, on behalf of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), to the Council
and police-contributing countries for their continued
support to Liberia's ongoing peacekeeping efforts. The
commitment and dedication of the police have been and
remain critical to maintaining peace and stability in
Liberia.

Today, I will speak about what the protection
of civilians mandate in Liberia means for the United
Nations police and how the devastating Ebola outbreak
presented both challenges and opportunities in moving
forward protection aspects for transition.

The United Nations Mission in Liberia was
established in 2003 by the Security Council , under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, with
a clear mandate to protect civilians under imminent
threat of physical violence, within its capabilities, and
without prejudice to the efforts of the Government
of Liberia. Twelve years later, UNMIL still retains
a protection of civilians mandate, underscoring the
legitimacy and credibility of protecting civilians as
a significant part of any long-term peacekeeping and
peacebuilding effort. The protection of civilians is a
whole-of-mission responsibility. Notably, the United
Nations police is an integral part of the UNMIL
protection of civilians strategy, first, by supporting
protection through political processes; secondly, by
establishing a protective environment; and thirdly, in
building the capacities and capabilities of the national
police and other law enforcement agencies to protect
the population from physical violence.

The UNMIL comprehensive protection strategy
came into effect on 1 March 2014. It seeks to increase
the Government's awareness and understanding of its
full and primary responsibilities to protect civilians
from physical harm and to enhance its capacity and
willingness to assume that responsibility. The strategy
also notes UNMIL's strategic readiness to act to protect
civilians within its capabilities when the Government is
unable or unwilling to do so.

As we move towards transition, it is critical to
have national ownership and leadership in the Liberian
Government's readiness to assume fully its complete
security responsibilities from UNMIL by no later than
30 June 2016, as called for in resolution 2239 (2015).
However, in consolidating this readiness, the Liberia
National Police and other security and justice actors
will require further support in three key thematic areas
to fulfil their protection of civilian role:

First, following years of capacity-building support
and while noting the gains made by the National Police,
support is still required for them to better understand
and fully assume their protection responsibilities
by strengthening police leadership; enhancing
accountability; establishing command, control and
coordination mechanisms; improving operational
planning and response; and strengthening substantially
its community engagement. Critical to ongoing peace
and stability in Liberia will be a stronger foundation
of confidence and trust in the Liberian criminal
justice system, built essentially on protecting civilians
through steadfast partnerships between the police and
the communities they serve. United Nations police, in
coordination with bilateral partners, continue to advise
and guide the Liberia National Police in its community
engagement strategy and in delivering targeted projects
to strengthen this relationship. Projects have been
successfully delivered in several counties and will be
extended across Liberia in direct support of the revised
national community-oriented policing policy.

Now, secondly, in order to extend protection
capabilities throughout the country, the decentralization
and decongestion of State, police and justice services,
including those to remote areas, is essential. Steady
progress is being made with those priorities identified
under the Government's plan for UNMIL's transition,
which also includes the deployment of increased
numbers ofpolice countrywide. To that end, the Liberia
National Police are currently deploying 552 officers to
the border counties.

And, thirdly, further enhancement of accountability
and oversight is necessary to consolidate Liberia's
protection of civilian responsibilities. During 2015,
after extensive consultations, Liberia's legislature
is now deliberating the much-needed legislative
reform for its National Police. A draft police act
includes the provision for civilian oversight in two
keyareas i complaints made against the police and
in its policy development. Also for the first time,
the Police Professional Standards Division is now
deployed outside the capital, Monrovia, to strengthen
accountability and disciplinary mechanisms.

In each of the three thematic areas outlined
earlier - targeted capacity building and improved
community engagement; decentralized and decongested
service delivery; and enhanced accountability and
oversight - the Ebola crisis, which spanned more than
16 months and took thousands of lives, inadvertently
brought new opportunities to reinforce protection
capacities and responsibilities for the national
police, including fostering better police-community
relationships and strengthening the presence of police
throughout the country. Notably, United Nations police
supported the national awareness-raising and outreach
programmes to communities to prevent the further
spread of Ebola and they also supported an integrated
response to Ebola operations. In a partnered approach,
the United Nations police trained 1,000 Liberian law
enforcement personnel in human rights and in the
protection of civilians during the state of emergency
period, while our formed police units provided
backstopping support to the Liberia National Police in
public order management.

The Ebola crisis presented unprecedented
challenges. It tested the Mission's ability to rethink
and adapt the execution of its protection of civilians
mandate and explored new areas of cooperation and
support with the National Police and other actors in
providing a security envelope to allow the necessary
health and humanitarian efforts to occur. This highlights
the critical role police play in often unpredictable
operational contexts in protecting civilians.

I wish to express my sincere appreciation to
Member States for standing by Liberia and UNMIL in
the face of these protection and operational challenges,
and thank especially UNMIL personnel for their
courage and commitment to peacekeeping during this
time. Moreover, Liberia's security sector should also
be commended for its resilience and professionalism
in preventing the spread of Ebola, despite its limited
capacity and resources, and the risk posed by the
epidemic. Notably, Liberia is now Ebola-free.

Looking forward, UNMIL's new protection-of-
civilians mandate, contained in resolution 2239 (2015)
of September, is not without challenges, particularly
given the transition of security responsibilities and the
Mission's significant police and military drawdown in
the lead-up to June next year. The Security Council
reaffirmed UNMIL's protection mandate and noted
that, from 1 July 2016, the Mission is still to support
Liberian security agencies to protect civilians in the
event of a deterioration of the security situation that
could risk a strategic reversal of peace and stability,
taking into account UNMIL's reduced capabilities
and areas of deployment. This change in the Mission's
operational response to the protection of civilians will
require clarity between the Government and UNMIL
as to the circumstances in which the Mission's armed
capacities will be deployed and what actually constitutes
a security deterioration that risks a strategic reversal.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that policing
remains an integral part of United Nations peace
operations, and we must have clear, credible and
achievable mandates matched by appropriate resources.
There remains a pressing need to recognize that the
mandate for each peacekeeping operation, as can be
seen today, is specific to the needs and situation of the
country concerned. As outlined in last year's inaugural
resolution for policing in peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, resolution 2185 (2014),
United Nations police play a critical role in supporting
protection efforts through the political process; in
establishing protective environments; and by building
the capacities and capabilities of national policing
institutions to protect the population from physical
violence - all ofwhich underpin lasting peace, security
and stability in post-conflict situations.

Once again, thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this briefing and affording me the opportunity to
address the Council today.
