Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): First and foremost,
Ukraine would like to join others in condemning
today's hideous attack against the United Nations in
Abuja. We express deepest sympathies to the victims
and their families, to the Government of Nigeria and to
the United Nations family.

Let me thank you, Sir, for convening this
important debate. The choice of today's topic came
quite naturally to such a major troop-contributing
country as India. I would like to join previous speakers
in commending the extraordinary contribution of your
country in this sphere. Our appreciation also goes to
the Secretary-General for his insight into today's topic.

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, I find it
pertinent to make a few brief points in my national
capacity.

Let me start by giving credit to former Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy for his dedicated
stewardship of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations through some of the most turbulent years
for United Nations peacekeeping. As he rightly noted,

"demand for United Nations-led peacekeeping
operations is likely to continue over the next five
years and may even start to rise again as fresh
crises and conflicts emerge The number of
peacekeepers in the field is not falling, just a year
after many thought that United Nations
peacekeeping was entering a period of
consolidation".

Recent events - the establishment of two new
United Nations peacekeeping operations and the
sketching out of a United Nations presence in Libya -
prove that this conclusion is very much to the point.
That is why, in our view, it is even more urgent to
address the most pressing issues affecting today's
peacekeeping operations, which were laid bare by a
historical surge in the number of uniformed personnel
deployments in 2010.

Let me briefly outline three areas where, in
Ukraine's opinion, our attention is most needed.

My delegation remains deeply concerned over the
mismatch between resources in terms of major enablers
and the broad mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The gap is exemplified by the
classic case of military utility helicopters, the shortage
of which jeopardizes the effectiveness of some of the
United Nations' most complex and ambitious
operations. That was one of the unmistakable messages
of the latest Security Council meeting with Force
Commanders (6592nd meeting).

Our peacekeepers should have all capacities
needed to tackle increasingly complex situations and
tasks, especially in vast theatres of operations. We
therefore fully concur with the European Union's call
for pragmatic and swift solutions and look forward to
studying the Secretariat's forthcoming proposals.
Ukraine believes that those proposals should be based
on the relevant recommendations of the last two
sessions of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, especially in terms of changing the way in
which military helicopters are reimbursed for and
operated.

Much has been said about United Nations
peacekeeping as a global partnership between the
Security Council, troop and police contributors, and the
Secretariat. We cannot agree more. But for this triangle
to work best, a mutual understanding between each of
its actors is a prerequisite.

The surest way to achieve such understanding is
to give troop-contributing countries (TCCs) a much
stronger voice in the decision-making process at all
stages of peacekeeping operations, from planning to
termination. There should be no instances when TCCs
are confronted with a fait accompli, only learning
about decisions directly affecting their personnel or
assets from Security Council resolutions on the day of
their adoption.

Ensuring an adequate level of safety and security
for United Nations personnel must be the central
element of any peacekeeping operation. We are deeply
concerned over increasing threats to Blue Helmets. I
would like to take this opportunity to express my
deepest condolences over the loss earlier this month of
the lives of four peacekeepers in the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei. The perpetrators of
such heinous acts should not go unpunished, and the
relevant TCCs should have every legal right and means
to be involved in the investigation of crimes committed
against the life and health of their peacekeepers.

As one of the initiators of the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
Ukraine looks forward to the Secretariat's
comprehensive report on all the processes involved in
the investigation and prosecution of crimes committed
against deployed United Nations peacekeepers.

The year 2012 will mark 20 years of Ukraine's
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That period has witnessed my country's
active military and police engagement in more than 20
missions under the auspices of the United Nations. If
there were a peacekeeping ratio, Ukraine's would be
one new mission per year. Overall, as of today Ukraine
has contributed almost 40,000 Blue Helmets to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in every region of their
deployment around the world. There is hardly a need
for greater testimony to our commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts - a commitment that we
are resolved to maintain in the years to come.

