Mr. Aznar (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is most
gratifying to me that the first hours of this Visit to New
York are being spent at the United Nations.

I have just had a very cordial and very
satisfactory meeting with Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, and it is an honour to have this opportunity to
address the Security Council in order to communicate
some thoughts on a subject that, for all of us, is a
serious concern and a test of our ability to work for
peace and security.

A little more than a month ago, on 4 April, Spain
assumed the chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) established by the Security Council.
We assumed that duty motivated by two sentiments and
an aspiration. The sentiments were those of
responsibility - of shouldering our share of
responsibility in our common cause against
terrorism - and of solidarity with the men and women
and countries that are the Victims of terrorism. The
aspiration is that of adding our efforts to the CTC's
momentum in leading that undertaking.

Resolution 1373 (2001), which established the
Committee, was adopted exactly 17 days after the
terrorist attacks of 11 September. The Security Council,
appalled by that eruption of horror, proved itself equal
to the circumstances and was able, within only a few
days, to reach agreement on adopting one of the most
far-reaching texts in its history.

During the last year and a half, under the
extremely effective chairmanship of the United
Kingdom and the valuable support of all of members of
the Council, the Committee has done an excellent job
unprecedented in its breadth and scope. However, in
my opinion, we must not fall into complacency. The
last thing that we should permit is that 11 September
should sink into oblivion, as if it had been a bad dream
or a unique and unrepeatable event, or that our
Committee should lapse into routine and a lack of
ambition.

Terrorism certainly acquired global dimensions
with 11 September, but it did not come into existence
on that date. The nature and magnitude of its threat had
been evident long before. From the beginning, the
principal characteristics of terrorism have only been
confirmed. I shall attempt briefly to sum them up.

First, terrorism is a threat against civilization -
against all civilizations. It is not an unjustifiable means
merely because of its recourse to indiscriminate
violence. Nor is it effective in achieving its ends,
because the religious or political causes that it purports
to serve become its first victims. Terrorism is primitive
and atavistic. Its aim is to subject and silence by means
of violence, undermining free consent and free speech,
which are the foundations of all civilizations.

Secondly, terrorism is a threat against democracy.
It is taking shape as the new totalitarianism of the
twenty-first century. The reincarnation of the
totalitarianisms of the past century, it is the main
enemy of open societies.

Thirdly, terrorism is a threat against international
peace and security. It is a destabilizing factor and a
brake on the building of a freer, safer and more just
international order.

In recent years, we have lived under the influence
of shifting paradigms in the defining of a new
international order. In my opinion, we have all seen it
demonstrated that we are not facing the end of history
but, rather, a new chapter that must be written by us all.
We are not facing a clash of civilizations but, rather,

the clash of the new barbarism against the civilization
that it aims to destroy.

Lending credence to the idea of the existence of
an inexorable antagonism between civilizations,
religions or cultures amounts to falling into the trap of
dialectics that the terrorists - practitioners of
monologue and the enemies of dialogue - would like
to impose.

We know that terrorism is one of the main
challenges to the international order. The chance to
universalize freedom and prosperity is one of that
order's greatest opportunities. The shape of the future
international order will largely depend on how we deal
with the challenges and how we are able to take
advantage of the opportunities.

Fourthly, all terrorism is one and the same despite
its thousand different faces. It adopts different forms,
but in its substance, it retains one identity. There is not
domestic and international terrorism, old and new
terrorism, or first- and second-class terrorism. Such
classifications belong much more to the world of
academic treatises than to that of political leadership
and, despite its intentions, contribute to the sowing of
confusion. All types of terrorism, which are the
manifestation of imposition by means of violence, are
fundamentally the same and must be combated with the
same aggressiveness and the same absence of
condescension.

Fifthly, terrorism is not something that concerns
one country or another; it concerns us all. It is
transnational. It exploits the vulnerabilities and gaps in
the judicial order of the organization of our societies
and the very dynamic of international relations. The
international community as a whole finds itself
challenged precisely where its fundamental values are
contested.

Sixthly, terrorism is a threat that casts a long
shadow over the future, and as such, we must combat it
with strong and sustained tenacity. The prospects could
be thoroughly ominous if the natural alliances between
so-called emerging threats - in particular between
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction - were to
materialize.

The attributes that I have enumerated demonstrate
that terrorism is a menacing but not invincible evil.
Thus, we must rethink the phenomenon of terrorism
and the national and international security architecture
that we have been constructing to combat it.

I believe that terrorism constitutes both an ethical
and a strategic challenge. The response to the first
challenge requires the development of a democratic
culture of opposition to terrorism, renewing the
authority of principles that are essential to any society
and ensuring values that we all must share.
The strategic challenge posed by terrorism
requires more ambitious collective responses. I shall
briefly outline some thoughts on ways to strengthen
those responses.

First, I believe that we should strengthen the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We must enhance the
means available to it and its capacity for supervision
and for facilitating assistance to countries, as well as
for coordination with other international and regional
organizations. Cooperation with the disarmament
agencies, especially those responsible for weapons of
mass destruction, must be a priority on our agenda. In
order to increase the Committee's operational
capability and visibility, I believe that we should
consider the possibility of empowering it to draw up a
general list of terrorist organizations, similar to the list
kept by the Committee established by resolution 1267
(1999) on Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

Second, I believe that the Committee should
focus on certain priorities. In this connection, it is
essential to strengthen mechanisms aimed at curbing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
the availability of such weapons to terrorist groups. We
must also further improve existing measures to cut off
financing to and dismantle financial networks that
provide resources to terrorists, who take advantage of
the openness of our economies and our financial
systems.

Third, we must maintain a policy of firmness.
Zero tolerance for terrorism should come first in any
code of conduct promulgated by the international
community.

Fourth, we must increase international
cooperation. Counter-terrorism assistance should be
regularly incorporated into international, bilateral and
multilateral cooperation programmes. The World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund and the Group of
Eight are called upon to play a particularly relevant
role in this area.

Fifth, we must elaborate procedures to prevent
terrorist groups from using the United Nations system
as a platform for conveying their violent message to
the world, in order to justify their actions or to obtain
political advantages.

Sixth, we must give a clear voice to the victims of
terrorism. We must commit ourselves to an active
policy of remembering, not forgetting. We must allow
victims of terrorism to speak out and to bear witness
within the framework of the United Nations by setting
up an institutional mechanism that can serve as their
forum.

Seventh, we must deprive terrorists of any
legitimacy, and we must disclose the pretexts that they
use. Here, I believe that it is imperative to reactivate
the Middle East peace process, with the help of the
road map, and to find a solution to the conflict between
Israelis and Palestinians. Moreover, we must address
the social factors that terrorist organizations use as
excuses. Finally, we shall have to take initiatives aimed
at fostering dialogue between civilizations, religions
and cultures.

Spain is a democratic and European nation. We
are facing the fight against terrorism from this dual
perspective. This fight has as a basis the firm resolve to
defend all the rights and freedoms of all citizens, to
uphold the supremacy of law and to strengthen our
solidarity towards the States committed to this common
objective. In so doing, we will not only be combating
a criminal phenomenon. We must also keep our
societies and relations among peoples free from
mistrust, fear and the threat of terrorism.

Within the sphere of the European Union, Spain,
along with its partners, has actively promoted major
advances in the fight against terrorism. Cooperation,
which for us is particularly intensive and valuable with
France, transcends the bilateral framework and has
enabled the European Union to equip itself with new
legal and judicial instruments and mechanisms for
police cooperation.

Terrorism has not been, and will never be, a
solution. It is the problem. Its defeat will require
considerable effort, active collaboration and
involvement by all, whether or not they feel directly
threatened by this scourge.

We must therefore denounce the fact that those
who are capable of committing systematic acts of the
greatest brutality use the noblest causes as their
pretexts. We must take action against the organizations
and groups that make the operation of terrorist groups
possible. We must acknowledge the pain and suffering
of the victims and prevent the seeds of hatred sown by
terrorism from taking root in the hearts and minds of
the children and young people, through whom
terrorism wishes to perpetuate itself.

As representatives of States meeting in this
Organization under its founding Charter, we must
renew our commitment and our efforts to prevent
terrorism from undermining, in any way, dialogue and
cooperation, which is the only path that will yield the
solutions that our peoples need today and in future.

