Ms. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): Allow me
to begin by thanking Mr. Qazi for his briefing and the
Secretary-General for his tenth quarterly report on the
activities of the United Nations in Iraq, particularly
those of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) (S/2006/945). We also thank Ambassador
Sanders for her update on the operations of the
Multinational Force in Iraq.

My delegation wishes to commend UNAMI and
other United Nations agencies for their dedicated
service in Iraq in a most challenging environment. We
are gratified to note that they have been able to
continue to provide and coordinate access to basic
services, including through efforts to restore public
infrastructure and to provide assistance to internally
displaced persons, whose numbers have been
increasing, as we heard from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

The unprecedented level of violence in Iraq is
very worrying. It has resulted in many deaths and
injuries, damage to property, extreme hardship and
suffering. Particularly disturbing is the number of
innocent civilians, including women and children, who
have fallen victim. The urgency of restoring order -
especially in Baghdad - cannot be overemphasized.

Regional and international efforts must be enhanced to
help contain the current sectarian strife in Iraq and
prevent it from escalating further. The war has divided
a people who were once seemingly united and has
aggravated sectarian differences that had hitherto not
been so divisive.

We commend the Iraqi security forces, working
in collaboration with the Multinational Force, for their
dedication in confronting the violence. But more must
be done. Deliberate and determined efforts should be
augmented to deal with the extreme violence and
replace it with democracy and the rule of law, which
we hope the political negotiations on the constitution
will also address.

We support the efforts of the Prime Minister, Nuri
Al-Maliki, in his search for peace, which has included
meeting key international players to seek their support
and guidance. We also support the recommendations of
the Iraq Study Group and welcome other ideas and
contributions that can turn the current situation around.
Recent pronouncements and commitments for peace on
the part of the neighbouring countries in the region are
an important signal that must be capitalized upon.

The work towards an International Compact with
Iraq is timely and deserves support from donor
countries and financial institutions. Prime Minister
Al-Maliki's national reconciliation plan also deserves
full support. Consensus-building should include the
various divergent communities and their religious
leaders. We therefore look forward to the outcome of
the conference on national reconciliation scheduled for
18 December.

As they seek to rebuild their institutions, Iraqis
will require assistance from the international
community. We urge generous and timely support for
that war-torn country.

