Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
for his comprehensive briefing, as well his for the
commitment and contribution of the team of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to peace and security in Afghanistan.

We also thank Ms. Sima Samar, Chair of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for her briefing, firmly calling for the protection
of women's rights and their wider engagement in
Afghanistan's development.

We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement.

As a State of the region, Kazakhstan takes to heart
all the issues regarding the development of Afghanistan
and is genuinely interested in its stable, secure and
prosperous development. Kazakhstan commends the
Afghan leadership for its continued efforts to ensure
more effective coordination and proactive engagement
with the opposition political parties within the country
in order to find common ground on critical issues the
country faces. We encourage the recently established
Independent Election Commission to introduce new
reforms to ensure successful impartial parliamentary
and regional elections.

Our delegation highly appreciates the commitment
of the Government of Afghanistan to the peace process
and calls on all interested sides within and outside the
country to exert every effort to support it. We recognize
that the political process in Afghanistan is Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned. At the same time, Kazakhstan

welcomes multilateral engagement at the regional level
and supports the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that the role of regional countries remains vital
to any political process.

We are concerned about the deteriorating
situation in Afghanistan, which remains unstable and
fragile because of well-known international terrorist
organizations - not home-grown, as stated by our
Afghan colleague - operating out of that country and
posing serious security threats to Afghanistan itself
and the countries of the region, including Central
Asian States. Kazakhstan underlines that the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization constantly address the situation in
Afghanistan. We commend the work of the NATO-led
mission and the efforts of a number of countries to train
the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces and
reform the security sectors of the army and police.

The increase in poppy cultivation and opium
production in Afghanistan poses another big threat to
security. We need to combat this scourge and support
the coordinated measures taken by Government of
Afghanistan, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL. The Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
for Combating Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs,
Psychotropic Substances and their Precursors, located
in Almaty, plays important role, and we encourage
closer cooperation among the countries of origin,
transit and destination in that regard.

The armed conflict has resulted in a grave
humanitarian situation, with increased numbers
of deaths of civilians. Kazakhstan is particularly
concerned that the destruction of hospitals and schools
has continued. All these violations of international
humanitarian law must be prohibited, prosecuted
and condemned.

We need to support UNAMA's assistance to the
Government in promoting human rights and taking care
of the influx of refugees into Afghanistan, as well as
in launching the proposed national countering violent
extremism strategy for Afghanistan. Kazakhstan
provides assistance to Afghanistan by sponsoring the
education of 1,000 Afghan students and providing
humanitarian assistance to vulnerable Afghan citizens.
Kazakhstan and Japan have launched a project that
focuses on human rights and the economic independence
of Afghan women.

Regional trade and economic and transit-transport
cooperation are critical to the economic revival of
Afghanistan. Countering terrorism will not be effective
unless we properly address the issues of development.
My country therefore proposes the establishment of a
United Nations regional centre in Almaty, which already
hosts 18 United Nations regional and subregional
offices. The centre would promote development,
disaster risk-reduction and resilience-building, and
coordinate cost-effective humanitarian aid from the
United Nations.

We support the development strategy of the One
Belt-One Road initiative, as proposed by China, which
could bring economic growth and prosperity to our part
of the world. Kazakhstan will continue to contribute
to bilateral, regional and multilateral action for the
recovery, stability, peace and progress of Afghanistan.
Finally, the work of UNAMA is acknowledged
as indispensable to these objectives. Its presence,
its achievements and successes are necessary in
Afghanistan. We support the extension of its mandate
for another year.

