Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, Ambassador Van Oosterom and Ambassador
Vale de Almeida for their briefings and to express my
appreciation for their work.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
on Iran's nuclear programme represents an important
achievement of multilateralism and a success story in
addressing international and regional hotspot issues
through political and diplomatic means. It has played
an important role in upholding the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and promoting peace and
stability in the Middle East. As such, it is generally
welcome by the international community.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has reported 11 times in a row that Iran has been
implementing its nuclear-related commitments under
the JCPOA. The coordination between the Security
Council and the Procurement Channel is working as
expected. The experience in the past three years has
fully shown that the JCPOA is an effective agreement.

China commends the efforts of all the parties
concerned to implement the JCPOA and expresses
regret with regard to the withdrawal of the United
States from the agreement. China calls on all parties
to assume a responsible attitude, bear in mind the
long-term and broader situation, commit to patiently
engaging in dialogue and cooperation in order to
preserve the seriousness and authority of the JCPOA,
and resolve issues through dialogue and negotiation.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/602)
is an important component of the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. The report
welcomes the commitment of the parties concerned
to maintain the full implementation of the JCPOA and
reflects Iran's effort to implement the agreement in an
objective manner, which China acknowledges.

China has also noted that, in his report, the
Secretary-General expressed his deep regret with regard
to the withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA.
In the meantime, China believes that the report of the
Secretary-General should reflect the implementation
efforts in an objective, balanced and comprehensive
manner, and take the legitimate concerns of Iran into
a consideration. The Secretariat should act in strict
accordance with its mandates and functions.

China appreciates the work done by Ambassador
Van Oosterom and his team in his capacity as Facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). China
has taken note of the report submitted by the Joint
Commission to the Security Council on the work of the
Procurement Working Group, and will continue to take
an active part in the work of the Joint Commission and
the Procurement Working Group.

China consistently stands for the settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue through political and diplomatic
means and is committed to the strengthening of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and
the maintenance of international and regional peace
and stability. China will objectively, impartially and
responsibly maintain its dialogue with all parties
concerned to continue to preserve and implement
the J CPOA.

