Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for having the Security Council observe a moment of silence in memory of the victims of the earthquake in Haiti and for the victims of terrorism in my country. I express my condolences to the Government and the people of Oman following the passing of Sultan Qaboos. I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his very informative briefing. I also thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia and her delegation for their presence here today. Three years have passed since the signing, in Havana, of the Final Agreement for Ending Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, between the Government of Colombia and the rebels of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in 2016. Today, we are pleased to note that the implementation process of the Final Agreement has made significant progress in some areas. Although it is slow or even insufficient in some respects, that progress nevertheless demonstrates the strong will of the Colombian authorities and other stakeholders to advance the peace process and is to be welcomed. As aresult of the war and organized crime, Colombia continues to register serious human rights violations and ongoing criminal activities. The violence, which had reached a worrying level at the end of last year, is now somewhat reduced, which has enabled elections to take place, even in areas where elections could not previously be held due to insecurity. My delegation is pleased with the smooth running of those inclusive municipal elections, in which a woman, for the first time, was elected mayor of the capital, Bogota. Despite that progress, my delegation would like to call on all actors to redouble their efforts to consolidate the gains I mentioned earlier. Several factors may still undermine the progress made, including the still ineffective State presence in several regions of the country formerly occupied by armed groups, insufficient funding for the implementation of the Final Agreement and the assassinations of human rights activists, leaders of indigenous peoples and former combatants. The country is also facing the reconfiguration of paramilitary groups and the rearmament of some of the armed groups that have decided to drop their commitments with the Colombian State. Nevertheless, we welcome the categorical rejection by Colombians on all sides of such attempts to undermine the peace process. The adoption of the road map for reintegration will hopefully enable progress in the social sectors and will bolster the country's current positive momentum. There is no doubt that the diversification of the economy through the substitution of illicit crops and the promotion of alternative agricultural production will help reduce the level of violence by increasing the income of producers.My delegation also commends the efforts to date the Colombian Government to achieve national reconciliation and implement the Final Agreement despite constraints, especially the financial constraints. We also reiterate our appreciation to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, for his tireless work and urge the members of the Council to maintain their vital support of the Colombian authorities in their pursuit of lasting peace. In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the Niger's support for the full implementation of the Final Agreement so that the Colombian people, whose history has been marked by conflicts, can at last know peace, calm and prosperity. I would also like to once again convey my gratitude for the words of solidarity expressed towards my country following our recent tragedy.
