Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/225), and the Special Representative for her
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Stabilization
and Association Process country and potential
candidate; as well as Armenia and Ukraine, align
themselves with this statement.

Haiti is experiencing a sensitive political period.
The European Union is concerned about the interruption
in the electoral process following the disputed results
of the elections held in August and October last year.
Finalizing the elections is a necessary condition for
political and institutional stability. It is urgent that
Haiti complete the process in order to deal with the
many economic, social and environmental challenges
it faces. Haiti cannot afford a new major political and
security crisis. It must safeguard the progress made
following the devastating 2010 earthquake, even as
new challenges emerge, especially related to drought
and malnutrition.

The European Union calls on all Haitian actors,
including interim President Privert, to make every
effort to ensure the stability and security of the country,
the success of the pending electoral process and the
democratic consolidation of the country. The European
Union remains a loyal partner of Haiti and continues to
be committed to supporting the country in this critical
phase, in coordination with other partners.
The European Union strongly supported the
holding of elections in August and October 2015 along
two tracks, namely, through a financial contribution
of €5 million to the trust fund managed by the United
Nations system and by sending an election observation
mission, as requested by the Haitian authorities and
agreed by them. The mission, in full independence
and following a methodology and a code of conduct,
observed all stages of the process in line with regional
and internationl electoral obligations as well as
Haitian law. The mission concluded that, despite some
irregularities, mostly due to inadequate training of
election officials, there was no significant disturbance
of the result of the first round of presidential elections.
The European Union regrets the interruption of the
electoral process following the deterioration of the
security environment and threats that weighed on the
process. The results announced by the Provisional
Electoral Council should be the baseline for the
organization of the second round.

We should pay tribute to the Haitian people, who,
in extremely difficult conditions, devoted themselves
to ensuring the holding of elections, which is the only
way to allow the Haitian people to choose their leaders.

The European Union takes note of the agreement

of 5 February between the executive and the legislature
branches aimed at ensuring institutional continuity,
as a compromise whose implementation will avert a
governance vacuum and ensure both the stability and
continuity of the State and to allow for the continuation
of the electoral process initiated in 2015, including
the organization of the second round of presidential
elections on 24 April. The European Union calls
for the implementation of all the provisions of the
agreement, in particular avoiding the transition to be
extended illegitimately or that the electoral process
is carried forward or suspended de facto in violation
of the agreement. Everyone must show responsibility,
restraint and a spirit of compromise in that regard.

The electoral process should continue in accordance
with the principles of peace, inclusion, transparency
and legality and on the basis of the agreement. It
is essential to achieve the early functioning of an
inclusive transitional Government that is confirmed by
the Parliament and the Provisional Electoral Council
in order to take the necessary measures to allow
the electoral process initiated in 2015 to take place
transparently and in compliance with the new agreed
timetable. The European Union is ready to continue
to support that process, including through its electoral
observer mission.

The European Union has long been a supporter and
a friend of Haiti. It remains one of its main donors of
emergency assistance funds and development aid. That
financial support, however, is subject to compliance
with democratic principles, including the right of
people to choose their Government democratically
through the ballot box, and not through mobilization in
the streets. Conditionality clauses are an integral part
of the Cotonou Agreement, which links the European
Union to the countries of the African, Caribbean and
Pacific regions, including Haiti. Institutional stability
is essential for European assistance to be effective and
able Ito produce lasting effects for the benefit of the
population. It is therefore both urgent and necessary to
put in place freely elected and legitimate institutions to
address without delay the huge economic and structural
challenges the country faces.

While the security situation remains generally
stable, it has nevertheless been affected by the tensions
in the electoral climate. The European Union welcomes
the professionalism of the Haitian National Police,
which managed the recent events successful and
largely independently. The European Union stresses
that the support of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MlNUSTAH) remains important
in the current context. The European Union believes
that the presence of MINUSTAH, and in particular its
support for election security, while always respecting
and protecting human rights and the principle of
sovereignty, remains useful to ensure the continuation
of the process, as well as peace and stability in the
coming months. The European Union supports - when
conditions permit - undertaking a review on the future
of MINUSTAH, based on the Secretary-General's
recommendations. The European Union encourages
Haitian stakeholders to assume their responsibilities in
concluding the pending electoral cycle.

In conclusion, the European Union remains
committed to supporting the efforts of the Haitian
authorities, the United Nations and the international
community to ensure a better future for the entire
Haitian people.

