Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): By deciding to
co-sponsor resolution 2334 (2016), along with Malaysia,
New Zealand and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Senegal wishes to reaffirm its principled position on
the settlements, which are illegal from the point of

view of international law. Indeed, at a tiime when the
peace process is at a stalemate, we see a continued and
accelerated progress of building settlements in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. In addition to compromising
the chance for peace between Israelis and Palestinians,
those settlements and occupations foment the violence
that affects both Israelis and Palestinians and the
possibility for both peoples to live side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders.

Together with the Israelis and Palestinians, with
whom we, as members of the Council, share the same
aspirations for peace and stability, we must find a path
to negotiations with a view to reaching a peaceful,
happy and definitive solution to the dispute. We avail
ourselves of this opportunity to renew our disapproval
and condemnation of acts of terrorism and incitement
to violence, no matter who the authors are or what the
motives may be.

My delegation reaffirms the urgency of relaunching
the peace process. That is why we encourage the
ongoing initiatives, such as that of France, and
diplomatic efforts, such as those undertaken by Egypt
and the Russian Federation; all of such initiatives, in
our View, require greater coordination.

In conclusion, it is up to the international
community, and first and foremost the Security Council
as the guarantor of international peace and security, to
work on the two-State solution. Our faith was restored
by the remarks President Macky Sall delivered during
the United Nations International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People:

"Despite the stalemate of the peace process, I
have the strong conviction that efforts must be
continued, strengthened and intensified in order
to realize the two-State solution. The two States,
Israel and Palestine, should be able to live side by
side in peace and security, each of them within
its own internationally recognized borders, in
accordance with all the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and the efforts of the Quartet."

On that basis, Senegal, faithful to its principles and
foreign policy, and also as Chair of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, continues to engage in dialogue and consultation
in order to reach a two-State solution.

