Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Madam President,
for again giving me the floor. For this meeting is
potentially crucial, as we continue to hope that the
meeting in Tehran will be as well - from what we
hear, there have been important discussions. Time is of
the essence.

Let me start with a picture. I do not know whether
Council members can see it properly, but depicted
here is an image of women holding candles. They are
civilians, as are 98.8 per cent of the people in Idlib.
They are our top priority.

I received a letter from 1,000 women in
Idlib - women and mothers, not terrorists - who have
been urging all ofus to remember that they are civilians,
internally displaced people, teachers, doctors, nurses,
engineers, writers and homemakers, and that they come
from many parts of Syria. Idlib therefore symbolizes the
mosaic that is Syria. It is true that many of the fighters
who were evacuated - or decided to reconcile, evacuate
or whatever the terminology was - also went there, but
they are a very small group in comparison with those I
am referring to. In their letter, the women stated:

"We invite you, Mr. De Mistura, to Idlib to see for
yourself and tell everyone in the world that we are
civilians of Idlib whose voices have been silenced
and are not being heard. Civilians have been
suffering over the past years, and we are hoping
that they will not have to suffer any longer. We
want a country without war, and we want a future
in which we can live."
They too are against terrorism, but they cannot
show that because the situation is very difficult.
However, they are not expecting to be bombed while
terrorists are being identified or addressed.

Let me go into some more substantive aspects.

The reason that all of us were very eager to meet
today is because there was an important meeting in
Tehran among the Heads of State of Iran, Turkey and
Russia. As we are aware, they have been intensely
discussing future formulas for Idlib. We do not know
the details of what was discussed or what the outcome
is. What I got from their meeting is that time is needed
and time is of the essence. I hope that more time will
be given for discussions among them and among all
of us in order to avoid what we all call, and President
Erdogan repeated again today, a potential catastrophe.

There were reports that President Erdogan put
some ideas on the table, and I understand that they were
quite substantive. We have not seen them yet, and we
are looking forward to hearing more when we meet our
Turkish partners and colleagues early next week - and
perhaps the Council will be hearing more about them.
The signals indicate that they intend to continue talking
about how to implement some ideas. On that basis, let
me also propose my own idea. Actually, it is an idea I
heard from civil society. I know some people say "civil
society" when they may be referring to terrorists, but
the people I am referring to are very normal people who
have been expressing fear about being where they are
and about what could happen.

The key dilemma that we are hearing all the
time - and it is indeed a dilemma; I feel it too - has
to do with how one squares a terrible circle having
to do with the fact of the presence of a number of
United Nations-listed terrorists. We know that they are
terrorists, as they have been clearly identified, but they
are a small number in comparison with the 2.9 million
people. Then there are almost 3 million people who are
just in between and would not like to end up in between.

They key word that I have been hearing, which
was also mentioned in Tehran and which we have been
hearing for at least three years, is "separation". How
do you separate listed terrorist groups and other armed
groupsthatarenotterrorists andcanbe"reconciled"-or
at least one can take a different approach in addressing
them - and the general population? I think there is
even a reference in paragraph 4 of the joint statement
made in Tehran on that. Let us therefore address that
aspect. That is where we need more creativity.
I believe one Government official publicly asked
why the United Nations did not come up with some
ideas on how to separate them. I agree that it is not
easy. However, here is a potential plan: turning the
table. We have been saying that there are no more
Idlibs - I have been saying it and Council members
have been saying it, and rightly. However, are Council
members sure that within Idlib there are no more
Idlibs? Let me explain: perhaps the population should
not be moving away. The people that should be moving
out of the population centres and the villages are the
fighters - the Al-Nusra Front.

That type of idea is potentially doable and is based
on some assumptions. The first assumption is that the
large majority, that is, 98.5 or 98.8 per cent, of the
population in Idlib are civilians, and they have a voice.
They are telling us that. They want to use that voice.
And they can use that voice in order to produce the
separation we are talking about. The second assumption
is that Turkey is generally very worried about a potential
catastrophe. We heard that from President Erdogan.
Turkey has influence - we know it, Turkey knows
it - on armed groups present in the area, and it can
exert that influence.

Russia, Iran and the Government of Syria state
that their priority is to defeat terrorists in Idlib, or at
least to separate them. How can we not agree on that?
If that is the case, the main objective of a plan would
be to first spare the lives of civilians and to avoid a
mass exodus, because that would be a problem. We can
handle 700,000 or 800,000, but there are 3 million of
them. In which direction will they go? Towards Turkey
or towards the Government area, where they are afraid
to go? It is therefore important to avoid that effect.

Secondly, we may be able to see whether we can
assist separating the population de facto from the
extremists and terrorists, and the terrorists from other
groups. What could such a plan consist of? Ideally, all
militant fighters should be provided with a deadline to
move their own military presence and bases away - I
repeat, away i from population centres and villages.
Population centres would therefore remain under the
control of the civilian local councils and local police.
That would apply in particular to members of Al-Nusra,
who should be notified by the guarantors - especially
including Turkey, which has the capacity to send strong
messages to them - to evacuate houses and villages.
At the same time - and this is the message that I
received from the population 4 a media campaign
would be needed to indicate that this is what has been
asked of those armed groups, namely, to move out. "Do
not remain in my house. Do not remain in my city."
Three million people can be mobilized in that context.

Do we have examples of that? Such social
mobilization has already been increasing. We have
seen not only candle lights, but demonstrations without
Al-Nusra's banner. There was an attempt today by
Al-Nusra to actually fly its own flag. The people
said, "No, we do not want that; we want just to remind
everyone that we are civilians". Three million people
have a voice, which they can use if they know that we
are serious. That would require, of course that, at the
same time the Russian Federation ensure this type of
plan, together with Turkey, which would be a major
player in such an endeavour, and that the population
be made aware and mobilized to actually express their
voice to tell the fighters that there would be no aerial
attacks or major military attacks on any population
centre. Otherwise, all this would be futile.

This is not the only plan and could be one of
many; for all I know, it could be the plan that President
Erdogan has proposed to President Putin. I really do
not know. This plan is based on the common sense of
the people whom the United Nations is supposed to
represent sometimes - is that not true? - especially in
the kind of situation in which they now find themselves.
Russia and Turkey, above all, should be the guarantors,
together with Iran, of such a plan. Perhaps, the Security
Council could then support it.

In conclusion, I believe that we - including
me - are constantly raising concerns, stating how
tragic and terrible the situation could become and
warning about it, while we need to have some concrete
plans. I heard of one such plan from the people of Idlib.

