Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.

The United States called this meeting today to
talk about the dangerous and destructive activities of
the Hamas terrorist organization in the Gaza Strip.
One might think that the rest of the Security Council
would join us in condemning a terrorist organization
like Hamas. There should not be any debate about this.
But of course, because this attack involves Israel the
standard is different.

The United States drafted a Security Council
statement that would have condemned Hamas for
launching rockets and endangering civilians. This should
have been a no-brainer. One would think no one would
want to side with Hamas when it comes to condemning
rocket launches, but the statement was blocked. We
called for this meeting under the agenda item "Threats
to international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts", but we were blocked again. Apparently, some
Council members did not think that Hamas launching
rockets qualified as terrorism. The United States
begs to differ. We all know that certain actions in and
around Gaza receive an enormous amount of attention,
both here in the Security Council and throughout the
international media. Strangely, other actions do not
receive nearly the attention that they deserve.

What happened yesterday is one such action that
calls out for attention and condemnation. The facts are
clear. On 29 May, Hamas and an allied militant group
fired at least 70 rockets and mortars from Gaza into
Israel. That rocket attack was indiscriminate, aiming to
cause as much civilian death and destruction as possible.
There were several injuries but, thank goodness, there
were no deaths. But the mere fact that one of the rockets
landed on a kindergarten playground is all the proof we
need of the intentions of the terrorists. The horrifying
damage that could have been done is unthinkable.

Unlike some situations we deal with here in the
Security Council, where guilty parties claim mistaken
identity or lack of evidence of responsibility, this is
clearly not the case. Hamas openly claims responsibility
for that attack. They do so proudly. Their only regret is
that the attack did not kill anyone. The Security Council
has always been quick to pounce on Israel, regardless
of the facts or the circumstances. I am very interested
in how my colleagues respond when the attacks are
directly against Israel. These attacks are a clear
escalation of violence and take no steps whatsoever to
protect against civilian casualties. In fact, the entire
desired outcome of the attacks is to maximize civilian
casualties. There are a couple of major conclusions to
be drawn from that disconnect.

First, this outrageous terrorist attack proves what
we have consistently maintained, namely, that the stated
purpose of Hamas is the destruction of Israel. That is
its purpose when it fires rockets into Israel. That is its
purpose when it builds terror tunnels underneath Israeli
territory. And that is its purpose when it orchestrates
Violent protests and riots at the boundary fence, calling
for a march for return. All of those acts are indivisible
parts of a single strategy. That strategy is to do as
much damage as possible to Israel and to provoke a
response in self-defence that will create international
condemnation of Israeli actions.

Secondly, the actions of Hamas prove the falsehood
of the idea that the people of Gaza require international
protection. The people of Gaza do not need protection
from an external source. The people of Gaza need
protection from Hamas. It is the actions of Hamas that
are putting Gazans in grave danger. The indiscriminate
attacks by Hamas against Israel inevitably bring about
a response. As I have asked my colleagues before, I will
ask them again today: Who among us would accept 70
rockets launched into their country? We all know the
answer to that question: no one would.

The Palestinian people of Gaza are facing desperate
humanitarian hardships. We want to help address their
needs. We support Special Coordinator Mladenov's
engagement to restart initiatives that could improve
conditions in Gaza. But here again, we must look at
the destructive actions of Hamas. In recent weeks,
Hamas militants have repeatedly assaulted the Kerem
Shalom border crossing - the biggest lifeline for basic
humanitarian goods into Gaza. In its attacks yesterday,
Hamas rockets damaged three power lines, knocking
out electric power to tens of thousands of Palestinians.
Those monstrous actions demonstrate complete
disregard for the people of Gaza. Apparently, it is not
enough for Hamas to incite military responses to its acts
of terrorism. Hamas also feels compelled to increase the
suffering of the people in Gaza. We note reports today
that Hamas has unilaterally declared a ceasefire. We
hope that the ceasefire holds and that there are no more
rocket attacks. But the fact that Hamas can even declare
a ceasefire is further confirmation of its responsibility
for those attacks in the first place.

When we consider the situation in Gaza, this
is what the Security Council should address. It is
outrageous for the Security Council to fail to condemn
Hamas rocket attacks against Israeli civilians while
the Human Rights Council approves sending a team to
investigate Israeli actions taken in self-defence. I urge
the members of the Security Council to exercise at least
as much scrutiny when it comes to the actions of the
Hamas terrorist group as it does to Israel's legitimate
right of self-defence. To allow Hamas to continue to
get away with its terrorist acts and to somehow expect
Israel to sit on its hands when it is attacked is the height
of hypocrisy. To continue to condemn Israel without
even acknowledging what is actually coming from the
leaders of Gaza makes me question who actually cares
about the welfare of the Palestinian people.

The Palestinian people deserve a better life. That
can happen only if we acknowledge and reject the
terrorist actions of Hamas and if we encourage more
responsible Palestinian leadership. All responsible
parties should be encouraging both sides to come to the
negotiating table for the well-being of the Israelis and
the Palestinians.

