Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you,
Mr. President, to the Security Council Chamber. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/74) and to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mahiga for his assessment of the
situation in Somalia. Above all, we would like to
congratulate our British colleagues on successfully
holding the London conference on Somalia. We hope
that it will make a significant contribution to the
process of resolving the situation in Somalia, which
has entered a critical phase.

Achieving the goal of stabilization and laying the
foundation for statehood in Somalia requires
coordinated, dynamic efforts on the part of the
international community, political will and the full
commitment of the Somali Transitional Federal
Government. Of paramount importance right now are
the timely suppression of Al-Shabaab and the prompt
completion of the main transition objectives within the
deadline set.

We welcome the recent successes of Kenyan,
Somali and Ethiopian troops in southern and central
Somalia. However, extremists continue to control a
major part of the South of the country and, judging by
the latest reports, they are actively regrouping and
making alliances, both with local likeminded groups -
such as in Puntland - and with Al-Qaida abroad.
Terrorist acts continue in Mogadishu, where the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is an
important stabilizing force.

The recent adoption of resolution 2036 (2012)
creates new possibilities for strengthening AMISOM
military capabilities, making possible a broader and
more intensive campaign against Al-Shabaab. It is vital
to begin implementing the resolution's provisions as
soon as possible. Any attempts to engage Al-Shabaab
in dialogue are unacceptable. It is a group on the
United Nations sanctions list for Somalia. Its goals -
particularly since allying with Al-Qaida - are patently
clear and do not include renouncing terrorism or
further attempts to destabilize the situation in Somalia.
Somalia is awash with weapons, a circumstance
that inevitably provokes violence. Given that reality, it
is more important than ever to strengthen the arms
embargo overall and to cut off weapons channels for
the extremists, including those coming from Libya and
other volatile regions in Africa and the Middle East.

We must bear in mind that force can only be a
complement to a broad political process, which the
Somalis themselves have the full responsibility to drive
forward. In that light, they must work for unity within
the Transitional Federal Institutions, put an end to
personal score-settling and mobilize their energies to
carry out the provisions of the road map, namely,
advancing the political process and securing State
authority over the recovered territories. We must reject
any attempts to undermine the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Somalia.

Although the effects of the famine have
somewhat abated, the humanitarian crisis in Somalia
continues and the number of refuges is unfortunately
growing as military action against Al-Shabaab
continues, affecting even the capital Mogadishu itself.
The Russian Federation provides humanitarian
assistance to Somali refugees in neighbouring
countries, especially Kenya, and makes significant
contributions to United Nations programmes. We
support measures adopted under Mr. Mahiga's
leadership to coordinate and expand the United Nations
presence in Somalia as required by the security
situation.

The outlook for the fight against piracy off the
coast of Somalia is still dim. Piracy is flourishing and
continues to destabilize the region, taking a large
economic and moral toll on the international
community. We welcome the determination in evidence
at the London conference to counteract that scourge as
part of a comprehensive anti-piracy strategy, including
creating an effective system aimed at bringing pirates
to trial. Given the clear complications of carrying out
justice in Somalia, we are in favour of creating a
relevant structure with an international component.

Russia continues to participate in international
operations to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia.
We will continue to pursue a policy of comprehensive
support to Somalia and active participation in the
efforts of the international community to facilitate a
solution to the Somali situation.

