The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of Zaire
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lnkabn
Khabouji N'Zaji (Zaire) took a place at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/761, which contains the text of a letter dated 25
August 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l995/77l, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l995/683, which contains the
text of a note verbale dated 10 August 1995 from the
Permanent Mission of Zaire to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Zaire, on whom I now call.

Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'Zaji (Zaire)
(interpretation from French): I should like to express, on
behalf of the Republic of Zaire, our appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia for the way in
which he conducted the proceedings of the Security
Council last month. I also wish to avail myself of this
opportunity, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September. I know you personally, and your
intellectual, moral and diplomatic qualities assure us that
the Council is in good hands.

The Council has before it a draft resolution
establishing an International Commission of Inquiry into
allegations of the supply of arms to the frontiers of the
countries surrounding Rwanda. I referred to "allegations".
My country, the Republic of Zaire, wholeheartedly
supported the establishment of such a commission of
inquiry at the Bujumbura Conference last February. It was
during that Conference that my country demanded an end
to the unhealthy accusations levelled at Zaire by certain
elements in the region. To put an end to those
accusations, Zaire proposed that an independent
commission could address them and establish the truth.

It is now September. Zaire's request was made in
February. One might say better late than never; but how
long we have waited for this Commission to be set up.
Some countries in the region put obstacles in its way.
They did not want the Commission to be established -
they did not want the truth to be established. We are
pleased that the Security Council is able today, through
the draft resolution now before us, to get this Commission
under way.

But I should like to point out that Zaire has nothing
to hide. This is shown by the fact that we are living with
more than two million citizens of other countries on our
territory. What do we have to hide? They are participating
in trade. Does the 1951 Geneva Convention authorize
refugees to conduct trade in the country of their asylum?

Some around this table who have enjoyed the
hospitality of the Republic of Zaire and who, thanks to
Zaire, were able to escape massacre and, again thanks to
Zaire, occupy posts in international organizations on
behalf of the Republic of Zaire are today hurling insults
at Zaire.

In my country we say that one should not spit in the
air, or the spit will fall into one's own face. I think my
point is clear, and I hope it will benefit those who are

 

today living in camps, deprived of their homeland. Zaire
does not expel refugees. It authorizes them to return to their
country. Where is the harm in that? We would remind the
Council that there are, furthermore, provisions allowing us
to take such action.

In conclusion, I should like to express the appreciation
of the Republic of Zaire to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for sending to the region the High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Ogata. She has just
completed her mission in the region, and we are awaiting
her report with impatience. We believe it could bring peace
to this troubled region.

Zaire has nine neighbouring countries, of whom
almost half are in a state of armed crisis. We bear an
enormous burden, and we hope that the High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mrs. Ogata, will promptly present her report
to the Secretary-General for submission to the Security
Council. We will then, once more, be in a position to make
clear Zaire's intentions vis-a-vis the situation of the
refugees on its territory.


The President: I thank the representative of Zaire for
the kind words he addressed to me.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.


