Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his briefing,
especially because it is his first briefing on this threat
since the Office of Counter-Terrorism was established
last year. The United States looks forward to its
continued cooperation with him and his team to help
Member States fight terrorism.

The maps of the territory occupied by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in Iraq and Syria
tell a powerful story. In 2013 and 2014 ISIS was on
the march. It had seized large portions of Syria and
Iraq for its self-proclaimed caliphate of terror. Some of
the region's largest cities, such as Mosul, had fallen to
ISIS. Those terrorists committed unspeakable human
rights abuses against the people of Iraq and Syria in the
areas ISIS controlled, while they used their safe haven
to plan attacks around the world.

Today, in 2018, the maps tell a different story. The
territory ISIS controls has collapsed. Iraq has been
liberated from ISIS. The United States led a decisive
coalition of Member States that helped to significantly
weaken ISIS, together with partners across Syria and
Iraq. Our resolve for an enduring defeat of ISIS will
not falter. We will continue the fight until the maps no
longer show ISIS territory at all.

But even then our work will not be done. That is
because ISIS is adapting its tactics. ISIS is losing its
so-called State, but its remaining fighters will try to
undermine stabilization and reconstruction in Iraq and
Syria. ISIS foreign terrorist fighters will also try to
return to their homes and take their fight to new fronts.
Together with Al-Qaida, ISIS cells and affiliates
present a grave threat that the spread of terror will be
expanded to communities around the world.
We see those despicable attacks happening already.
Just a few weeks ago, ISIS claimed responsibility
for a cowardly attack in Afghanistan against Save
the Children, a humanitarian non-governmental
organization that helps more than 700,000 Afghan
children. Last fall in Egypt, ISIS claimed responsibility
for a despicable attack against a mosque that reportedly
killed more than 300 people, in the middle of prayers.

Even as we roll back ISIS on its core territory, the
need for all of us to be vigilant and to work together
to defeat this evil is obvious. As the fight against
ISIS enters a new phase, much of the work will fall
to our dedicated law enforcement and intelligence
professionals, who will need to pool their resources
and information to stop attacks from happening in the
first place. There is no time to waste in looking for
ways to deepen our cooperation on that front. We have
introduced vital tools here at United Nations that can
help such efforts.

First of all, Member States must step up their efforts
to crack down on the sources of financing for ISIS and
Al-Qaida. In the coming months, we fully expect that
ISIS will try to infiltrate legitimate businesses in Iraq
and Syria to look for new ways to raise money. All
Member States have an obligation to freeze the assets
of all terrorists on the list of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
including those of ISIS and Al-Qaida. Member States
must take that obligation seriously and implement their
obligations comprehensively. The United States will
exercise maximum vigilance to locate and disrupt the
funding networks for ISIS and Al-Qaida.

We must all enhance our efforts to disrupt the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters across borders. They
constantly look for ways to break our defences and evade
capture. That is why resolution 2396 (2017), which we
adopted in December, is so important. It includes crucial
measures aimed at strengthening border security and
information-sharing, as well as provisions to improve
judicial and law enforcement cooperation. Resolution
2396 (2017) sets high standards for how States should
improve their border-control tools. It also strongly
encourages Governments to develop prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies, alongside
civil society, to help break the cycle of terrorism. The
United States urges all Member States to implement
their obligations under this resolution as soon as
possible, and United Nations counter-terrorism bodies
to be prepared to assist Member States in that task.
There should be no doubt about the need to use all
the tools we have established under the Security Council
to fight ISIS. To that list we should also add resolution
2379 (2017), which established an investigative
mechanism to document crimes committed by ISIS in
Iraq. Accountability for atrocities committed by ISIS
is a crucial part of recovering from the group's reign
of terror. The final deadline for agreeing to the terms
of reference for the ISIS investigative mechanism is
coming up tomorrow. We hope that Iraq and the United
Nations can reach agreement so that the resolution can
be fully and rapidly implemented.

The United States is proud of our steadfast effort
to stand up to ISIS and rally a global response to defeat
the threat. It is true that the threat posed by ISIS is
adapting in new and dangerous ways. When we look
back at what our campaign has achieved so far, we
should use that success to strengthen our resolve for
this new chapter. When we all looked at those maps
of ISIS expanding in 2014, it was hard to imagine that
three years later we would see such a dramatic change
for the better. Through the strength of our collective
will, we have turned the tide. We will do the same in
the years to come until ISIS is defeated for good and
consigned to the dustbin of history, where it belongs.

