Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First and foremost,
I wish to congratulate Uruguay' on its accession to
presidency of the Security Council and commend the
great skill with which you, Sir, have led the Council
since the beginning of the month.

My delegation also commends the leadership
of Ambassador Samantha Power, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations, in the Council in December last year.
Finally, I wish to pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, to whom my country owes so much for his
remarkable and tireless efforts to ensure that peace
returns to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation notes the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as contained in document
S/2015/1031, the content of which we fully appreciate.
With your kind indulgence, Mr. President, I shall briefly
touch on a number of points contained in the report
before us today, including the elections, the inclusive
national dialogue, armed groups, the implementation of
the Nairobi Declarations and the strategic dialogue.

As underscored in paragraph 9 of the Secretary-
General's report, the electoral process in my country
seems to be experiencing some delay but, as was
eloquently recalled by His Excellency Mr. Raymond
Tshibanda N'tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation when he spoke at
the General Assembly in September (see A/70/PV.24),
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is committed to
organizing general elections, which will be the third
after those held in 2006 and 2011, even though the
road towards the elections may seem to be strewn with
obstacles. Despite such challenges, my Government will
do all in its power to meet the challenge of organizing
elections that meet all international standards of
inclusivity, transparency and credibility.
Nevertheless, I am compelled to recall that,
following the political intolerance and the failure of
the losers to accept the results before, during and after
the 2006 and 2011 elections, my country experienced
deadly violence that led to loss of human life and
property. In a bid to avert a recurrence of that situation,
His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President
of the Republic, engaged the country in national
dialogue so that our political stakeholders, civil society,
and religious and traditional authorities could agree
together on the ways and means that would enable
us to overcome the obstacles we face with a view to
achieving consensus on the electoral process under
way, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Constitution. In that regard, let me touch on the fact
that the aforementioned obstacles are linked first and
foremost with the electoral list, which has raised some
questions on its reliability and inclusiveness.

While there is no guarantee to date that all Congolese
of voting age are on the electoral list - as illustrated
by the problems with those who have recently reached
voting age, Congolese living abroad and refugees
returning home - at the same time there is nothing to
prove that all names on the list are there legitimately.
The International Organization of la Francophonie,
which audited the list, recognized the need to update it.
Therefore, after considering the options, the consensus
is either to have elections based on a flawed voters
list - which could lead to the election results being
challenged - or to address the flaws of the list ahead
of the process and reduce the risk as much as possible.

The second obstacle is the electoral calendar.
Admittedly, there is a general calendar that includes
the organization of elections at all levels. However, as
the Head of State pointed out in his speech to the nation
when he announced the convening of the inclusive
national dialogue, that calendar is not operational at
this point because of the multiple dissenting opinions
within the political establishment. Indeed, before it was
published the calendar was demanded by the opposition,
which then promptly challenged it. The differences
concerning the calendar have never been resolved, to
the point that the initial voting planned for October did
not take place.

The third obstacle is providing secure conditions
for the elections. The elections of 2006 and 2011 were
marred by violence in certain constituencies. Indeed,
in 2006 the highest adjudicatory body, the Supreme
Court of Justice, was torched, and following that
election, a war broke out in Kinshasa in 2007 that led
to the loss of several lives because the results were
not accepted. A very similar situation arose in 2011,
when violence broke out in Kinshasa and several other
cities and towns in the country before, during and after
elections because of altercations between activists of
rival political parties. Beyond providing physical and
material security for the candidates and voters, the
problem at this level is that of the role that should be
played by the political establishment in promoting an
environment conducive to a peaceful election process.

The fourth obstacle is the funding of the electoral
process. Funding the process also requires some
dialogue. So far, the National Independent Electoral
Commission has forwarded to all stakeholders in the
electoral process a budget equivalent to $1.2 billion
to finance the entire electoral process. For 2016, the
Government has published a draft financing bill with
an appropriation to the tune of $500 million, which is
less than half of the aforementioned budget, and with
the caveat that we can only disburse tens of millions
of dollars per month, while our current capacity to
mobilize revenue does not allow for that.

To prevent a crisis arising from the failure to
resolve all those problems responsibly, good sense
recommends that we sit down together around the table
and talk - hence, the need for the dialogue among
Congolese. Dialogue is a virtue that we cannot avoid
in democracy. Other voices - such as those of the
Secretary-General, His Holiness Pope Francis, and the
Episcopal Conference of the Congo, composed of all
bishops of the Catholic Church in the country - have
also called for dialogue.

Having thus consulted every sector of Congolese
society, which has largely acknowledged the importance
and necessity of organizing a national dialogue, and
having recognized the urgent need, expressed by many,

to ensure that this dialogue is supported by international
facilitation, on 17 November 2015 the President of the
Republic asked the Secretary-General to appoint a
facilitator. We are awaiting that appointment so that we
can get started on our dialogue.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, my
Government has put considerable effort into combating
the armed groups. In the Sukola I operations, the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC), with the support of MONUSCO, continued
to pursue the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) with
the aim of securing Beni and the surrounding area.
The FARDC also led similar operations against the
Forces de resistance patriotiques de l'Ituri. Both these
and the ADF operations are supported by MONUSCO.
In December, in order to assess the situation on the
ground, the Head of State, as Supreme Commander
of the Congolese armed forces, made an inspection
tour that took him to Goma and Beni, in North Kivu,
and then to Bukavu, in South Kivu. Since then the
necessary arrangements have been made to ensure that
those operations continue smoothly.

Regarding the Forces democratiques pour la
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the FARDC's operations
against that negative force have continued in the areas
of Lubero, Rutshuru and Walikale, in North Kivu,
and in the Itombwe forest, in South Kivu, and have
weakened it, enabling us to arrest Ladislas Ntangazwa,
a perpetrator of genocide, on 8 December. In that
regard, I recall my Government's position concerning
the FDLR ex-combatants and their families who are
cantoned in transit sites. While we are grateful to the
United Nations for taking charge of them, as we had
asked, my Government would again like to see greater
involvement on the part of the international community
in general, and the Security Council in particular, in
repatriating the ex-combatants to Rwanda or quickly
resettling them in a third country outside the Great
Lakes region.

Regarding the former Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23) and the delay in implementing the Nairobi
Declarations, the assessment made at the Security
Council's meeting on 8 October 2015 (see S/PV.7529)
still stands. As the Secretary-General emphasizes in
paragraphs 35 and 36 of his report, no progress has
been made in repatriating former M-23 combatants,
owing mainly, as was also noted at the last meeting, to
the bad faith of the leaders of the former M-23. Despite
the appeal made at the special meeting of defence
ministers of member countries of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Luanda
on 20 October, urging all those involved to help to
speed up repatriation of former M-23 combatants, the
situation remains unchanged. After two meetings, held
in Kinshasa on 18 November and in Kampala from 3 to
7 December, aimed at agreeing on a repatriation plan
following the expiration of the time allowed, only 12
of the 1,763 former M-23 combatants in Uganda agreed
to be repatriated, making for a total of 194 repatriated
from Uganda since December 2014.

We can say without fear of contradiction that as of
today, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is alone
in implementing the Nairobi Declarations. The former
M-23 combatants, held hostage by their command,
refuse to respect their commitments and continue to
reject voluntary repatriation despite our President's offer
to mitigate it by allowing unconditional repatriation
first to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
sites and subsequent reintegration to communities
of the former combatants' choice. My Government
believes firmly that, as the Secretary-General states in
paragraph 81 of his report,

"[t]he full and timely implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations and, particularly, the repatriation of
the ex-M-23 elements cantoned in Rwanda and
Uganda, are critical for peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region".

My Government's view, therefore, is that the
Security Council should consider instituting sanctions
against the former M-23 leadership, in accordance with
the decision made by the Heads of States signatories to
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region when
they met in New York on September 29 2015 as part of
the sixth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Framework. It is also important that
the countries that are sheltering them be encouraged to
translate their commitments into action and find lasting
political solutions to the obstacles to repatriating these
former combatants and rehabilitating and reintegrating
them into the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The strategic dialogue is ongoing and significant
progress has been made in bilateral discussions between
my Government and the United Nations. In that regard, I
should point out that the Congolese Government, which
remains committed to continuing discussions with the
United Nations in a spirit of mutual trust, is hoping that
the dialogue will result in a good outcome that, among
other things, will enable us to intensify our pursuit of
the negative forces still operating in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to resume our
joint operations against the FDLR, in accordance with
MONUSCO's mandate. In that context, my delegation
commends the Secretary-General's recommendations
to the Security Council, in his letter of 16 December
2015 (S/2015/983) addressed to the President of the
Council for the month of December, on the review of
MONUSCO's mandate coming up in March, especially
where reducing the Mission's military strength and
improving its effectiveness are concerned.

In conclusion, my Government has taken note
of the Secretary-General's comments. We welcome
and greatly appreciate the assistance and sacrifices
of the international community in general, and
the peacekeepers of MONUSCO and the Force
Intervention Brigade in particular, aimed at preserving
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country
and ensuring peace and stability for our people. Lastly,
my delegation would like to express the gratitude of the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to the Security Council for its dedication
to our country, and to offer the Council our best wishes
for 2016 at the beginning of this new year.

