Mr. Abe (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English text provided by the delegation): Our agenda today,
the situation in Syria, is an urgent one. This ongoing
international crisis requires a show of solidarity from
the Security Council. We discussed Syria at the Group of
Seven (G-7) Ise-Shima Summit this year and confirmed
the importance of cooperation among G-7 members.
Today, I would like to reaffirm our commitment in the
Security Council.

We deeply deplore the situation that the nationwide
cessation of hostilities based on the agreement
between the United States and Russia is in danger.
The International Syria Support Group was convened
yesterday and the commitment was reaffirmed that the
international community as a whole will support the
agreement. Japan took part in that commitment. The
Security Council must strongly promote the transition
to a political process in which violence is ceased and
humanitarian access is improved under the leadership
of Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.

The joint investigation of the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
identified those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria last month. This month, it was reported
that chlorine-based attacks were conducted in Syria.
The use of chemical weapons is utterly unacceptable
in any circumstances. The Security Council must unite
in order to hold perpetrators to account and bring those
responsible to justice. As a member of the Security
Council and the International Syria Support Group,
Japan calls on the international community and all
relevant stakeholders to fully abide by the Security
Council's Syria-related resolutions.

In collaboration with the United Nations and
other international organizations, Japan has provided
non-military assistance and aided in creating as
conducive a climate as possible for the political
settlement of the Syrian crisis. Japan has supported
efforts to build societies that are resilient against
violent extremism by combining urgent humanitarian
assistance with development assistance for the people
of Syria and neighbouring countries. That support has
centred on three areas.

First, Japan has extended assistance to all Syrians
inside and outside of Syria. Secondly, Japan has
provided support to vocational training and capacity-
building programmes for women. Thirdly, Japan has
provided assistance to alleviate the burdens faced by
neighbouring countries in support of regional stability.
It is especially important to bolster efforts to build
societies that are resilient against violent extremism.
In collaboration with the United Nations, Japan has
supported territories liberated from violent extremism
in order to promote stabilization. We have provided
assistance to people who are socially marginalized and
have not received even basic assistance.

As one example, Japan has collaborated with the
United Nations Development Programme to implement
the Emergency Employment Project in northern Jordan,
where the unemployment rate has risen amid a wave
of Syrian refugees. That project has supported job-
seeking and business ventures for more than 1,000
young people. Nadia, a Jordanian woman, recalled,
"I cannot forget the moment when I heard over the
phone that I had been accepted to participate in the
project". Nadia, who has three children, acquired the
necessary knowledge to start a business and decided to
open a kitchen utensil store. We believe that promoting
women's social participation and developing a sense of
involvement among young people are effective means
to create resilient and tolerant societies and to prevent
violent extremism.

With that in mind, Japan provided more than
$1.26 billion to Syria, Iraq and neighbouring countries
from 2011 to 2015. In addition, Japan is implementing
$1.13 billion of assistance to Syria, Iraq and
neighbouring countries this year. Japan is focusing in
particular on implementing humanitarian aid, including
the provision of food, water and vaccinations, as well
as assistance for economic development and social
stability, including education and vocational training
in collaboration with the United Nations and other
international organizations.

However, the success of Japan's efforts depends
on how we resolve the current Syrian crisis. Japan
reiterates its determination, as a member of the Security
Council, to work on the matter in a responsible manner
because, first of all, a ceasefire is absolutely important.
Once again, Japan will continue to work on this issue.

