Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first say that I
concur with the statement made earlier by the representative
of the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

The wars in the former Yugoslavia were marked by
horrendous crimes against international humanitarian law,
often committed in the name of that repulsive policy,
"ethnic cleansing". Crimes such as mass killings, the
systematic rape of women and detention under horrible
circumstances constitute a threat to international peace and
security. To prevent them from recurring, in the Balkans or
elsewhere, the persons responsible must be brought to
justice. The establishment in 1993 of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia was an important
indication of the international community's determination to
put an end to such crimes.

The work of the International Tribunal is also a crucial
element in the broader peace-implementation and
reconciliation process in the former Yugoslavia, in both the
short-term and the long-term perspectives. Impunity breeds
continued hate and mistrust. Rendering transparent justice
brings clarity and hope for future generations, and that is
why all indicted war criminals must be brought to The
Hague.

These are the main reasons for Sweden's strong
support over the years for the work of the Tribunal, both
politically and in substance.

Today, we are very pleased to see that the work of
the Tribunal has intensified. The recent increase in the
number of indictees taken into custody has been most
welcome. But we must also be prepared to adapt the
resources of the Tribunal accordingly, so that the
indictees can be tried without undue delay. It has become
clear that the caseload has reached a point where we need
to increase the judicial resources of the Tribunal.

Today's decision will confirm the strong support in
the Council for the work and role of the International
Tribunal. Having chaired the working group dealing with
the ad hoc tribunals, Sweden is particularly gratified that
the Council will be able to give a positive response today
to the request from the Tribunal. By adding a third trial
chamber, we will make it possible for the backlog of
cases to be dealt with more expeditiously and the
resources of the Tribunal, including the new courtrooms,
to be used more effectively.

In closing, I would like to stress that today's
decision, along with the similar decision the Council took
last month concerning the Rwanda Tribunal, also
highlights the need for a permanent international criminal
court, to bring to justice any future crimes of this nature.
At the Diplomatic Conference in Rome this summer, we
must not hesitate to take the historic step of establishing
such a court.

