Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'lvoire welcomes the holding of this open debate on
the role of reconciliation in maintaining international
peace and security, as well as your presence here today,
Mr. President, which reflects the importance that
your country attaches to the issue. Cote d'Ivoire also
thanks the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
informative briefings and relevant recommendations.

According to the Constitution of UNESCO, since
wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of
men that the defences of peace must be constructed.
While that quotation, so dear to UNESCO, urges us to
mobilize our collective consciousness in order to prevent
conflicts, it also implicitly underlines the essential role
of reconciliation in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Reconciliation should therefore play a role throughout
the entire peace continuum and be a part of each of its
distinct phases, from prevention, through management,
to the consolidation of post-crisis stability. Above
all, it must involve the parties to conflicts and ensure
that they can overcome and forgive, reflecting values
without which no lasting peace is possible.

Cote d'Ivoire's recent history has been marked by
events that while undoubtedly painful taught us many
lessons. We learned, in particular, that reconciliation
is a difficult, lengthy process that requires both
the willingness of the parties to conflicts to pursue
peace and the continued support of the international
community, including regional organizations. In that
regard, at the national level, reconciliation must be
the backbone of all post-crisis and peacebuilding
strategies. It must be part of a holistic approach that
takes into account the root causes of the conflict and
involves all national political and social actors, without
exception. In order to be a genuine nationwide cathartic
process, reconciliation must enable the perpetrators of
crimes, as well as their victims, to be heard, because
they must be encouraged to forgive one another and
agree to transform their differences and their traumas
into a new social contract.

In the light of those requirements, as soon as
Cote d'Ivoire's post-electoral crisis ended in 2011,
our Government established a dialogue, truth and
reconciliation commission whose task was to restore
dialogue between all of the country's sociopolitical and
ethnic elements and promote their peaceful coexistence.
During its two-year mandate from 2011 to 2013, the
commission held nearly 70,000 victim hearings and 80
public hearings. In its subsequent recommendations
the commission considered the effective application
of the law on rural land, improved consideration of
issues related to the status of women, the reduction of
regional disparities, the establishment of a republican
army and the holding of national days of remembrance
and forgiveness and days dedicated to dialogue. In
May 2015 a national commission for reconciliation and
victim compensation took over and was entrusted with
the responsibility of identifying and compensating the
victims of the post-electoral crisis.

While we recognize that reconciliation should be
central to post-crisis and peacebuilding strategies,
it must also be inclusive and ensure that there is a
significant arena for the voices of women and young
people, who are the primary victims of violence in
conflict situations but who can also be the architects
of peace and stability, as Ms. Elman just reminded us.
Also crucial to reconciliation are transitionaljustice and
the implementation of the principle of accountability,
particularly in cases of serious human rights violations,
including mass killings and sexual violence against
women and children. In that context, the support of
the international community and development partners
is essential to strengthening transitional justice
institutions as well as ensuring the compensation,
psychological care and social reintegration of war
victims. I want to underline the important role in that
regard of the Peacebuilding Fund, which is another tool
for us in our efforts to consolidate peace when it has
been restored.

If reconciliation is to live up to the outcomes
expected of it, it must take into account social and
cultural regulatory mechanisms such as inter-ethnic
alliances and peace pacts and the work of religious
associations, and the leading roles, especially in the
context of Cote d'Ivoire, that schools and national
radio play through their ability to preserve social
equilibrium and coexistence among all sectors of
society. The creation of cote d'Ivoire's National
Chamber of Traditional Kings and Chiefs, with a View
to further strengthening the achievements of the two
post-conflict reconciliation commissions, has been an
effective response to the requirements of reconciliation,
working to establish harmonious relations between the
Government and the people and to strengthen national
unity and social cohesion.

Beyond the national arena, reconciliation is
also needed in cases of conflicts between States. In
that regard, the willingness of the warring parties
to reconcile and work for peace can benefit from the
support of regional organizations, which among other
things are responsible for promoting dialogue and
cooperation among State actors.

In conclusion, my delegation urges the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, to continue
its multifaceted support for ongoing national and
inter-State reconciliation processes with a view to
strengthening international peace and security.

