Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate. I also thank Mr. Nigel
Fisher for his briefing and for his excellent work as
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Interim Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I appreciate the
contribution just made by the Ambassador of Haiti,
Mr. Gaspar, and I welcome the participation of
Mr. Fernando Carrera Castro, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala, in our debate.

Brazil values the concept of a consolidation plan
that foresees the conditions for a sustainable transition
of the current United Nations presence in Haiti, in line
with the security situation on the ground. We agree that
the tasks performed today by MINUSTAH should be
progressively transferred to the Haitian authorities, as
the development of national capacities allows. We also
support the concept that troop levels should be adjusted
as MINUSTAH prepares to gradually disengage.

Nevertheless, financial considerations must not be
the driving force behind the reduction of the United
Nations presence in Haiti. Although we understand
the current financial constraints, the situation on the
ground and the assessment of the Haitian Government's
ability to assume responsibilities should be the decisive
factors in determining the level and nature of the future
United Nations presence in Haiti. If we allow financial
needs to dictate the pace of transition, we will deviate
from the responsible and controlled exit strategy to
which the Security Council is committed.

MINUSTAH's consolidation plan must be owned
by Haitians as a platform for the development of critical
capacities. It must entail a true partnership around key
common objectives. Moreover, it must ensure that
when the time comes for transferring responsibilities,
international partners, agencies, funds, programmes
and, more important, the Haitian Government, will
come together in a coherent strategy and that the
support and resources needed will be provided.

That is especially important with regard to the
Haitian National Police (HNP). We welcome the
Haitian commitment to the strengthening of the HNP
and to adjusting its recruitment process to the objective
of having 15,000 police officers by 2016.

Likewise, the appropriate organization by Haiti
of the upcoming elections is a fundamental step in
the country's efforts to fully exert its institutional
and political responsibilities. In that connection, too,
sustained international support is needed. Strengthening
the rule of law, democracy and human rights are also
central areas to consolidating stability.

Let us not forget, however, that economic growth
with job creation and social inclusion is an absolutely
essential dimension of stability in Haiti. It is the first
priority that must continue to guide the international
approach to the situation in the country.

International engagement remains key to the
development, in an integrated manner, of critical
capacities in those core areas. Brazil renews its long-
term commitment to Haiti in that regard.

Our sister nation of Haiti has made important
strides in its quest for recovery from one of the worst
natural catastrophes of our time. Yet, Haiti's resilience
was again put to a test. The impact of the last hurricane
season and rising living costs compound a very difficult
scenario, which still requires the sustained attention of
the international community. It is widely accepted that,
in spite of the progress achieved, a lot remains to be
done.

In that connection, it is troubling that, due to
financial constraints, important international partners
are pulling out their assistance to the country, even in
the face of worrying humanitarian needs. That trend
is not in line with MINUSTAH's consolidation plan
laid out in the Secretary-General's report (S/2013/139)
before us. In fact, it contradicts one of its fundamental
assumptions. Only through an active, permanent
effort to mobilize the necessary resources to fill the
spaces progressively left open by MINUSTAH will the
consolidation plan succeed.

As a true partnership, in full respect of Haiti's
sovereignty, the consolidation strategy also envisages
steps that can only be decided upon by Haitians
themselves. Those steps, in turn, need an environment
of cooperation and commitment to the highest interests
of the Haitian population and to a fully functional
political system. We are confident that all Haitian
political actors will continue to pursue dialogue and
democratic consolidation.

As recognized by the Security Council and by the
Group of Friends of Haiti last January, the holding of
local and legislative elections is a fundamental step
in Haiti's path to peace, stability and development.
Brazil expects that the Haitian leadership will heed
that call and take the necessary measures to ensure the
organization of elections in the shortest possible time
frame.

We note recent efforts and constructive initiatives
to move the political process forward, and we encourage
further steps in that direction. We remain confident in
the Haitian ability to craft the necessary consensus to
navigate through the complexities ofthe process, with a
view to creating the conditions for further cooperation,
investment and institutional consolidation.

The Haitian Government and people can continue
to count on Brazil's unwavering engagement and
solidarity.

