Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for all of your and your team's hard
work during this month's presidency, and for convening
today's wrap-up session. I particularly welcome the
fact that this meeting is being held in public. It is good
to see that the Council can build on its past practice and
enhance the transparency of these discussions. I hope
to repeat this format at the end of our presidency next
month.

Comparing the programme of work issued at the
start of the month with the current one, it is clear how
much of the Council's time this month has been taken
up with emerging and worsening crises. We have had
emergency meetings on weekends and late into the night,
and unforeseen adoptions at short notice. This included
the unanimous adoption on 14 July of resolution 2165
(2014), which marked a major step forward in our efforts
to respond to the suffering in Syria and cut through
the obstructions that the regime had been putting in
the way of the delivery of humanitarian aid directly to
those in need.

The shooting down of Malaysian Airlines Flight
MH-17 over eastern Ukraine shocked us all. The
Council came together quickly to respond through a
press statement, and followed that up in short order
with the adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), demanding
dignified and respectful treatment of the bodies of the
victims, immediate access to the crash site and the
full cooperation of all States with the investigation
and efforts to establish accountability. Disgracefully,
the pro-Russian separatists in control of the crash site
have, from the very first day, tried to cover up what
happened. They treated the victims' bodies with
appalling disrespect. They were deliberately slow to
provide access, preventing the professional and rapid
follow-up action that was needed to secure evidence at
the site. Those actions created untold additional distress
to the families of the victims.

The Council has a collective responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but
every member also has an individual responsibility
to meet the obligations set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. The Russian Federation has not lived
up to those responsibilities. Quite apart from illegally
annexing Crimea, the Russian Federation could
have brought about the end of the fighting in eastern
Ukraine weeks ago. Instead, it has sought to foment
the unrest, providing weapons and political support to
the separatists, with predictably tragic consequences.
Against this, President Poroshenko has provided
repeated opportunities for the separatists to engage in
dialogue, removing entirely their basis for taking up
arms. For that reason, the Council will have to keep its
attention on the situation in eastern Ukraine during the
month of August.

The Council has also had to respond with emergency
meetings this month to the terrible situation in Gaza. It
is deeply tragic that so many innocent civilians have
been killed or injured in the current crisis. Both sides
must do their utmost to de-escalate the situation and
avoid further injury and loss of innocent life. The
people of Israel have the right to live without constant
fear for their security, but the people of Gaza also have
the right to live safely in peace. The adoption late on
Sunday night, on the eve of Eid Al-Fitr, of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/l3 underlined the Council's
concern about the conflict and echoed the Secretary-
General's call for an immediate and unconditional
humanitarian ceasefire.

While we must do all that we can to alleviate the
suffering - and the United Kingdom is providing
$3 million to help the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in that
regard - the priority must be to achieve a durable
ceasefire that will end this cycle ofviolence. A ceasefire
agreement must therefore address the underlying causes
of the crisis. It needs to secure full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) and the November 2012 ceasefire
agreement. Concerted action will be needed to get a grip
on the security situation and open up Gaza's economy.
The Palestinian Authority must return to Gaza. Until
the crisis is resolved, the Council must remain ready to
do what it can, reinforcing the messages and actions of
international partners to bring about a comprehensive
and lasting peace.

Finally, Mr. President, let me congratulate you
on convening the open debate on peacekeeping and
regional partnerships on Monday (see S/PV.7228).
This was a welcome and thoughtful follow-up to the
debate on new trends in peacekeeping held under the
Russian presidency in June (see S/PV.7196). Making
peacekeeping operations efficient and effective
remains a vital strand of work for the Council and for
the Secretariat. The Secretary-General's review of
peacekeeping will form a central part of this quest.

At the same time, the more this Council can do to
prevent conflict, the less we will have to turn to the last
resort of deploying a peacekeeping operation. Looking
ahead to our presidency, we plan to hold an open debate
on this topic to ask questions about what more the
Council should be doing to respond to the early warning
signs we can all see and to take the early action that
would help to prevent conflicts from escalating.

