Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Today's meeting has been convened to consider the
results of the activities of the multinational protection
force for Albania, the establishment of which was
authorized by the Security Council.

Responding to a request by the Governments of
Albania and Italy, the Council considered the situation
and determined that the crisis in that country constituted
a threat to the peace and security of the region, and
decided very swiftly to establish a multinational
protection force.

By means of resolution 1101 (1997), adopted on 28
March, the Council authorized a number of Member
States to establish a multinational protection force of a
temporary and limited nature to facilitate the safe and
prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance and to help
create a secure environment for the missions of
international organizations in Albania, including those
providing humanitarian assistance.

From the outset of consultations in the Council,
Chile supported the adoption of measures appropriate to
the serious crisis in Albania, aware of the need to avoid

 

a deterioration of the situation and the spread of its effects
to neighbouring countries. As resolution 1101 (1997) makes
clear, the purpose of the multinational protection force was
strictly humanitarian. In considering the question and
adopting a resolution on it, the Council was simply
shouldering its responsibilities in the humanitarian sphere.

The protection force was deployed efficiently, focusing
on the most sensitive areas and responding to the challenge
of making possible the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in a safe and timely manner. The consolidation of the
presence of the force took place within the time period and
modalities that were envisioned. Without doubt, its presence
produced a very positive effect on the overall security
situation. In spite of certain isolated incidents, the everyday
activities of the Albanian population began to develop in a
normal manner from that time.

In this context, we appreciate the fact that the force
provided a secure framework for civilian and humanitarian
convoys, as well as protection measures for the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund
and various missions from non-governmental organizations
active in Albania. As is well known, this range of measures
led to a qualitative improvement in the conditions for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance for the Albanian
population.

My delegation considers particularly valuable the fact
that the force provided protection to the non-governmental
organizations that requested it. We believe that providing
those entities with the protection they needed was one of
the basic objectives laid down in resolution 1101 (1997).
Furthermore, in providing that protection we met the
assumption that humanitarian workers, whether or not they
are part of the United Nations system, have a right to
expect the Security Council to be effective in protecting
their lives and property.

With regard to procedural aspects, we note with
satisfaction the fact that coordination of the protection force
with the Albanian authorities developed in a flexible way,
extending to the local and police authorities. For its part,
the United Nations, through the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, maintained an appropriate presence
as observer in the meetings of the Steering Committee of
the force.

Our assessment of the work of the multinational force
is clearly positive and leads us to the conclusion that the
objectives of resolution 1101 (1997) were fully met.

My delegation expresses its sincere appreciation to
the 11 countries that participated in the establishment of
the multinational protection force, selflessly contributing
to the solution of the Albanian crisis.

We are especially grateful to the Government of
Italy for the active steps it took to obtain the Council's
decision and for its leadership in the conduct of the force.
Successful operations always have many authors. That is
why it is fair at this time to underscore this great
contribution by Italy to the cause of peace. It had the
foresight to initiate and encourage a prompt decision. It
had the logistical capacity to coordinate the operational
dimensions of the force and the sense of political
timeliness to enable it to both act and withdraw in a
timely manner. We are grateful for that, and pleased that
Ambassador Fulci is present with us; he has every reason
to feel proud of his country.

Through resolution 1114 (1997), adopted on 19 June,
the Council, recognizing the decisive importance of the
elections planned for the end of that month, decided to
extend the mandate of the protection force so that it might
continue to maintain an atmosphere of security during the
final stage of the electoral process. In so doing, the
Council was explicitly recognizing the neutral and
impartial manner in which the force was implementing its
mandate. In spite of a few isolated incidents, the two
rounds of these crucial elections took place successfully,
in an environment free of violence and under normal
conditions.

My delegation is aware of the importance of this
electoral event for the future of Albania and its
institutions, and for this reason we appreciate the role
played by the protection force, which was the key for
ensuring tranquillity in the country, especially at polling
stations, and for protecting the international observers of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The formation of a new Government before the
withdrawal of the force is the clearest expression of the
success of the electoral process.

It is therefore clear that the decision by the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the multinational
protection force was a wise one. The nature of the
mission of the force is also an important precedent to be
considered in the event of similar situations that might be
brought to the Council's attention.

As we congratulate ourselves for the success of this
operation, we must not forget the long-suffering people of

 

Albania. If developments turned out well it is because, in
general, the people themselves contributed to the
stabilization of their homeland. The protection force created
the conditions that the Albanian people needed to establish
their own democratic course. We must, therefore,
congratulate them too for not having missed an opportunity,
which so often happens in other cases that are considered
by the Council. The Albanian people also have a great role
to play in the manner in which we evaluate this success.

Finally, the undeniable success of this operation must
not conceal the magnitude of the tasks that face the
Albanian people as they start again on the course of social
peace and economic recovery.

The profound causes of the Albanian crisis, as we
know, have not been completely overcome. There is a need
to build a broad consensus within Albanian society so that
it can recover its faith in its institutions and in the rule of
law.

The international community cannot be dissociated
from this undertaking, which affects a country in a region
where peace and stability are not always assured. The
United Nations, through its agencies and relevant organs,
must give assistance to the Albanian people. And the
Security Council, in particular, must continue to follow
closely the evolution of the situation in Albania.

