Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I also wish to thank you for having called this
meeting to debate this painful subject.

Since this body began to focus special attention
on this subject, just a few months ago, thousands of
children have been killed or wounded in armed
conflicts in a world that still has learned neither to
settle its disputes through peaceful means nor to
prevent the additional crime of involving children in
the calamities of war and armed conflict. Nevertheless,
Chile maintains its faith that multilateral efforts can at
least lead to reduce the magnitude of this problem.
However, that will be possible only if the Security
Council puts the entire weight of its authority behind
identifying and punishing those responsible for the
worst violations of human rights, which affect those
who are most vulnerable and least able to defend
themselves.

In that connection, we attach special importance
to the content of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/ 1299). We support fully the call to action made
today by Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and by Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF). I would also like to say that we fully
endorse the statement to be made by the delegation of
Austria in its capacity as the Chair of the Human
Security Network, of which Chile, along with 12 other
countries, is a member. As is well known, one of the
priorities on that group's agenda since its establishment
in 1999 has been the situation of children in armed
conflict. The Network is currently engaged in
promoting concrete projects to make progress on its
agenda.

Children have rights. However, their rights are
being ignored every day in situations of armed conflict,
whether those conflicts are of an inter-State or intra-
State nature, whether they are of low intensity or
whether they involve armed violence in the context of
civil war. In that connection, we are deeply concerned
about the continued denial of access to conflict areas
for humanitarian purposes by States and non-State
actors alike. We call on the parties involved in conflicts
to end this situation, which, as the report of the
Secretary-General points out, constitutes a violation of
both humanitarian law and human rights.

We also wish to point out that we are alarmed at
the fact that some parties to armed conflicts continue to
recruit or use children in violation of international
obligations incumbent upon them. In that regard, we
resolutely join in the appeal made by the Secretary-
General for measures to be taken to create monitoring
mechanisms aimed at preventing these situations from
continuing. We welcome as a significant step in that
regard the list of parties to conflict drawn up in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1379
(2001), which we hope will be expanded in the future
and complemented by initiatives to strengthen political
will among those parties to resolve their respective
situations with a view to being removed from the list.

Chile attaches particular importance to the
appointment of special child protection advisers as part
of peacekeeping operations. We hope that this practice
will continue and be further strengthened. In that
connection, we firmly support the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to include a child protection
adviser in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. We also welcome the development of
guidelines for the inclusion of child protection in
peacemaking and peace-building activities, as well as
the initial version of training materials for
peacekeeping personnel. We hope that in both of these
areas consideration will be given to education on the
rights of children and adolescents. We believe that
education on this subject constitutes one of the
fundamental pillars for achieving lasting protection.
That conviction is shared by the members of the
Human Security Network and is reflected in past and
current activities promoted by the Network in the areas
of children in armed conflict and human rights.

Moreover, in addition to the preventive measures
that we believe should be adopted, we urge that efforts
be made to ensure that, in the event of armed conflict,
education continues to be provided throughout the
duration of the conflict. That will facilitate the
subsequent reintegration of those children into society,
in which they can feel useful and have an opportunity
to participate. Chile considers that it is very important
to ensure that children are able to participate in the
process of post-conflict reconstruction. Without doubt,
not only their interests but also their points of View
should be taken into account in peace processes.

Testimonials such as "When I grow up, I will
form a gang and avenge my father" from an Afghan
refugee child, or the images that reach us daily of
Palestinian and Israeli children killed by acts of terror
not only move us and deserve our most profound
condemnation but should also spur us to commit to an
even more active participation in the collective effort
that is needed to achieve the full implementation of
resolutions 1261 (1999), 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001),
which were adopted consecutively over the past three
years.

Evidence of that commitment is the signing and
ratification by Chile of the principal international
instruments establishing norms in this field. Thus,
Chile ratified the Convention on the Rights of the
Child in 1990, recently signed the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the involvement of children in
armed conflict - which is in the process of ratification
by the Congress - and ratified International Labour
Organization Convention No. 182, concerning the
elimination of the worst forms of child labour. We have
also subscribed to the Rome Statute, which created the
International Criminal Court. With respect to the Court,
we wish to express our satisfaction at the fact that it
qualifies the recruitment of children under the age of
15 years as a war crime.

Along those same lines, we have reiterated our
commitment in regional consensuses such as the
Kingston Consensus, adopted by all countries of Latin
America in October 2000, or through our active
participation in forums such as the Latin American and
Caribbean Conference on the Use of Children as
Soldiers, which was held in July 1999, and in the
meeting of experts on the same subject held in
December 1999.

Chile wishes to reiterate its commitment to
contributing actively to the elimination of all forms of
violence that affect children, from armed conflicts to
urban violence. We will resolutely join all initiatives
that seek compliance with the international agreements
in this field. From a medium- to long-term perspective,
our efforts should be oriented to guarantee the human
security of children today, in an effort that would
gradually lead to the development of our societies in
conditions of harmony, free of intolerance and
protective of their domestic peace. The sooner we act
for the benefit of children today, the sooner we will
improve conditions for future generations. We are
faced with a collective responsibility that affects the
effectiveness of this Council and human dignity.

