Ms. Amos: This briefing to the Security Council
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict is an
opportunity to measure the progress made by parties to
conflict in meeting their obligations to protect civilians.
1064592
The Secretary-General's report (S/ZOlO/579)
paints a very bleak picture of the state of the protection
of civilians. Any positive and encouraging
developments are heavily outweighed by what is
happening on the ground: the continuing and frequent
failure of parties to conflict to observe their
international legal obligations to protect civilians.
Complementary to that is the failure of national
authorities and the international community more
broadly to ensure their accountability in any
meaningful, comprehensive and systematic sense.

As the Secretary-General's report notes, the
progress made in the last 18 months has been in the
further strengthening of the Council's approach to
protection. That has been embodied in the Council's
thematic resolutions on the protection of civilians, on
women and peace and security, and on children and
armed conflict. Increasingly, that progress has been
embodied in situation-specific resolutions, where the
Council's informal Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians has played an important role; in the further
development of international legal standards; in the
efforts of United Nations actors - in particular
humanitarian agencies and peacekeeping missions -
and other international and non-governmental
organizations to enhance protection on the ground; and
above all, in the courage and ingenuity of the affected
populations themselves.

Those are all important and welcome
developments, but as the report of the Secretary-
General makes clear, more needs to be done to tackle
the five core challenges that inhibit more effective
protection for civilians. Those challenges are: to
enhance compliance by parties to conflict with
international law, to enhance compliance by non-State
armed groups, to enhance protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions, to enhance
humanitarian access, and to enhance accountability for
violations.

Improving compliance by parties to conflict with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
remains particularly important, especially in the
conduct of hostilities. In countries like Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and the
Sudan, civilians are frequently targeted or fall victim to
indiscriminate or disproportionate attacks.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) has carried out over
200 attacks on villages in the North-East of the country
since January. Between July and September, 75 attacks
were reported in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Southern Sudan.
Ninety civilians were killed in these attacks, and over
100 abducted.

In Somalia, clashes in Mogadishu and the south-
central part of the country continue to result in high
numbers of civilian casualties, deaths and displacement.
Between July and September, at least 300 people were
killed and over 500 wounded by fighting between
Government forces and their allies and insurgent
groups. At least 8,000 Somalis flee the country every
month.

I remain profoundly concerned at continuing
reports of attacks, including aerial bombing, carried
out by the Sudanese Armed Forces in populated areas
of the Jebel Marra region of Darfur. These have
resulted in civilian deaths and injuries, and some
100,000 people have been displaced. With limited
humanitarian access, mostly due to Government
restrictions, it has been difficult to gain a clear picture
of the situation and of the numbers and locations of the
displaced and other vulnerable groups.

Where we are unable to promote and encourage
compliance with the law, the Council must do more to
enforce. This includes following through on the
willingness expressed in resolution 1894 (2009) to
respond to situations of conflict where civilians are
targeted or humanitarian assistance is deliberately
obstructed.

I would like to draw particular attention to the
concern raised in the report over the humanitarian
impact of explosive weapons, particularly when used in
densely populated areas. As the inhabitants of Baghdad,
Gaza, Mogadishu, the Vanni region of Sri Lanka and
elsewhere can attest, explosive weapons such as
artillery shells, missile and rocket warheads and bombs
can cause substantial and ongoing civilian suffering
when used in populated areas. Civilians within the
vicinity of an explosion are likely to be killed or
injured by the blast and fragmentation from such
weapons. They may be harmed by the collapse of
buildings or suffer as a result of damage to essential
infrastructure, such as hospitals and sanitation systems.
And they live with the threat posed by unexploded
ordnance.
I would join the Secretary-General in urging
Member States, United Nations actors, and
international and non-governmental organizations to
consider the issue of explosive weapons closely,
including by supporting more systematic data
collection and analysis of the human costs of explosive
weapons use. I would urge also increased cooperation
by Member States in collecting and making available
information to United Nations and other relevant actors
on civilian harm resulting from the use of explosive
weapons. Policy statements outlining the conditions
under which explosive weapons might be used in
populated areas would also be invaluable.

Improved compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law will remain
elusive in the absence of and full acceptance of the
need for systematic and consistent engagement with
non-State armed groups. Experience in Colombia,
Liberia, Nepal, the Philippines, Sierra Leone, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan and the former Yugoslavia shows that
lives can be saved by engaging armed groups in order
to seek compliance with international humanitarian law
in their combat operations and general conduct, to gain
safe access for humanitarian operations, or to dissuade
them from using certain types of weapons.

An increasing number of Member States
appreciate the importance of engagement for
humanitarian purposes, but this must translate into
greater consideration of the possible humanitarian
consequences of national legal and policy initiatives
that effectively inhibit humanitarian actors in engaging
armed groups for humanitarian purposes. I am
increasingly concerned by the growing body of
national legislation and policies relating to
humanitarian funding that limit humanitarian
engagement with non-State armed groups that have
been designated terrorist organizations. In the United
States, for example, domestic legislation defines
"material support" in such a way that it includes
advocacy, technical expertise and advice, even when
such activities are aimed at bringing the conduct of
these non-State actors in line with international law.

Across donor States, the threshold of what
constitutes direct or indirect, or intentional or non-
intentional material support to designated terrorist
organizations varies; so too does the manner in which
these are formulated in humanitarian funding policies.
The result is a complex web of bureaucratic restrictions
demanding extensive vetting of partner organizations
and, in some instances, explicit prohibitions on contact
with designated terrorist organizations as a condition
of funding.

Humanitarian actors face potential criminal
liability and prosecution for engaging with designated
terrorist organizations in the course of, for example,
securing the release of child soldiers or for simply
delivering aid to civilian populations in an area
controlled by such an organization. Measures of this
sort can take us further from, rather than nearer to our
goal of protecting civilians.

From Chad to Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of Congo to Liberia, to Sierra Leone and the
Sudan, United Nations peacekeeping missions have
had a significant impact on enhancing the protection of
civilian populations. Important measures are being
introduced to further improve the implementation of
protection mandates by such missions, based on the
recommendations of the November 2009 independent
study jointly commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).
Mr. Le Roy will speak to these shortly.

I would like to touch on three issues in the
Secretary-General's report.

The first is mission drawdown. In recent months,
United Nations peacekeepers have begun to withdraw
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad is expected to withdraw completely
by the end of this year. The protection and
humanitarian implications of drawdown are context-
specific. It is therefore essential that drawdown be
based on the achievement of clear, context-specific
benchmarks, including on the protection of civilians.
Anything less risks instability, violence and further
protection problems.

In advance of mission drawdown, the Security
Council should insist upon the articulation of
benchmarks relating to the protection of civilians and
on the establishment of a mechanism to measure and
report progress against those benchmarks. Resolution
1923 (2010) on the situation in Chad provides useful
examples in both these respects. Early consideration
must also be given to the likely resource implications
for the humanitarian and development actors that
remain once a mission has withdrawn. These can be
considerable. Member States must be fully aware of
10-64592
the need for increased voluntary contributions to
support crucial ongoing humanitarian and development
activities, especially those related to the protection of
civilians.

Secondly, the protection of civilians is a shared
responsibility. Humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
have distinct roles and responsibilities, but these need
to be brought together in a coherent and strategic way.
I look forward to the completion of the strategic
framework that is being prepared by DPKO, in
conjunction with other United Nations actors, to guide
the development of comprehensive protection
strategies by peacekeeping missions. This will, I hope,
go a long way towards ensuring the necessary
coordination and consultation between different actors
and improve our collective efforts on the ground.

Thirdly, approaches to protection must involve
the participation of affected communities and build on
their capacities. This should be incorporated into
mission protection strategies.

Access is a fundamental prerequisite to
humanitarian action and yet, as the annex to the report
demonstrates, it is frequently compromised.
Bureaucratic constraints, active hostilities, deliberate
attacks against humanitarian workers and the
economically motivated theft of humanitarian supplies
and equipment continue to undermine efforts to protect
and assist those in need. In resolution 1894 (2009), the
Council noted with grave concern the severity and
prevalence of constraints on humanitarian access and
the frequency and gravity of attacks against
humanitarian personnel and their implications for
humanitarian operations. It further stressed the
importance of parties to conflict cooperating with
humanitarian personnel in order to allow and facilitate
access to conflict-affected populations. Importantly, the
resolution reaffirmed the Council's role in promoting
an environment that is conducive to facilitating
humanitarian access.

The Council's continued attention to access
constraints is welcome. However, greater precision is
needed in specifying the nature of the constraints and
the actions to be taken to counter them. The Council
must ensure enhanced accountability for grave
instances of deliberate delays or denials of access for
humanitarian operations, as well as situations
involving attacks against humanitarian workers. That
can be achieved by encouraging domestic prosecutions
10-64592

or through referrals to the International Criminal Court.
In line with resolution 1894 (2009), I stand ready to
bring to the Council's attention situations where
humanitarian operations are deliberately obstructed,
and to suggest possible response actions for
consideration by the Council.

As emphasized in resolution 1894 (2009), the
primary responsibility for ensuring accountability for
violations of humanitarian and human rights law rests
first and foremost with States. In practical terms that
means disseminating information about international
humanitarian and human rights law. It means training
combatants and ensuring that their orders and
instructions comply with international law and are
observed. When violations occur, it means
investigating and prosecuting those responsible.

Regrettably, instances of disciplinary action and
national prosecutions are in short supply, despite
mounting allegations of serious humanitarian law and
human rights violations in today's conflicts. In some
cases, a lack of capacity is to blame. I would urge
Member States to provide the necessary technical and
financial support to national efforts, or for
consideration to be given to the establishment of so-
called mixed courts and tribunals, as we see in
Cambodia and Sierra Leone, to support much-needed
investigations and prosecutions at the national level.

In other cases, the fault lies in an absence of
political will. However, unnecessarily slow or
ineffective national efforts must not hinder the pursuit
of accountability, including at the international level.
The mandating of international commissions of inquiry
sends an important signal that violations will be
pursued and victims heard. Yet, while their utility is
clear, their establishment is often politically fraught.
We need to find ways of using such mechanisms on a
more consistent and less politically influenced basis.
As the Secretary-General notes, scrutiny must be the
norm. I therefore welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to request Secretariat departments directly
involved in launching and supporting inquiries to
undertake a review of the United Nations experience in
these processes.

In addition to the various recommendations
aimed at the Council and Member States, the
Secretary-General's report identifies three actions that
are implicit yet fundamental to enhancing our
collective efforts to bring about more effective
5
protection for civilians. First, we must ensure a
comprehensive approach to protection. Resolution
1894 (2009) expresses the Council's willingness to
respond to situations of conflict where civilians are
being targeted or humanitarian assistance is being
deliberately obstructed, including through the
consideration of appropriate measures at its disposal. I
would urge the Council to extend that willingness to
act to conflicts of which it is not already seized. These
often raise many of the same, and sometimes more
acute, protection concerns than we see in those
situations already on the Council's agenda, and may
equally warrant or demand Council attention.

Secondly, we must ensure a consistent approach.
We need greater consistency in the manner and extent
to which the Council addresses protection in those
contexts of which it is seized. The systematic
application of the aide-memoire - an updated version
of which has been adopted today - is crucial in that
regard. So too is the continued use of the informal
Expert Group and the consideration of other ways in
which it could further inform the Council's
deliberations. Those would be important steps in this
direction.

Finally, we must ensure an accountable approach.
Systematic monitoring and reporting on the impact of
our efforts to improve the protection of civilians is
essential. We need to assess and report on the extent to
which our actions are making civilians safer. That also
applies to all relevant actors, not only peacekeeping
missions, as well as all relevant situations, not only
those in which peacekeepers are present. As requested
by the Secretary-General, we plan to develop
indicators for systematic monitoring and reporting on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The work of the Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is of prime importance. We
face a sobering reality, and yet progress has been made.
I hope that the Council will continue to be seized of
this matter and keep the protection of civilians at the
centre of its agenda.

