Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom): We postponed
sanctions at the end of September because UNITA
promised to finish its remaining tasks in the Angolan
peace process. At the time, UNITA appeared to be
making some welcome progress. Given the subsequent
lack of progress, we can only conclude that those positive
developments were concessions by UNITA simply to
prevent the implementation of sanctions. During October,
UNITA continued to fail conspicuously to meet its
remaining obligations, despite being urged repeatedly to
do so. In effect, UNITA broke its promises.

Once again, as we consider the prospect of
sanctions, UNITA is making welcome steps in the right
direction. But they are not enough. The Security Council
should not allow itself to be swayed again by last-minute
gestures.

We believe that, unfortunately, the time has come to
apply the pressure on UNITA envisaged in resolution
1127 (1997). We do this not to punish UNITA, but to
encourage it to keep its promises.

We hope that UNITA will realize that delay does not
pay and that it will quickly implement its remaining
obligations in good faith. The Council is ready to lift
these measures as soon as UNITA has done so.

But first we need substantial action from UNITA,
particularly on the extension of State administration,
demilitarization and the transformation of Radio Vorgan.
We do not accept that UNITA has no more troops to

 

demobilize. UNITA must declare all of its remaining troops
so that they can be properly demobilized.

The Government of Angola also has its
responsibilities. It must notify the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA) of its force movements and
refrain from aggressive troop movements or other military
acts. We also share the Secretary-General's concern at
Angola's intervention in Congo (Brazzaville). Angolan
forces should be withdrawn immediately.

If the peace process is to move forward, it is essential
that greater trust be developed between the two sides. In
this context, we welcome the announcement that a meeting
will take place between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi in Angola in November.
The Secretary-General is right to be concerned at the
current critical stage of the peace process. We agree with
him that the continuing presence of MONUA military units
can help to maintain stability. We support his
recommendations that the withdrawal of troops should be
further postponed and that the mandate of MONUA should
be extended to 31 January 1998.

We will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

