Mr. Burian: I have the honour to brief the
Security Council on the most recent activities
undertaken by the 1540 Committee and to outline its
future efforts to promote compliance by all States with
resolution 1540 (2004) through the achievement of the
implementation of its requirements.

As members are aware, on 27 April, the Security
Council examined the report of the Committee which
addressed the status of implementation of resolution
1540 as of April 2006. The same day, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1673 (2006) and
emphasized the importance of all States fully
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).

With resolution 1540 (2004), the Security
Council adopted the first international instrument
which deals with weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials in an integrated
and comprehensive manner. The main objective of the
resolution is to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials, and to deter non-State actors from gaining
access to such items and from illicit trafficking in
them. It establishes binding obligations for all States
regarding non-proliferation and is aimed at preventing
and deterring illicit access to such weapons, their
means of delivery and weapon-related materials. The
resolution requests all States to report on measures
they have taken or intend to take to implement their
obligations under the resolution.

Continuous monitoring of and support for the
efforts of all States to fully implement the provisions of
the resolution require a lasting effort by the Council. It
therefore decided to extend the mandate of the
Committee for a period of two years, until 27 April
2008. It also decided that the Committee shall intensify
its efforts to promote the full implementation by all
States of resolution 1540 (2004) through a work
programme which shall include the compilation of
information on the status of States' implementation of
all aspects of resolution 1540 (2004): outreach,
dialogue, assistance and cooperation. The Council also
decided that the Committee's work programme shall
address, in particular, all aspects of paragraphs 1, 2 and
3 of resolution 1540 (2004).

Sll'V.5446

 

As of 30 May 2006, 129 States Members of the
United Nations and one organization have submitted
first national reports to the Committee; 62 Member
States have yet to submit their first report. In response
to the examination of the first national reports by the
Committee, 83 States provided additional information.
Facilitation of reporting and conduct of outreach
activities to promote States' reporting and
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will remain
among the top priorities of our future work.

With respect to reporting, the Committee intends
to approach again all United Nations Member States
that have yet to submit a first report. Based on its
previous experience of examining national reports
submitted by States, the Committee decided to assist
the national authorities of those States in the
preparation of a first report on the implementation of
the resolution. I will also continue the practice of
reaching out to the members of all regional groups in
New York to discuss issues relating to reporting as well
as implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) generally.

The Committee, with the support of Member
States and the United Nations Department for
Disarmament Affairs, will continue its other outreach
activities to promote States' implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), consistent with resolution 1673
(2006). Three regional seminars aimed at raising
awareness about proliferation problems worldwide,
facilitating further reporting and advancing the
implementation process will be organized in the second
part of this year in China, Ghana and Peru. Within
existing resources, the Committee also will continue its
practice of informing organizations outside the United
Nations about its work at relevant meetings and
conferences. I will make full use of these opportunities
to address, in particular, issues of reporting and
implementation.

As part of the Committee's efforts to promote

information-sharing concerning States' implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), I am also pleased to
announce that on 19 May 2006, the Committee decided
to publish a legislative database on its official website.
This database contains links to public sources of
relevant information about national legislative and
other regulatory measures of States which have
submitted reports on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The Committee developed the database to
provide additional information on laws, regulations and
other measures related to States' implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and to facilitate the exchange of
information on the implementation efforts of States.
The Committee will regularly update the database. It
will encourage States to make appropriate use of the
background information provided through the database,
as well as of legislative advice provided by
international organizations, when enacting national
implementation laws and measures.

The Committee will interact and cooperate with
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations in order to facilitate the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540 Committee will
maintain close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the 1267 Committee. The
Committee's experts will continue to work closely with
their colleagues, making every effort to maximize
synergies between and among the experts of the three
Committees. As part of those efforts, the Committee's
experts have been working with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the 1267
Committee Monitoring Team to develop proposals for
improving reporting and addressing the problem of late
submission of reports in a coordinated manner. We also
are making use of country visits by the CTC and the
1267 Committee in order to raise the issue of reporting.

The Committee, through its experts, will continue
to act as a clearing house on assistance, including by
collecting up-to-date information on the issue and by
informally contacting States to inquire whether they
might be interested in receiving information on offers
and requests for assistance.

In its future work on the examination of national
reports, the Committee, through its experts, will
identify national practices in implementing resolution
1540 (2004) that might be used in providing further
general and specific guidance, upon request, to States
seeking legislative assistance in implementing the
resolution.

The Committee will also invite those States that
offer assistance and those that request assistance to
take a proactive approach on a bilateral basis,
including making use of offers by international
organizations, in order to contribute to capacity-
building. In this regard, the Committee looks forward
to the results of the donor conference on assistance for
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which
will be organized by the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute in Geneva on 6 and 7 June 2006.

S/l'V.5446

 

A draft programme of work, which will cover a
l2-month period, is currently under consideration by
Committee members. The programme will be based on
the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) and resolution
1673 (2006). It also will reflect the recommendations
contained in the Committee's report to the Council of
25 April 2006 (S/2006/257).

On behalf of the Committee, I look forward to the
cooperation of all States as the Committee goes
forward with its future work.

