The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

I join others in thanking Ambassador Osorio for
today's briefing to the Council and for his report on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of
Experts. As his report makes clear, the Committee
continues to do important work. During the reporting
period it has in particular received a violation report
following the launch by Iran of a Safir rocket, a clear
contravention of the Council's decision that Iran should
not undertake activity related to ballistic missile
technology. It has heard a useful briefing from the
delegation of France explaining why space-launch and
ballistic-missile technologies are essentially identical.
It has received notifications from several States that
show that Iran continues both to proliferate weapons
and import nuclear-related material, in violation of
Security Council resolutions. Of those violation
reports, we are seriously concerned by evidence of
systematic Iranian activity to provide weapons illegally
to the Syrian Government - weapons that, as we
speak, are being used to violently suppress the people
of Syria.

The United Kingdom looks forward to the open
meeting of the Committee being planned by
Ambassador Osorio. This is an important opportunity
to discuss the Committee's work with the wider United
Nations membership.
We thank the 1737 Panel of Experts for their
ongoing support for the Committee. We welcome their
efforts to raise awareness of those steps that Member
States need to take to implement sanctions and to
promote knowledge-sharing and collaboration between

States.

We continue to be frustrated by the blockage of
the publication of the Panel of Experts' independent
report. We urge the Committee to act on the
recommendations in the Panel's report by designating
individuals and entities that have violated sanctions
and by publishing implementation assistance notices.

Iran's nuclear programme continues to develop,
in contravention of the Council's resolutions and of
Iran's obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The latest
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) report
provides further detailed evidence of this. In particular,
the report found that Iran continues to increase both
production of higher-grade 20 per cent enriched
uranium and enrichment to 3.5 per cent.

Iran has failed to give a convincing explanation
about how a quantity of its uranium has gone missing.
Two IAEA missions to Tehran within less than a month
have failed to convince Iran to engage constructively
with the Agency. The Iranian Government has again
refused the IAEA access to key sites, relevant
documents and individuals associated with its nuclear
programme. And let us not forget that in its last report,
the IAEA said unequivocally that Iran had carried out
activities relevant to the development of a nuclear
explosive device, that some of its nuclear activities
were specific to nuclear weapons and that some of
these may still be ongoing.

Iran has time and time again had the opportunity
to convince the IAEA otherwise by providing
unhindered access to its nuclear facilities and behaving
in a transparent manner, but it has failed to do so. No
one following these issues could be in any doubt that
Iran's clear objective is to develop the technology
required for a nuclear weapon.

Despite this, we remain committed to engaging
Iran on the international community's genuine
concerns regarding its nuclear programme. We
continue to seek a peaceful, negotiated solution and are
applying pressure on Iran to bring one about. The twin-
track approach is working. Iran is feeling the pressure
of sanctions and its growing international isolation. We
are ready to talk, but Iran must negotiate seriously and
without preconditions. It must match our good faith.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Ambassador Osorio to respond
to comments.

