Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The use of sanctions by the
Security Council to influence the behaviour of States,
individuals and non-State groups has in many instances
provided a viable alternative to the use of military force in
the maintenance of international peace and security. The
history of Security Council sanctions over the past decade
has clearly demonstrated that while such measures have
achieved success in a number of cases, in others the desired
objectives have not been achieved. If the Security Council
is to maintain sanctions as a credible instrument, we must
take concrete steps to ensure that we get sanctions right,
rather than impose flawed regimes which may be either
ineffective or unenforceable.

It is in this context that my delegation expresses its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the Canadian
delegation for convening this open meeting to discuss
general issues relating to sanctions, which, if they are to
be effective, require the adherence of all States Members
of the United Nations.

We also wish to recognize the work already done by
the General Assembly and by the Secretary-General, and
thank Under-Secretary-General Prendergast for his
introduction of the subject this afternoon. We also wish
to express our appreciation to those Governments and
institutions which have analysed the effectiveness of
existing sanctions regimes and have presented
recommendations for consideration by the Council. My
delegation is therefore pleased to support the
establishment of the informal working group on sanctions,
which will develop general recommendations on how to
improve the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions.

One issue of particular concern to my delegation is
the need for the humanitarian impact of sanctions to be
considered when designing sanctions regimes. We believe
that sanctions must not be a blunt instrument, but must
exert pressure on targeted Governments and groups, rather
than inflict suffering on innocent civilians and vulnerable
groups, particularly women, children and the elderly.
Provisions must be made for promptly revising sanctions
to remove or reduce their impact on civilians, and they
must always take into account universal human rights
standards and international human rights instruments.
Additionally, appropriate conditions and guidelines for
humanitarian exemptions and adequate delivery of
humanitarian aid must be included, as appropriate.

In addition to reducing the impact on civilians, every
effort must be made to minimize the impact of sanctions
on neighbouring States. Without the support and
cooperation of neighbouring States and major trading
partners, it is hardly likely that sanctions will achieve
their desired result.

In order to ensure that non-targeted States or
individuals are not adversely affected, and to ensure their
cooperation, the Security Council, with the assistance of
the Secretariat, must ensure advance assessments of the
potential impact of sanctions on the non-targeted States.
The Council must also monitor and assess the specific
needs and problems of these States with a view to

 

ensuring appropriate assistance and adjustments to sanctions
regimes where required.

The importance of enhancing Security Council policy-
making and sanctions design has been recognized. Critical
to this process, we believe, is the need for greater clarity in
Security Council resolutions, allowing sanctions provisions
to be more precise, thus eliminating doubt as to the
respective responsibilities of parties and avoiding subjective
interpretations to suit narrow, national political interests.
We also believe that there is a need for clear criteria in
such resolutions for the lifting or suspension of sanctions.
This is in keeping with General Assembly resolution
51/242, which calls upon the Council to provide for
imposing sanctions that may be partially lifted when
targeted groups comply with given requirements or to
provide for the lifting of sanctions progressively as targets
are achieved, so that parties under sanctions derive some
benefit from compliance.
We all agree that sanctions cannot be an end in
themselves, but, rather, must be a means to an end. If
sanctions are designed to resolve conflicts rather than to
inflict punishment, they must be established with clear
objectives, provisions for regular review and precise
conditions and time-frames for removing them. Another
critical element in improving the effectiveness of United
Nations sanctions is that of enhancing our capacity
effectively to monitor and enforce these measures and of
assisting Member States in their capacity to implement
sanctions. Clear guidelines and instructions, as well as
possible technical and financial assistance to Member States
and regional bodies to assist in compliance with sanctions
regimes, can clearly improve the process.

We also need to devise practical strategies for assisting
Governments in developing the means for more effective
sanctions implementation, given that some Governments
lack the capacity to do so due to structural deficiencies,
including their inability to introduce appropriate national
legislation and to adopt monitoring measures.

Arms embargoes are perhaps the most common
measures used by the Security Council in seeking to
maintain peace and security. They are also one of the most
frequently violated sanctions regimes. As we have seen
from past experience, arms embargoes affect a number of
actors in the financing and sale of and trafficking in arms.
The 1998 report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict in Africa (S/1998/318) called on Member States to
make violations of United Nations embargoes a criminal
offence in their domestic laws. We agree that this will be
an essential tool in making these embargoes effective.
However, the Council, in its working group, must address
the question of harmonization of penalties to ensure that
they are effectively applied.

The Security Council should also use all means at its
disposal, including the use of investigative commissions,
to find and report on violations of embargoes and the
sources of finance. The traffickers and supplier nations
must be held to account. If we remove the source of
funding from the purchase of arms we will remove the
overriding incentive for violations of the embargo and, in
this regard, we have an excellent example in the work of
the sanctions Committee in the sanctions against UNITA,
which we will address tomorrow.

Too often the resolutions approving sanctions
regimes lack clarity and specificity with regard to the
identification of weapons and military services that are to
be prohibited. This deficiency in arms embargoes must
also be corrected. The capacity of the United Nations to
monitor, enforce and report on violations of arms
embargoes must also be enhanced. Sanctions committees
must be given the necessary tools to carry out this work.

Having said this, sanctions can be effective only if
there is the necessary political will. In one case analysed
by the International Peace Academy, it was pointed out
that the decision to impose a specific arms embargo
seemed to reflect the desire by the Council to do
something, however modest, in response to the particular
worsening crisis. According to the Academy's analysis, it
also reflected the minimum consensus that could be
achieved within a divided Security Council. Without an
effective means of enforcing the arms embargo, and faced
with an obvious lack of enthusiasm among the major
Powers for implementing more forceful sanctions, the
sanctions committee was powerless to do anything about
the lack of compliance.

In addition to reforms and policy-making, improving
the effectiveness of sanctions requires the enhancement of
internal institutional mechanisms within the United
Nations system, including the development of a more
effective monitoring capacity within the Secretariat,
adequate staffing, streamlining of procedures and
harmonization of guidelines in the working methods of
the sanctions committees, visits by sanctions committees,
technical expertise and support, and improved cooperation
with regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and international financial institutions. The
note of the President of the Council of 29 January 1999

 

contains recommendations which still have to be acted
upon.

It is important that the working group devise a method
for the Security Council to work with the General
Assembly to ensure that there is the necessary budgetary
support to support the Secretariat and the Security Council
in the implementation of sanctions regimes.

In conclusion, my delegation looks forward to
participating actively in the working group, and again we
wish to express our appreciation to the President and the
Canadian delegation for the leadership shown on this issue.

