Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, as well as today's briefers,
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq, and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim, the representative of the
International Indigenous Peoples' Forum on Climate
Change. We would like to welcome President Waqa
of Nauru and to acknowledge the great significance
that climate change holds for his country. Russia also
considers this issue extremely important. We are one
of the leaders of the international climate process, both
because of our contribution to reducing greenhouse-gas
emissions and our efforts to universalize the regime on
climate change under the auspices of the United Nations
Frameworks Convention on Climate Change. My
country is making active use of innovative approaches
based on introducing cutting-edge technologies.

My statement may not be in tune with those of other
Security Council members before me today. That said,
however, I have to say that we are disappointed about
today's Council meeting, and not because we object to
collective efforts to combat climate change. Quite the
contrary. We refuse to be reconciled to the fact that in
our view today's meeting is yet another attempt to link
the issue of preserving the environment to threats to
international peace and security. Regrettably, we are
creating the illusion among those who follow our work
that the Council is now taking on the climate issue and
that will immediately bring about a turning point. That
is a dangerous illusion and a clear deception.

In various countries and regions, attempts are
being made to ascribe a worsening socioeconomic and
political situation to the climate factor. The resulting
conclusion is that climate change is a threat to security
generally, and yet those who promulgate that idea do
not as a rule make the effort to bring scientifically
sound, specific details to bear or clear explanations
of the notions of security, conflict, threats or stability
as they relate to the climate issue. These words are
used in a very general sense while demanding that we
recognize highly abstract connections. Such actions not
only do not help anyone, they mislead everybody and
distract the Council from dealing with issues where it
can make a genuine contribution to the quest for the
right solution.

I will say it again. While we believe that climate
change is a grave threat to us all, the Council has neither
the specialized expertise nor the tools to put together
viable solutions for effectively combating climate
change. I am once again obliged to point out that climate
change is not a universal challenge in the context of
international security but should rather be addressed
with regard to the specifics of each situation. Besides
that, the role of the United Nations is to give support
to States, which have the primary responsibility for
responding to security challenges within their national
borders and for independently determining strategies
for that. Our international Organization should adhere
strictly to the principle of the division of labour in its
work and in the understanding that each of the main
United Nations organs should operate within its area
of responsibility.

The basis for introducing climate issues in the
Security Council is frequently the premise that climate
change is a so-called threat multiplier and a catalyst for
acts of violence. If we are so principled about this, why
are we always silent during the discussions initiated on
this pretext about a no less serious aspect of the issue,
the damage to the environment that results from violent
military operations and unilateral sanctions, a glaring
example ofwhich have been the bombings onugoslavia,
Libya and Syria by Western coalitions? It is strange,
to say the least, that no speakers today have expressed
concern about the massive environmental damage that
such action inflicts, not to mention the colossal harm to
the health of the citizens of those countries.

It is no secret that NATO's bombing of the territory of
the former Yugoslavia using munitions with radioactive
compounds, chiefly depleted uranium, that pollute the
environment, spawned a surge in cancers and had an
adverse impact on the general and reproductive health
of the population living in the affected areas, which to
this day still need decontamination and rehabilitation.
The situation following the Libyan venture has been
equally tragic. The NATO rocket strikes and bombings
of its oil infrastructure, as well as the operations by
armed opposition groups supported by the West in
the vicinity of oil enterprises, led to their partial or
total destruction, colossal fires and pollution of the
atmosphere with the burning of oil and petroleum

by-products.

I should not omit to point out that the ongoing
illegal presence of Western coalition forces on Syrian
territory is an obstacle to the restoration of Government
control throughout the country and therefore to the
implementation of its national legislative norms on
the use of natural resources, including environmental
norms, and in general to restoring domestic activity in
those areas, including household waste management.
The situation is exacerbated by unilateral anti-Syrian
sanctions that deprive the country of the possibility
of buying the equipment and materials needed for
environmentally safe industrial production.

An alarming situation is developing with regard to
the work of the Donetsk water filtration station, which
has been subject to regular shelling by Ukrainian armed
forces. If the chlorine gas in its storage tanks leaks, it
could be an environmental and humanitarian disaster. It
is hard to believe that the initators of such actions were
unaware of the negative consequences of environmental
pollution by radioactive materials or the destruction of
oil facilities. However, they continue to choose to pay
no attention to it and are in no hurry to help to mitigate
the damage that has been done. In that connection, we
believe that issues of environmental pollution resulting
from criminal military operations and illegal unilateral
sanctions can be viewed as threats that at the very least
are no less significant to the climate problem.

With regard to climate change, I want to say once
again that the constant securitization, as it were, of
this vital issue irreparably undermines the process of
our joint quest to resolve it. This year there are plans
to adopt guidelines for the implementation of the
Paris Climate Change Agreement. At the same time,
the member States of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change will discuss joint action
and coordination on climate-related efforts in the
Talanoa Dialogue Platform, whose founding principles
are depoliticizing climate discussions, preventing
mutual blame-laying and striving to understand what
we can get done by joining forces.

We are just as eager as Ms. Hindou Ibrahim, in
her emotional statement today, to ensure that climate
change does not interfere with the lives of indigenous
peoples. Russia is also helping small island States
through its contributions to the United Nations
Development Programme. We are ready to help and are
doing all we can to ensure that the collective efforts
of the specialized entities and mechanisms can solve
these problems, but it is clear that today's discussion
in the Council is taking the issue in the exact opposite
direction, to speculations on the climate issue and its
exploitation to solve purely political problems, impose
one-sided standards and abandon practical action for
demagoguery and public-relations posturing.

We believe it is essential to allow all the United
Nations mechanisms related to combating climate
change to do their work in peace, without creating
artificially intersecting approaches that merely obstruct
the advancement of our shared interests. Only through
joint practical action, conducted through the existing
expert formats, can we achieve our aim of preserving
the global climate in the interests of the current and
future generations of humankind.

