Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I wish you and your friendly delegation every success. The Republic of Yemen has acceded to numerous international instruments on child protection and enacted several national legislations consistent with their provisions to reflect the commitment of the Yemeni Government to those instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict and the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups. We endorsed an action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children in 2014, as well as the Safe Schools Declaration of 2017, and signed onto a road map in 2018 by which joint committees were established to implement it in partnership with the UNICEF country team. We also issued a military order, signed by the Deputy Commander- in-Chief of the Armed Forces, ensuring guiding principles on child recruitment and, on 20 February 2020, directives by the President of the Republic of Yemen, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, ordering the adoption of a mechanism to verify the age of members of the armed forces and establish liaison focal points within military units in accordance with the understandings of the road map with the country team. The Government of Yemen welcomes the delisting of the coalition from annex I, section B, and commends the dedicated efforts of the coalition to establish a child protection unit and provide for the financing of the Ma'rib rehabilitation centre for former child soldiers recruited by the Houthis, which involved extensive coordination with the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. My Government is determined to update the monitoring mechanism and looks forward to establishing an alternative mechanism with new methodology for the selection of reliable sources. In the context of the Yemeni conflict, such a mechanism will be instrumental in enhancing the accuracy, reliability and objectivity of the information gathered, particularly in Houthi- controlled areas, where the country task team consistently faces obstructions and threats and operates in an unsafe environment that severely limits the team's ability to carry out its mandate and ensure transparent and credible reporting. In accordance with the national and international commitments towards children in Yemen, the Government of Yemen is sparing no effort to implement all the necessary measures to protect children and fully preserve their rights. To that end, the Government of Yemen remains committed to implementing the road map and has taken significant steps to reintegrate former child soldiers into society. In that regard, we look forward to enhanced coordination with the country task team to ensure the full implementation of the road map. We also wish to stress the need to fund the reintegration and rehabilitation programmes in Yemen. We urge international donors to provide the critical funding needed to save Yemeni children from the oppression and terror of the Houthi militias in areas under their control. With regard to education and vocational training, the country task team should place more focus on issues related to the manipulation of school curricula by the Houthis. The severe consequences of such actions are most evident in Yemen where the Houthis' imposition of extremist ideologies in school curricula and summer camps has increased trends of child use and recruitment and brainwashed and militarized Yemen's children. In addition, the military use of schools by the Houthis deprives children of their basic right to quality education and puts them at risk of recruitment and use by the Houthis and other armed groups, which exploit the poor economic and financial hardships of Yemeni families in areas under their control to recruit and use children in their absurd war against the Yemeni people.
