Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director
for Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for her very
useful briefing, and to commend the excellent work
of all the teams involved in responding to the urgent
humanitarian situation in Syria. I also commend the
commitment of the humanitarian co-penholders, as was
expressed by the representative of Belgium only a few
minutes ago.

Let us be clear. We would be making a serious
miscalculation and a huge political mistake if we
were to assume that the Syrian tragedy is behind us.
It is not - as the country enters its ninth year of the
conflict, the risks of escalation continue to be very real
and the humanitarian situation remains a disaster.

In the Idlib region in particular, ceasefire violations
are on the rise and the risk of a humanitarian disaster
remains acute, as illustrated by the recent displacement
of more than 20,000 people in less than one week.
Equally distressing are the situations of the besieged
population in Al-Baghouz, where a large number of
people have lost their lives while trying to leave the
area, and of the 47,000 people who are currently living
in Al-Hol camp. Those calamities are the result of the
horrific and systematic policy of Da'esh, in particular
its resort to mining on a massive scale and its use of
human shields. In that context, now more than ever,
we must remain fully prepared to act with regard to
three key inseparable priorities - the need to protect
civilians, ensuring humanitarian access and achieving
a lasting political solution in Syria.

Our first priority is therefore the protection
of civilians. The protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, must be an
absolute priority for all stakeholders. Hospitals
and schools remain the target of attacks, which is
completely unacceptable and at odds with international
humanitarian law. It must therefore be stressed
that all parties must respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law. That is not a wish but
a requirement.

In particular, we must do everything possible to
preserve the ceasefire in Idlib over the long term, in
accordance with the commitments reiterated at the
Istanbul quadripartite summit. An offensive would
have disastrous humanitarian, migration and security
consequences throughout the region. To avoid that
worst-case scenario, Turkey and Russia must continue
their efforts to preserve the ceasefire agreement that
they were able broker last September and monitor its
proper implementation.

Our second priority is ensuring humanitarian
access. I would like to recall a statistic that is more
eloquent than long speeches - of the 200 requests for
access made to the Syrian regime during the months
of December and January, only 40 per cent were
authorized. In particular, it is unacceptable for the
regime to be blocking access to areas it has reclaimed.
We again call on actors with influence over the regime
to ensure immediate, safe, comprehensive, unhindered
and sustainable humanitarian access throughout
Syria, in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law.

Humanitarian access must be respected at all
stages - from independent needs assessment to the
implementation and monitoring of humanitarian
projects - in order to ensure that aid reaches the targeted
populations, in particular and as a priority the most
vulnerable. In Rukban, we welcome the deployment of
the United Nations convoy in early February, but the
situation remains extremely worrisome and calls for a
two-pronged approach.

On the one hand, it is imperative to allow the
United Nations to regularly deploy convoys to meet
the needs of the more than 40,000 people in the
camp, who live in appalling conditions. On the other
hand, the results of the United Nations survey are
clear - 95 per cent of people wish to leave the camp.
The return of displaced persons from Rukban must be
voluntary, safe and dignified and must be conducted in
accordance with international humanitarian law and in
close coordination with the United Nations. We must
also ensure that displaced persons have access to all
necessary information, including information on the
security situation in the areas to which they Wish to
return and access to their property and basic services,
as well as the necessary guarantees against the risk of
arrest, arbitrary detention or forced conscription.

Reports that the Syrian regime practises such
violations in the territories now under its control, in
particular in the south-west and eastern Ghouta, are
particularly worrisome. I therefore call on the regime's
supporters to put an end to those violations, which is
a prerequisite before the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees can be considered. In areas
outside the regime's control, it is crucial that the entire
international community continue its efforts to meet
the urgent needs of the population.

Regarding the north-east in particular, our
mobilization must remain intact - it is a humanitarian
imperative, contributes to the stabilization of the
region and should help prevent the resurgence of
Da'esh. I would also like to sound a warning of the
risk of humanitarian disaster and serious human rights
violations that a military intervention in that area would
pose, regardless of its origin.

Our third priority - a decisive one - is the launch
of a sustainable political process. Only an irreversible,
credible and inclusive political transition Will break
the cycle of Syrian tragedy and pave the way for
reconstruction. Concrete progress in the implementation
of all elements of resolution 2254 (2015) is necessary
to achieve lasting improvements in the humanitarian
situation and to make possible the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of refugees. That was the commitment
made by the European Union and the Arab League
at their summit on 24 and 25 February by declaring
that they Will pursue their respective policies towards
Syria in line with the tangible progress made towards a
political settlement.

It is our belief that today, perhaps for the first time
in eight years, there is a small window of opportunity
to put an end to the Syrian conflict. Our shared
responsibility is to seize that opportunity through an
inclusive political solution, because that is the only way
to prevent the same causes leading to the same effects
in future repetitions of the Syrian tragedy. That is why
we call on each member of the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities to allow the establishment
of a credible political process, under the supervision
of the United Nations, within the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015).

The Council should be aware that there will be
no lasting political solution without justice for Syrian
victims. Following international arrest warrants
issued by French courts against senior officials of the
repressive Syrian regime, the recent arrest in France and
Germany of three former security officers suspected of
committing war crimes and crimes against humanity
is an important step, which demonstrates that serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights will not go unpunished. In that regard, France
reiterates its support for the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic.

The Council can count on France's full mobilization
at all levels in support of the political process and the
efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen, the new Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, to whom we pledge
our full support.

