Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me thank our three briefers for their insightful remarks and comments. Germany wholeheartedly supports the efforts by the Somali Government to ensure peace, stability anddevelopment in Somalia. In that context, we underscore that credible, free and fair elections in 2020 and 2021 are key to democratic State-building in Somalia. Following the elections in 2016 and 2017, a wide range of Somali leaders pledged to hold direct one-person one-vote elections in 2020 and 2021. Most recently, that was also reflected in the commitments of the Somali Government and stakeholders under the 2020 Mutual Accountability Framework. We take note of the federal electoral bill signed into law by the Federal President last week. However, we also see that some paragraphs of the law are arguably not implementable, despite repeated and concrete advice on those issues provided to Parliament by the National Independent Electoral Commission and United Nations electoral experts. In addition, the electoral code leaves many important questions unresolved. Those questions need to be answered on the basis of broad political consensus and in full cooperation between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states in accordance with commitments made under the Mutual Accountability Framework. Like others, we are highly concerned with regard to the current political situation in Galmudug and Jubaland. We call for the political settlement of tensions, which requires dialogue and compromise. Constructive political cooperation between the Federal Government and all federal member states must be given the highest priority. Unfortunately, we have not seen much progress over recent months, but coordination meetings should resume promptly and take place regularly in order to resolve outstanding issues. In the light of the 2020 elections, the political process, obviously, must noticeably catch up. On the issue of Somaliland, we also encourage both sides - Mogadishu and Hargeisa - to pursue the now-resumed dialogue. On security, first of all, let me commend the progress made in the security sector. We pay tribute to the work and the sacrifices of the African Union Mission to Somalia and the Somali National Army. It is crucial to continue on that path in a coherent and coordinated manner. We need security sector reform and the implementation of the national security architecture and a security transition. The security of elections is equally important. But it also important to pursue constructive discussions with all stakeholders on the future of international support to the Somali security sector over the months ahead, including with the perspective of the upcoming independent assessment requested by the Security Council for early 2021. We need a credible and sustainable post-2021 security model for Somalia. On the humanitarian situation and developments, Germany remains extremely concerned about the current humanitarian situation and about the additional challenges caused by the plague of locusts. We reacted swiftly by making available €3 billion to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to safeguard livelihoods, and will continue to monitor the situation very carefully. To say a few words on the human rights situation, we noted that Amnesty International stated in its latest report that there had been a surge in violent attacks, threats, harassment and intimidation of media workers in Somalia. We are obviously concerned about that assessment and urge all stakeholders to respect the freedom of the press and to protect media workers. We were very impressed by the report of Mr. Dan Smith and see very clearly the nexus he talked about. The aggravating consequences of climate change for Somalia's humanitarian situation and fragile statehood clearly demonstrate the challenges posed by climate change for regional stability and security. However, climate-related risks are not the only drivers of conflict - I think we would all agree on that. But, at the same time, it is a reality that they represent one driver, and often a very significant one, of conflict, which we cannot ignore and, we feel, the Security Council should not ignore. Floods and droughts exacerbate conflicts. The analysis of the situation in Somalia would be incomplete without taking into account climate-related risks. Food insecurity and other insecurities give Al-Shabaab an opportunity to present themselves as alternative providers of security. There is therefore obviously a clear nexus between climate-related risks and insecurity. For us, all of this shows that there is substantial cause for concern about the effects of climate change on the security situation in Somalia. At the same time, as we heard in today's briefings, climate change poses challenges to the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. We are therefore convinced it is high time for the Security Council to duly take into account climate change as a factor relevant to peace and security. Germany is investing in strengthening capacity on climate and security in the field, inter aliaby financing the cost of an environment and security adviser who will support the United Nations in-country presence and provide information on climate-security risks in Somalia.
