Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I too would like to welcome among us
Mr. Haris Silajdzie, Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
European Union Special Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to thank them for their statements.

The delegation of Mexico welcomes the active
participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an elected
member of the Security Council. This demonstrates the
progress that the country has made over the past
several years. Bosnia and Herzegovina's strategic
rapprochement vis-a-vis the European Union and the
development of more fluid cooperative relations with
its neighbours are important steps forward in
consolidating the country's role on the international
stage and in promoting stability in the Balkans. Yet
these positive international developments should be
accompanied by improved political understanding in
the domestic arena. To bring lasting peace and stability
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the country's various
political forces must intensify their dialogue and
understanding and must demonstrate political will to
make genuine progress on pending aspects of the peace
process.
That is why we regret the extreme divisionist and
nationalist rhetoric of one of the parties, along with its
attempts to challenge the activities and mandate of the
High Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union. We reiterate our call to all political
actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble their
efforts to meet outstanding commitments, such as those
relating to refugees and displaced persons, State
property and security sector reform. We also call on
them to keep open the path of negotiation and dialogue

in order to narrow their differences and avoid action
that could endanger the country's stability, in particular
with a view to the general election to be held in
October.

We consider that the presence of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) continues to be necessary to guarantee the
country's security through its support for the Office of
the High Representative and other international entities
in fulfilling their mandates, and by providing training
and assistance to the country's security forces. The
international community should continue to support the
efforts of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to strengthen the rule of law.

We regret that, yet again, it has not been possible
to achieve the political consensus necessary to
implement the provisions of annex 7 of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which provides for the establishment
of a comprehensive strategy on the return of refugees
and displaced persons. That is why we call once again
on State authorities to take stronger action to
implement the National War Crimes Prosecution
Strategy, the National Justice Sector Reform Strategy
and the package of constitutional reforms. We must
ensure that the legal framework is compatible with the
country's international human rights obligations with
respect to equality before the law and
non-discrimination.

In that respect, we hope that efforts to compile
information on war crimes not yet in the central
database, the investigations concerning the 1,381 cases
already presented to the Office of the Chief Prosecutor,
and the broadening of legal cooperation agreements
with other countries of the region will soon yield
results that will make it possible to fight impunity and
make progress in the national reconciliation process.
All those efforts should include greater cooperation by
all States in the region with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

I should like to conclude by reiterating Mexico's
support for the work of the High Representative. We
hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina will succeed in
permanently overcoming differences and consolidating
a multi-ethnic democratic State in which its citizens
can, along with all the citizens of the Balkan region,
enjoy a more stable and prosperous future as an
integral part of Europe.
