Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank Ambassador Takasu for his briefing.
This presentation comes at a good time to remind us of
the reality of the Iranian nuclear dossier. The Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) has just given us a shocking overview of that
reality in the report he submitted to the Agency's Board
of Governors on 5 June 2009.

Iran is continuing with enrichment and installing
new centrifuges despite the bans issued by the Security
Council. Iran has refused the repeated requests by the
Agency for access to the reactor at Arak that is being
built. Iran is refusing to implement certain
transparency measures that derive from its safeguards
agreement, or Code 3.1, and the Director General has
pointed out that Iran is the only country that has
significant nuclear activities that does not apply those
measures. Iran continues to refuse to apply the
Additional Protocol.

Finally, with regard to the investigation into the
possible military dimensions of the programme, which
is of course a key point, Iran has not cooperated. It has
not provided access to the information, documents,
sites or individuals concerned. The Agency must
therefore conclude that it is not in a position to give
credible assurances with regard to the absence of
non-declared nuclear activity in Iran.

Given this behaviour, it is up to us, the Member
States, to fully apply the sanctions that were adopted
following Iran's repeated violations of its obligations.
Ambassador Takasu alluded to the Manchegorsk issue,
the ship chartered by the Islamic Republic of Iran
Shipping Lines that was implicated in illicit trafficking
on Iran's behalf and in violation of Security Council
resolutions. The Republic of Cyprus took the right
decision in inspecting the vessel and impounding its
cargo, but the investigation is not finished. We have to
determine whether, in addition to the arms banned
under resolution 1747 (2007), the cargo of the vessel
has any link with the persons or entities listed in the
resolutions dealing with the Iranian nuclear programme.
We must insist on the seriousness of this kind of
contraband, which threatens our collective security, and
on the need for very strict vigilance on our part.

In conclusion, I would like to stress, as the
previous speaker did, that France supports a twofold
approach to the issue of Iran. The political directors of
the E3+3 have proposed now for a long time that Iran
meet with them, including in the presence of the
American political director, and Iran has still not
replied. We hope that Iran Will re-evaluate its
behaviour and will stop obstructing the work of the
09-3692]
Agency. We also hope that Iran will accept the hand
again extended to it and do what is required of it to
restore confidence. Iran has a truly singular
opportunity to do this, and France sincerely hopes that
it will take this opportunity quickly.

