Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to convey to you,
Mr. President, my sincere and warm congratulations
on China's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. I am confident that
your experience and leadership will be valuable assets
when heading up the work of the Council work during
this period. I would like to thank the Security Council
for this platform to discuss issues pertaining to the
development of the situation in Cote d'Ivoire.

Once again, I take the opportunity to extend my
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative, Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou, and her
team for their outstanding work in collaboration with
the Ivorian authorities and the French forces in Cdte
d'Ivoire.

In referring to the progress made in Cote d'Ivoire
in his December 2015 report on the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the Secretary-
General stressed that

"the successful conduct of the presidential election
is the most powerful demonstration of the progress
made in Cdte d'Ivoire" (S/2015/940, para. 89).

He went on to indicate his optimism about the country's
future. Three months after that report, it is with the
same confidence and conviction that I take the floor
today before the Council to say that Cdte d'Ivoire is
determined and will continue its march forward.

Following the successful presidential election, a
new Government was set up and given specific new tasks
focused on national reconciliation, social cohesion,
good governance, the improvement of living conditions
and the people's purchasing power, the promotion of
youth employment and equal justice for all. Putting
words into action, the President of the Republic and
the Government have since undertaken a wide range
of actions. After his re-election, the President of the
Republic undertook consultations with an important
sector of society, including traditional kings and
chiefs, religious leaders, the National Commission for
Reconciliation and Compensation of Victims of the
Ivorian crises and the Front populaire ivoirien, the main
opposition party.

I would like to take this opportunity to also inform
the Council that, in the context of the Head of State's
resolve to enable all political actors to participate
actively in the life of the nation, the Ivorian Government
has decided to promote the candidate who came in
second in October's presidential election, the head of
the opposition, to the position of Minister of State.

The President of the Republic, convinced that
national reconciliation and social cohesion are essential
to laying the foundations of a unified nation, and
echoing the wishes expressed during consultations, has
taken several important steps, including the provisional
release of several individuals detained during the post-
election crisis who were awaiting trial, the unfreezing
of the accounts of several opposition figures, the
voluntary return of several exiles from Liberia, the
announcement of the establishment of a high authority
for rural land ownership, as well as the revision of the
Constitution. That is in order to remove all conflicting
elements in the fundamental law and to strengthen
State institutions.

In addition to national reconciliation, security
also remains key to stability and peace. As such, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform processes have attracted the
attention of the Government and partners. There has
been an implementation rate of 94 per cent for the former,
and promising results for the latter. Efforts continue, as
indicated in the Government's latest report on security
sector reform and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, which was conveyed to
the Sanctions Committee in March. In particular, the
adoption of a law on military programming 2016-2020
and a law on programming domestic security forces
2016-2020, and the establishment of the coordination,
monitoring and reintegration cell were undertaken in
order to take control of the residual activities of the
former Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Authority.

Unfortunately, the cowardly and heinous terrorist
attack suffered by innocent people in Grand-Bassam
on 13 March reminds us of our duty to be vigilant and
alert at all times. I would like to once again honour
the memory of all those who were so cruelly torn from
their families and loved ones. On behalf of the Ivorian
Government, I take this opportunity to reiterate our
gratitude to all countries and friendly institutions that
lent their support during the ordeal that my country
went through.

Far from being a discouraging factor, that
unfortunate situation has only served to dramatically
increase the resolute will of the Ivorian Government to
adopt, at the national, regional and international levels,
measures to strengthen security, in particular with
regard to the domestic deployment of security forces in
all strategic sites and public areas, as rightly identified
in the report of the Secretary-General. I would therefore
reiterate once again the Ivorian Government's request
for the total lifting of all sanctions on both individuals
and weapons to C6te d'Ivoire, in particular to enable the
appropriate equipment to reach our defence and security
forces, to better control our borders - particularly in the
west - and to promote effective military cooperation
with friendly neighbouring countries so as to enable the
national security forces to fulfil their sovereign duties.

With regard to the issue of justice and the human
rights situation, the credo of the President of the
Republic has always been zero tolerance for impunity.
That inclination for equal justice for all resulted,
during the establishment of the last Government,
in the creation of new ministries for rights and civil
liberties, solidarity and social cohesion, and for the
compensation of victims. Proceedings against people of
all political persuasions have been and will be brought
progressively, based on the independence of the judicial
system. The ability of Ivorian justice to henceforth
handle its duties led the Head of State to affirm that
from this point forward, no other Ivorian citizen would
be handed over to the International Criminal Court.

The Government's programme of action also
provides, as mentioned earlier, an important place for
the promotion of youth employment because of the
role that young people can play not only in economic
growth, but also in the restoration and consolidation
of peace. My delegation welcomes the actions taken
on the ground by the Peacebuilding Office, alongside
the Ivorian Government, through two priority plans
for peacebuilding and the cross-border cooperation
programme between Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.

My delegation welcomes the fact that most of the
progress achieved by the Ivorian Government in terms
of stabilization, social well-being and lasting peace was
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General. My
delegation takes note of that report and endorses the
proposals seeking to extend for one last time UNOCI's
mandate before its full drawdown on 30 June 2017.
My Government hopes that the transitional assistance
phase will give high priority to training and assisting
the Ivorian defence and security forces, as well as to
preparing the United Nations country team so as to
ensure a smooth handover to the Ivorian Government.
It is to be noted that tremendous ongoing and
continuous progress has been made, especially if we
consider where we started from. My Government
will continue its efforts to overcome any residual and
emerging challenges. To that end, my country does
indeed warrant encouragement and support from by the
Council and the international community.

Before concluding, I should like to say that the
commitment of the United Nations to C6te d'Ivoire
under Chapter VII of the Charter represents for
numerous observers a real success story that should go
down in the history of our institution's peacekeeping
operations throughout the world. The Council, the
Secretary-General, friendly countries, the international
community and the Ivorian Government should be
extremely proud of the work that has been done and the
major successes we have achieved. I would therefore like
to convey on behalf of my Government my country's
esteem for and gratitude to all of the stakeholders that
I have just mentioned for their involvement and their
belief in a Cdte d'Ivoire that is based on peace and
progress.

