Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate, the first
of its kind in the Council since the Peacebuilding
Commission started its work. It gives us a timely
opportunity to review the Commission's activities and
the best ways to support it.

I also wish to commend and thank Ambassador
Ismael Gaspar Martins, Chairman of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Assistant Secretary-General Carolyn McAskie of the
Peacebuilding Support Office for their efforts in a new
field. We wish them every success in their work.

The establishment of the peacebuilding
mechanism composed of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund is among the most practical and
tangible steps taken by the international community to
date in the context of operationalizing the indisputable
concept that the dedication of resources necessary to
peacebuilding in countries emerging from conflict is
critical to the consolidation of stability, peace and
development. Similarly, the assistance received by
those countries from the international community plays
a pivotal role in safeguarding against their relapse into
conflict.
The Commission is still an infant entity and
struggling to identify the best ways and means to
achieve the objectives for which it was established.
Since its inception, it has received encouraging and
positive responses from the two countries on its
agenda, Burundi and Sierra Leone, where national and
international efforts have succeeded in ending their
respective conflicts. The success of the peacebuilding
phase there will no doubt consolidate those positive
results. Given that the Security Council is the primary
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the success of the peacebuilding
process in Burundi and Sierra Leone will be a valuable
complement to the efforts of the Council, which is
engaged in ongoing follow-up on the situations there.

Peacebuilding is an integrated process and a
multidimensional endeavour undertaken by various
United Nations entities, and cannot be broken down
into its component tasks. In recognition of that vision,
it was decided at the 2005 Summit to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission as a consultative organ,
under two resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, respectively. Thus, the Commission
must work within the mandate given to it by the
General Assembly and the Security Council.

If the Commission is to meet its objectives, there
must be close coordination between it and the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the other principal
bodies of the United Nations, including the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. Peacebuilding activities embody one
aspect of such coordination aimed at fulfilling the
vision set out in the Organization's Charter. Moreover,
the Commission's mandate encourages consultation
with civil society, non-governmental organizations and
the private sector in order to ensure that it receive the
input of international organizations in its peacebuilding
activities.

There is no doubt that several other countries are
appropriate candidates for inclusion on the
Commission's agenda. In every case, we must take the
fundamental principles of peacebuilding into
consideration by acknowledging the unique specificity
of each country and hence the different methods by
which peacebuilding operations should be conducted.
It is important that the Commission and countries
emerging from conflict agree on the methodology for
undertaking peacebuilding activities if the desired
objectives are to be reached.

As we have noted, the Peacebuilding Commission
is an advisory body seeking to assist countries
emerging from conflict in identifying the optimal
approach to conducting the peacebuilding process. Its
mandate also includes the mobilization of necessary
international resources to attain its goals.
Consequently, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Commission together constitute an integrated
mechanism. We therefore appeal to the international
community to donate generously and to mobilize the
resources necessary to maintaining the process of
peacebuilding and reconstruction.

