Mr. Begec (Turkey): At the outset, let me inform the
Security Council of our deepest regret and sorrow that
the Ambassador of Russia to Turkey, His Excellency
Mr. Andrei Gennadyevich Karlov, has lost his life after
a gunman's attack in Ankara. We condemn this attack
in the strongest possible terms. We also express our
condolences to and strong solidarity with the delegation
of the Russian Federation here. Turkish authorities will
do their utmost to ensure justice, including through
a thorough investigation. An official statement
concerning this heinous attack will be released in due
course by the relevant authorities.

At the outset allow me to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2016/1049),
Special Representative Yamamoto for his briefing and
Ambassador Saikal for his statement. Following the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 71/9 on the
situation in Afghanistan last month, we welcome this
opportunity to discuss developments in the country in
the Security Council.

During the past 14 years, Afghanistan has gone
through a remarkable transition process and achieved
considerable progress in many areas. We welcome
the dedication and determination of the Afghan
Government, security forces and people in making
genuine efforts towards overcoming challenges.
Together with the assistance of the international
community, Afghanistan is moving forward in the
areas of security and development. Today, millions of
Afghans have access to education, health and other
social services. However, there is still much to do.
Accomplishments are still reversible. The security
situation is fragile, and Afghanistan remains at a
critical juncture.

The NATO Warsaw Summit and Brussels
Conference were encouraging. In those meetings, the
international community displayed its commitment
to support Afghanistan. Continuing this assistance to
the security and development efforts of the Afghan
Government during the transformation decade will be
vital. Afghanistan eventually needs to build its own
capacity in many respects. In the meanwhile, we must
extend all the help we can to assist the work of achieving
a secure, stable and prosperous future for Afghanistan.

The stability of Afghanistan, and subsequently that
of the region, will depend on improved security. Lasting
peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only through the
successful conclusion of the peace and reconciliation
process. In that understanding, we welcome the signing
of the peace agreement between the representatives of
the Afghan Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin).

We welcome and encourage the Afghan
Government's efforts to bring reforms to life. We
believe that the successful implementation of reforms
will bring further political and social cohesion to the
country. Turkey will continue to support the Afghan
Government in achieving its security and development
agenda as long as our help is needed. We will continue
our bilateral assistance in the areas of security
and development and our contributions to NATO's
efforts as a framework nation within the Resolute
Support Mission.

Turkey's official development aid to Afghanistan
in the period of 2002-2015 exceeded $962 million. It
is the single biggest development programme we have
ever undertaken. We mainly focus on projects in the
fields of education, health, infrastructure and capacity-
building for Government institutions. Furthermore,
Turkey was pleased to announce during the Brussels
Conference our pledge of $150 million for the period
2018-2020.

We believe that genuine dialogue among the
countries of the region is particularly important and
necessary. In that regard, Turkey will also maintain
its contributions to Afghanistan through regional
platforms, such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
In this regard, we welcome the holding of the sixth
Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul Process earlier
this month. We are pleased that the Process has provided
a foundation to establish interaction among regional
countries, supporting countries and organizations.
Confidence-building measures in the framework of the
Process also represent significant achievements. As
one of the co-lead countries of the Counter-Terrorism
Confidence-Building Measure Technical Group,
Turkey has hosted multiple training activities in 2016.
We aim to continue with similar training activities in
the upcoming year.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
Afghan people deserve a better future. The international
community's continued commitment will strengthen
the hopes of the Afghan people in this regard. It should
be our joint duty to help Afghanistan reach that goal.

