Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Deputy Prime Minister Dacic' for his briefing as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office. As he has stated,
his chairmanship comes during the worst crisis of
European security since the end of the Cold War. I
should therefore like to focus my remarks on Ukraine
and the OSCE role in that crisis.

Over the past months, the work of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission 0 Ukraine, led by Ambassador
Apakan, has been invaluable in giving some visibility
to the challenges to peace and security that persist in
eastern Ukraine. I pay tribute to the work of the OSCE
and express our full support for the Mission and for
Heidi Tagliavini, the Special Representative of the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office for Ukraine. We believe
that its role should be greatly strengthened.

Last week, the Council adopted resolution 2202
(2015), which endorses a package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreement and underlines
the importance of achieving a comprehensive ceasefire
in eastern Ukraine. However, in the days since the
agreement was signed in Minsk on 12 February, the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has observed
continuous breaches of the ceasefire that threaten to
further destabilize eastern Ukraine and undermine the
Minsk agreements in their entirety.

Minsk called for a ceasefire to begin on
15 February, and for the withdrawal of heavy weaponry
to start on 16 February. Yet within 40 minutes of
coming into effect, the ceasefire was shattered by a
Russian-backed separatist offensive on Debaltseve.
On 19 February, Ukrainian forces withdrew from the
city. Scores of Ukrainian soldiers were left dead or
injured. The continued presence of Russian military
hardware, including Uragan rocket launchers and
T-72 tanks around Debaltseve, shows that Russia's
commitment to withdraw foreign military formations,
which was a key element of the Minsk agreement, has
been disregarded. The OSCE reports that convoys are
still crossing the international border and that shelling
persists in Donetsk and Luhansk, in clear violation of
the ceasefire.

There have been some bright spots. We welcome
the exchange of a number of prisoners this weekend
between the Ukrainian armed forces and Russian-
backed separatists. However, many more remain
in detention, including the Ukrainian pilot Nadiya
Savchenko. Clearly, that is not yet enough.

We welcome efforts by the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to fulfil its mandate in difficult circumstances.
We were gravely concerned by reports of aggressive
separatistbehaviour towards the Mission on 22 February,
when a separatist commander at the Kyivski checkpoint
in Donetsk city threatened to kill the monitors. On the
same day, an unmanned aerial vehicle of the Mission
attempting to monitor compliance with the Minsk
package in the area surrounding the Donetsk airport
was deliberately and consistently jammed. Obstruction
and threats to the Mission are unacceptable. The
Council fully supports the work of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, and we should all unequivocally
condemn the acts of separatists attempting to impede
their work.

The Council has seen that pattern of behaviour
before. We recall how the separatists cynically and
systematically undermined the September Minsk
agreement. We recall how the line ofcontact was ignored
and redrawn as the separatists seized an additional 550
square kilometres of Ukrainian territory, and we recall
how indiscriminate shelling of civilians brought the
conflict to Mariupol and Volnovakha. As a signatory
to the Minsk agreements, Russia needs to ensure that
the separatist forces respect the ceasefire, and it must
fulfil its own commitment to fully withdraw the heavy
weapons it has supplied them with and its military
formations from Ukrainian territory.

Russian influence can also help expedite the full
exchange of prisoners and guarantee the humane
treatment of any soldiers currently detained. It can
also permit the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine to continue its important work in monitoring
the ceasefire and other provisions of the Minsk
agreements. But so far we have seen few signs of
Moscow's willingness to engage constructively. Russia
has refused to allow the expansion of the OSCE border
observation mission to enable full monitoring of the
international border, leaving hundreds of kilometres
of border open to the flow of weapons and soldiers.
It continues to block the OSCE, including the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the
High Commissioner on National Minorities, from any
access to Crimea.

Nearly a year on from the illegal annexation of
Crimea, we are faced with a crisis that has expanded far
beyond the Black Sea and now threatens the security of
the region and the credibility of the Security Council.
The pattern is familiar from Russian behaviour in
Georgia and Moldova - agreements are reached,
ceasefires arranged, territorial gains consolidated. In
Ukraine, these agreements are systematically breached
within days. The violence resumes, and the push for
more territory begins again. Quite apart from the
terrible human costs, these actions also have profound
consequences for international relations.

It is in no one's interests to return to an era where
agreements between leaders become worthless.
Organizations like the OSCE and the United Nations
were founded on the principles of dialogue and respect for
peace and stability. The Serbian chairmanship-in-office
has made welcome efforts to bolster respect for OSCE
principles despite continuing efforts by some States to
undermine them. The Security Council must follow this
example and ensure that further breaches of Minsk and
further erosion of the principles that the Council shares
are met with clear consequences. We will be working
with our European Union partners to ensure that
sanctions remain in place until Russia demonstrates a
clear commitment to those fundamental principles.

