The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada,
Croatia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Norway, Pakistan, Slovenia, Turkey and Ukraine, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table; Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Simonovic' (Croatia),
Mr. Eitel (Germany), Mr. Erdos (Hungary), Mr. Fulci
(Italy), Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Biprn Lian (Norway), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Tu'rk (Slovenia), Mr. Celem (Turkey)
and Mr. Yel'ehenko (Ukraine) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), document S/ 1997/966.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1997/989, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
Portugal, the Russian Federation, Sweden, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l997/975, which contains the
text of a letter dated 12 December 1997 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting a letter dated 10 December
1997 from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization addressed to the Secretary-General,
enclosing the eleventh monthly report on Stabilization
Force operations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 16 December 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Germany to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the
Conclusion of the Peace Implementation Conference on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, held in Bonn on 9 and 10
December 1997, which will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/ 1997/979.


