Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I
thank High Representative Inzko for his service in
representing the international community in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and for his stewardship of the Office
of the High Representative.

The United States welcomes the unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2315 (2016). Among its
provisions, the resolution authorizes the extension of a
Chapter VII mandate for the EUFOR ALTHEA mission
and the NATO presence for an additional year. It
reaffirms the final authority of the High Representative
in the interpretation of civilian aspects of the Dayton
Agreement and reaffirms that any amendments to
Bosnia and Herzegovina's Constitution must be made
in accordance with the amendment procedures set out
therein. The resolution demonstrates the unity of the
Security Council in its support for the agreements
reached in Dayton, and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as support
for those who seek to protect those fundamental rights,
including High Representative Inzko.

The High Representative's role, while always
pivotal, has been particularly important this year, as
certain elements have worked against the unity that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has striven for over the past
20 years. His briefing today underscores why the
Council must remain vigilant against those who seek
to undermine the constitutional order in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Republika Srpska's decision to hold
its referendum in September, in contravention of a
Constitutional Court order, made it clear that Republika
Srpska President Dodik and other politicians are
systematically attempting to erode the competencies
of State-level institutions. As the High Representative
highlighted in his report (8/2016/911, annex), the direct
rejection of the Constitutional Court by the Republika
Srpska means that it has effectively opted out of the
judicial system, out of the State, and has thereby
fundamentally rejected the sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As the High Representative goes on to say
in the report, the referendum is viewed by observers on
both sides as a possible prelude to further referendums
on status questions regarding the Republika Srpska.
Such purposeful destabilization is unacceptable and
threatens to send the country down a fractious path.

The United States looks forward to the day when
Bosnia and Herzegovina meets the objectives and
conditions established by the Peace Implementation
Council for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, and to the day when we can say with
absolute confidence that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
reached full compliance with the Dayton Agreement
and has become a peaceful, viable State, irreversibly
on course for European integration. But that day has
still not arrived - delayed, in part, because divisive
rhetoric and destabilizing actions on the part of certain
elements within Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to
erode and degrade the vital institutions necessary
for progress.

Further progress for Bosnia and Herzegovina on
political and socioeconomic reforms, on European
Union and NATO membership and on ensuring basic
rights for its people, such as the right to vote in Mostar,
requires commitment from all sides. The United States
commends the continued work of EUFOR ALTHEA
and of NATO, through its headquarters in Sarajevo, and
wholeheartedly supports the renewal of their mandates.
We are pleased that Bosnia and Herzegovina's defence
review is advancing, and we look forward to that
document, which will further reforms in the defence
sector. However, that progress cannot overshadow the
fact that the registration of defence properties in the
Republika Srpska continues to be blocked. We call on
Republika Srpska President Dodik to ease his unhelpful
rhetoric and inaction on that issue.

Finally, we welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina's
progress in the European Union membership process
this year, as well as the Government's dedication to
its reform agenda. Continuing down that path will
require vision, political will and real follow through
on commitments and, most important, compromise
and unity.

