Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland warmly welcomes
the unity that the Council has shown in the adoption of
this resolution. This is a strong message from the
Security Council acting in accord. We concur fully
with the Secretary-General's eloquent and telling
statement this morning to all of us - the Council and
all the Member States of the United Nations, including
Iraq.

We have noted carefully and we welcome the
assurances given by the sponsors that their purpose in
presenting this resolution was to achieve disarmament
through inspections, and not to establish a basis for the
use of military force. The use of force is, and must
remain, a matter of last resort. This is, therefore, a
resolution about disarmament, not war. It is about
removing all threat of war.

Iraq has been offered a rigorous and fair way
forward towards meeting its disarmament obligations,
while avoiding the use of force. However, the
resolution can leave Iraq in no doubt that it must now
cooperate fully with arms inspectors and reassure the
world finally that it has divested itself of weapons of
mass destruction and the means of delivering them, or
face serious consequences.

Ireland supports the resolution, because it offers
the most likely means of securing Iraq's voluntary
compliance with its disarmament obligations, avoiding
a military conflict and preserving the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
resolution represents the outcome of nearly two months
of painstaking negotiations in the Council. It has been
a remarkable demonstration of the Council's ability to
achieve compromise in order to meet its
responsibilities to the wider membership of the United
Nations. Ireland believes that the integrity of the
United Nations Charter and the prerogatives of the
Security Council are fully preserved in the terms of this
resolution. For Ireland, this is an issue of the most
fundamental importance.

The resolution provides for a clear, sequential
process, whereby the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
or the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
will give the Council its assessment of any material
breach or alleged material breach of Iraq's obligations
under Security Council resolutions. The matter will
then be fully examined by the Security Council itself.

As far as Ireland is concerned, it is for the
Council to decide on any ensuing action. Our debate on
17 and 18 October made it clear that this is the broadly
held view within the United Nations. However, we are
confident that, should it be necessary, the Council will,
in the words of the Secretary-General, face its
responsibilities.
The resolution strengthens the hand of the
inspectors in valuable ways, and Ireland is fully
confident that they will approach their task and apply
their mandate with the necessary firmness and wisdom.
We know that they are fully conscious of the fact that
they act on behalf of the entire international
community. The United Nations character of
UNMOVIC, established in resolution 1284 (1999) and
the multilateral character of the IAEA are a guarantee
that the inspections will be carried out with the
necessary objectivity and will be strictly limited to the
purpose of their mandate, which is the disarmament of
Iraq in respect of weapons of mass destruction.
Nothing should prejudice the perception that the
inspections will be conducted in an independent and
impartial manner.

As the concept of material breach is a key
element of this resolution, let me make it clear that
Ireland's understanding of this concept is in accordance
with the definition contained in the 1969 Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties: "the violation of a
provision essential to the accomplishment of the object
or purpose of the treaty" (Article 60, para. 3 (b)).
There is no doubt, on the basis of this definition, that
Iraq has been in material breach of its obligations. We
fully expect this same definition to be applied in
determining whether any further material breach has
occurred, should it become necessary to do so.

The Iraqi people have waited far too long for
their chance to recover from a decade of war, followed
by a decade of sanctions. The time has now come for
Iraq to resume the path of peaceful economic and
social development, which is so strongly desired and
deserved by the Iraqi people.

The Security Council, representing the
international community, has today assumed its
responsibilities in order to avert a perilous crisis. The
Council has given Iraq a final opportunity to comply
with its disarmament obligations. The Iraqi authorities
must now respond by assuming their own
responsibilities under the Charter.

Ireland calls on the Iraqi Government to choose
the path of peace, to cooperate fully with the inspectors
and to comply with all its other obligations under
Security Council resolutions. It must do so for the sake
of its own people, that of its neighbours and in the
interests of international peace and security.

