Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to thank the Italian
presidency not only for the initiative to convene this
debate, but also for its leadership in the negotiations
on resolution 2388 (2017) and for all of its work on the
topic that brings us together today. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his work on
and commitment to this common struggle. We further
thank Mr. Fedotov, Ms. Giammarinaro and Mr. Chergui
for their briefings.

In recent days, the International Organization
for Migration has denounced the existence of a slave
market in Libya. We have all seen the horrible and
heartbreaking images of individuals being auctioned in
that country. Bolivia echoes the words of the Secretary-
General in condemning those facts in the strongest
terms, and supports the request of the African Union
for the urgent conduct an investigation into those
despicable acts and inhumane practices in order to
identify those responsible and bring them to justice.

The international community must be made aware
that we are at a critical juncture in history. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, we are facing the greatest humanitarian
crisis since the creation of the United Nations. That is
reflected by the 66 million people who, by late 2016,
had been forcibly displaced throughout the world as a
result ofwar, persecution, armed conflicts and Violence,
representing the largest movement of people since the
end of the Second World War. Among those individuals
were children, women and men - all easily exploited
by traffickers.

As underscored in the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, armed groups also participate in trafficking in
persons in the territories in which they operate. They
recruit and use thousands of children as combatants in
various conflicts. They also traffic women and girls
to force them into marriage or subject them to sexual
slavery, and exploit men and boys with forced labour.
According to that report, 79 per cent of the victims of
trafficking in persons are women and children, two of
every three victims are girls under 12, and one of every
three Victims is a girl between the ages of 15 and 18. At
the same time, according to the International Labour
Organization, more than 12 million people suffer from
situations similar to slavery as a result of trafficking
in persons.

We urge all States to address this issue through
cooperation and international, regional and bilateral
dialogue, and to work to strengthen effective measures
to combat and eliminate trafficking in persons, assist
victims and survivors in their reintegration, and bring
the perpetrators to justice. Likewise, we underscore
the importance of implementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and
we call on States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children.

It is clear that conflicts weaken State structures,
impair protection mechanisms and allow criminal
networks to act with greater freedom. It is therefore
necessary to fight against economic asymmetries
and address the structural causes of poverty, one
consequence of which is the large migratory flows
that are caused mainly by the concentration of wealth
in certain countries - the root cause of which is the
current economic and financial system.

That situation is exacerbated by policies of regime
change, interventionism and interference in the internal
affairs of other States. A clear example of that is the
crisis in the Sahel region, which is due, inter alia, to
the associated impact of the crisis in Libya, as reflected
in the transfer of arms and combatants to Mali, which
considerably strengthened the military capacity of the
terrorist groups that operate in the subregion.
Unfortunately, terrorism has capitalized on those
economic asymmetries and armed conflicts, creating
a growing link between terrorism and trafficking in
persons. International criminal groups and terrorist
groups, which the Council and all Member States
fight, profit from trafficking in persons and their
exploitation, and use the economic gains to finance
their terrorist activities.

By closing offborders, building walls, criminalizing
migration and denying access to refugees, we believe
that some countries not only negatively impact
trafficking in persons, but also give rise to xenophobia,
discrimination and racism, and serve to fuel the rhetoric
of the terrorist groups that we are all trying to combat.
Such rhetoric, of course, includes intolerance of
different religious beliefs. Similarly, it is important that
the international community continue to investigate
how the economic profits from trafficking in persons
are injected into the global financial system through
money-laundering and so-called tax havens.

We note that, since 2012, there has been
comprehensive legislation in Bolivia against trafficking
in persons, aimed at fighting the evil. In addition, the
State is providing the resources necessary to ensuring
that this fight is successful. Furthermore, in June
the World People's Conference was held in Bolivia,
under the theme "For a world without walls, towards
universal citizenship", in order to promote the concept
of universal citizenship with a view to reducing not
only trafficking in persons but also the barriers that
prevent refugees from fleeing war and armed conflicts.

We thank the Italian delegation once again for its
leadership on this matter. We are sure that all that has
been said in the Council and adopted in resolution 2388
(2017) will not remain empty words, but will become
concrete action to eliminate this scourge.

