Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is grateful to Mr. Volcker and the
Secretary-General for their presentations.

I think this morning we need to remember above
all that it is Saddam Hussein who remains the key
culprit in the oil-for-food saga, as he sought
continuously to corrupt the programme for personal
benefit. Indeed, it was because of the humanitarian
imperative that the Security Council and the United
Nations Secretariat were obliged to reach less-than-
satisfactory agreements with the Saddam regime and
ensure a programme that would meet the essential
needs of the Iraqi people. We have heard Mr. Volcker
describe the circumstances of how that initial
programme was put in place.

But none of that can excuse the corruption, the
criminality and the mismanagement that took place.
But in condemning that, let us not forget that the
greater wrong that was done to the people of Iraq and
to the region was done by Saddam.

This morning, we have heard the Secretary-
General's acknowledgement of a personal and
institutional responsibility. And with hindsight, it must
be clear to all of us that many concerned in the
circumstances of the time were too focused on other
aspects of the Iraq problem, rather than on the
accountable functioning of the oil-for-food programme.
The report seems therefore to rightly highlight the
shortcomings in the Secretariat's management, the part
played by the Security Council in creating and
monitoring the oil-for-food programme and that of the
Member States in enforcing Iraq's sanctions.

So, as far as the United Kingdom is concerned,
we very much agree with the Secretary-General that in
studying this report we have to draw lessons for the
future, particularly on the question of management
reform. The serious shortcomings that have been
identified have to be corrected, and that underlines the
need for a successful summit outcome next week, with
real changes to secure the efficiency, the
accountability, the transparency and, perhaps above all,
the oversight that is necessary, and then to ensure that
responsibilities are fulfilled by all concerned.

For our part, we fully support the Secretary-
General in his efforts to ensure that the right lessons
are drawn from this report and that action is then taken.

