Mr. Riveros Marin (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank New Zealand for this initiative to discuss issues
affecting the promotion of international peace and
security.

The vulnerabilities of small island developing States
(SIDS) arise from their inability to address emerging
challenges and situations with global implications
that can jeopardize the stability and the livelihood
of these countries and regional and international
peace and security. Cooperation for development is
crucial to dealing with these threats. Chile has made a
commitment to the SIDS and has therefore contributed,
along with the countries of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), to capacity-sharing and the training of
human capital through South-South cooperation.
With all the CARICOM. countries, Chile is
implementing programmes of cooperation in teaching
Spanish, international relations, disaster prevention
and support for plant and animal health systems. This
always involves a South-South approach; in other
words, experience is shared in a horizontal relationship,
particularly in order to create capacity for the design
and implementation of public policies.

I should like to highlight two specific programmes.
We are implementing one in the Dominican Republic,
entitled "Improving youth employability", jointly with
the German agency for international cooperation. The
goal is to improve access to microcredit and to encourage
young people's entrepreneurship in association with
local Governments. The goal of the second, more
inclusive programme seeks to strengthen the Caribbean
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Agency, whereby
two Chilean institutions - the Chilean Agency for
Food Quality and Safety and the Agriculture and
Livestock Service - have been selected by the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization to provide
cooperation to the Caribbean.

These are two specific examples of cooperation
that are part of a much broader programme almost
always undertaken on a triangular basis. Through this
approach, Chile can share its experience in the design
and implementation of public policies that are also
carefully evaluated practices producing positive results.
We believe that this is the best way for the international
community to support SIDS in overcoming their
vulnerabilities. But there are also global activities
leading in that direction.

We are all aware of the threat posed by climate
change and of the urgent need to reach a comprehensive
and efficient agreement at the forthcoming Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP 21) in Paris. That
is particularly important for small island countries,
which are particularly exposed to the impacts of climate
change and cycles of natural disasters. Attention must
be paid to their impact on cultures and forms of life
and to the possible creation of such destabilizing
phenomena as forced displacement.

The exploitation and illegal trafficking of natural
resources, including illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, create a climate of instability by preventing
access to basic livelihoods. Global governance must
incorporate ways of protecting these vulnerabilities of
SIDS. These issues are the focus ofthe Council's special
attention for the first time today, and we therefore
congratulate New Zealand for this initiative. They are
regularly considered in various forums, but they cannot
be ignored by the Council.

Chile is willing to contribute in this area. In early
October, we will host the second Our Ocean conference,
an initiative aimed at adopting voluntary commitments
on the three serious threats to our ocean. Illegal fishing
is one of the principle factors affecting any project
or planning of sustainable fishing; marine pollution
from plastic products has become a global problem;
and the acidification of the ocean and its relation to
climate change make it urgent for us to adopt collective
action. Inclusive development in our societies can play
a fundamental role in ensuring the political stability,
democratic governance, development and territorial
integrity in our States, which are factors that effectively
prevent conflict.

We welcome this opportunity to discuss these issues
in the Security Council and to emphasize, from an
eminently political perspective, the importance for the
sustainability of the planet of achieving an agreement at
the COP 21 in Paris. At the Climate Summit held in New
York in September 2014, President Michelle Bachelet
noted that climate change exacerbates inequalities and
multiplies threats to global peace and security. We must
therefore tackle this problem before its consequence
become irreversible.

Chile trusts that this open debate will help to foster
realism and awareness within groups of countries and
regions. Collective inclusive action is essential in order
to promote basically preventive measures. We therefore
welcome the concerns raised today in the Council
concerning SIDS, which confirm the relevance of
South-South cooperation that we are undertaking with
the CARICOM. countries.

