The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/416, which contains the text of a
letter dated 24 April 2001 from the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President of 2 June 2000 (S/PRST/2000/20).
It expresses its intention to give full consideration
to the report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (S/2001/357). It takes note of the
action plan of the Expert Panel for the extension
ofits mandate (S/2001/4l6).

"The Security Council notes that the report
contains disturbing information about the illegal
exploitation of Congolese resources by
individuals, Governments and armed groups
involved in the conflict, and the link between the
exploitation of the natural resources and other
forms of wealth in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the continuation of the conflict.

"The Security Council condemns the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and expresses
its serious concern at those economic activities
that fuel the conflict. It urges the Governments
named in the report in this regard to conduct their
own inquiries into this information, cooperate
fully with the Expert Panel while ensuring
necessary security for the experts, and take
immediate steps to end illegal exploitation of the
natural resources by their nationals or others
under their control.

"The Security Council notes with concern
the terrible toll the conflict is taking on the
people, economy and environment of the
the

Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council believes that the only
viable solution to the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains the full
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement (8/1999/815) and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of a comprehensive approach
addressing all the root causes of the conflict to
achieve a lasting peace settlement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the
Expert Panel for a final period of three months,
and requests also that the Expert Panel submit to
the Council, through the Secretary-General, an
addendum to its final report which shall include
the following:

"(a) An update of relevant data and an
analysis of further information, including as
pointed out in the action plan submitted by the
Panel to the Security Council;

"(b) Relevant information on the activities
of countries and other actors for which the
necessary quantity and quality of data were not
made available earlier;

"(c) A response, based as far as possible on
corroborated evidence, to the comments and
reactions of the States and actors cited in the final
report of the Expert Panel;

"(d) An evaluation of the situation at the
end of the extension of the mandate of the Panel,
and of its conclusions, assessing whether progress
has been made on the issues which come under
the responsibility of the Panel.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to examine and respond to the
recommendations of the report in the light of the
addendum submitted by the Panel, so as to
advance the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.
