Mr. Osman (Somalia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to assure you of my
full support. I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the new members of the Council and to
wish them every success in their term.

I would like to begin by first expressing Somalia's
firm condemnation of the recent mortar attack on Aden
Abdulle International Airport in Mogadishu, which hit
the United Nations compound. We have assured the
Security Council that our law enforcement agencies
promptly began investigations with a View to bringing
the perpetrators to justice. We wish the injured a swift
recovery and we stand in solidarity with the United
Nations family at this time.

I also want to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and
Mr. Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, for their
valuable and comprehensive briefings today.

Since the most recent Council briefing on this issue
(see S/PV.8352), Somalia, led by President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed F armaj 0, has irrefutably continued
to progress on all fronts. Somalia's forward momentum
has been achieved with the strong support of our
partners. We pay tribute to the ongoing commitment
and sacrifice of the personnel of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and we are grateful for
the collaboration and support of the United Nations,
the African Union, the European Union and all of our
international partners.

Today, I wish to call member's attention to the
significant developments we have achieved with their
collaboration. In the span of almost two years, we
have advanced the organizational structure for the
implementation of our Government's agenda through
four distinct road maps: inclusive politics, security and
justice, economic recovery and social development.
Those road maps have enabled the Government
to track the implementation of projects, improve
coordination among ministries and agencies and
enhance accountability and transparency at all levels;
most critically, they will allow Somalis to streamline
the support received from our international partners.

During the seventy-third session of the General
Assembly, Somalia was elected as a member of the
Human Rights Council for a three-year term, beginning
this month. On this occasion, Somalia reaffirms its
commitment, at the national and global levels, to the
implementation, promotion and protection of human
rights and the principles and standards common to all,
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and relevant
international instruments.

In October, Somalia acceded to the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, becoming
the 178th country to do so. In the same month, our
Parliament approved a draft law prepared by the
Ministry of Human Rights and signed by President
Farmajo on 31 December. That is a milestone and a
tremendous achievement for our country, and a great
step to promote and ensure a full and equal enjoyment
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
persons living with disabilities in Somalia.

Directly attributable to this new mode of business,
let me also highlight other key achievements we have
made. Somalia is rebranding and taking its rightful
place in the region. The end of 2018 marked an exciting
time of regeneration and partnership in the Horn
of Africa. This new reality will increase regional
cooperation to boost economic initiatives and promote
peace and security across the Horn of Africa, and is an
example of the active role that Somalia can play in the
region under President Farmajo's leadership.

On inclusive politics, we have laid important
foundations for our reform agenda by reaching an
agreement on the electoral system for 2020 and
completing 50 per cent of the constitutional review
process. In order to put in place a legislative framework
for the election, we have reviewed the political parties
law and drafted an electoral law. With a view to
deepening federalism, various elections are under way
in many federal member states and are taking place as
scheduled, while we continue to support the devolution
of Government functions and powers to the different
administrative levels of Government.

Our working relationship with our federal member
states is becoming stronger. We are implementing
a joint developed framework for security support
with HirShabelle state and are currently finalizing
the same with South-West state. Building the trust of
Somali citizens in their Government is a key part of
our political reform, including through the tackling of
crippling corruption. In that regard, we have adopted an
anti-corruption law and established an anti-corruption
commission, and the cabinet has endorsed the
federal justice and corrections model - a key step
in strengthening the rule of law in Somalia. In order
to deepen federalism and address practical issues, we
have reached a resource-management agreement on
the ownership, management and sharing of fisheries,
petroleum and mineral resources.

Lastly, in order to build trust among Somalis and
ensure that our political reform is generally inclusive,
my President has led reconciliation efforts across the
country. In the city of Galkayo in central Somalia,
the President brought the parties together to resolve
the conflict and broken relations. In order to resolve
the conflict, the Government has followed up with
the integration of local forces to enhance the peace.
In Tukaraq, in the north-western part of Somalia, the
President is leading mediation efforts to de-escalade
tensions and in the district of Merca in Lower Shabelle,
his support has strengthened the local community
reconciliation initiative and benefited Lower Shabelle
security along the coastal line.
With regard to security, the Federal Government
of Somalia has made considerable progress in the
implementation of the Somali transition plan and the
national security architecture. Through the security
and justice road map, we have broken down the task
into priority areas to ensure that activities are not
implemented on an ad hoc basis but are concentrated
in areas and aligned with other security efforts in order
to multiply their effect. The Somali National Army
has conducted independent operations in support of
the transition implementation in Lower and Middle
Shabelle. Key areas, such as the coastal town of Merca,
were cleared and have been held by the Somali National
Army to enable stabilization, peacebuilding and
reconciliation initiatives.

The implementation of the transition has also
continued in the capital, with the Somali police
forces taking over the security responsibilities for the
Mogadishu stadium from the African Union Mission in
Somalia. We, the federal Government, have restructured
the National Intelligence and Security Agency into
a civilian intelligence-gathering agency, moving
operational units to the Somali police force. That is no
mean feat. In line with our reform agenda, the House of
the People just this week adopted a pension and gratuity
bill that will pave the way for the disengagement of a
large number of inactive civil servants. We continue
to restructure the Somali security forces and redefine
their roles and responsibilities in support of the payroll
reform and the biometric registration, and our national
registration force is nearing completion.

With regard to economic recovery, the Federal
Government of Somalia has achieved success owing to its
relentless fight against corruption through widespread
economic reforms. For the first time in many years,
high-ranking officials have been arrested and charged
in connection with embezzlement. The Ministry of
Finance is now the only line Ministry entrusted with
revenue collection, which was previously collected
by various other Government institutions. Domestic
revenue has increased. Taxes and Government fees are
paid directly to the Central Bank of Somalia.

As a result of those key policies and strengthened
fiscal discipline, our tax base has expanded. A staff-
level agreement has been reached with the International
Monetary Fund on the completion of the third staff-
monitored programme, thereby making significant
progress to pave the way for debt relief. In partnership
with the United Nations, the World Bank and the
European Union, we have developed the recovery
and resilience framework as a means to achieve long-
term economic and social responsibility to address
vulnerability. We are stepping up our efforts to prepare
the ninth national development plan. Structured
according to four key road maps, it will serve as a basis
for an interim poverty-reduction strategy paper - a
document that will lay out Somalia's development goals,
challenges and financing requirements.

In our efforts to achieve a prosperous society
through the social development road map, we are
working to establish policies, strategies and regulations
for the enhancement of affordable and accessible basic
social services, such as health care, education, clean
water and electricity. In line with the road map, we are
working on reinstating Somali pride and ownership in
the rebuilding of our State through our flagship social
mobilization campaign. That programme creates civic
engagement and enhances the culture of volunteerism.
For the first time in our national budget, we have tripled
the budget for the delivery of basic social services, such
as health care and education for our people.

Much of the aforementioned progress has been
achieved with minimum direct investment and in
partnership with the Federal Government of Somalia.
Real partnership requires commitment, trust and
mutual respect. Over the nearly past two years,
we have listened carefully to our partners and will
continue to encourage an open and frank dialogue. We
acknowledge and offer our appreciation to the United
Nations agencies that continue to provide vital support
and assistance to the Somali people. Somalia has been
a proud member of the United Nations since gaining its
independence in 1960 and is committed to the values
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Moreover, the principles of respect for the rule
of law, freedom of expression and assembly, fairness,
good governance, transparency and due process are all
enshrined in our provisional Constitution.

Ultimately, our leaders' decisions are subject to the
close scrutiny of our legislative and judiciary systems.
Those robust checks and balances, while protecting the
separation of powers, also ensure accountability and
fairness. Recognizing that our Government obtains
legitimacy first and foremost from its people, we have
ensured that public engagement is a critical pillar in our
approach to governance. That is why my Government
enjoys the confidence and overwhelming support of
the Somali people. Our youthful nation is finding its
voice and establishing new forms of debate and active
accountability through public forums. We are proud of
our active and vocal citizens, and we encourage their
engagement with their Government and elected officials.
We believe that our legitimacy and credibility and,
ultimately, the impact of our decisions depend on the
wishes and interests of our people. The Somali people
want Somalia to have its rightful place in the community
of nations, with mutual respect and reciprocity. The
Somali people demand that their Government assume
responsibility for its own decisions and shape their
future, with Somalia leading international support, not
international support leading Somalia. We therefore
have a duty to re-establish Somalia's position in the
world and represent the interests of Somalis actively
on the world stage. For the pride and protection of
the Somali people, as their representatives we have a
duty to give them a voice and represent their wishes
and aspirations.

Allow me to address the issue at hand. Somalia
distinguishes between the institutions that we are part
of and individual conduct having a detrimental effect on
our fragile nations. Our Government is taking Somalia
to a new future. It is no longer transitional in nature but
a sovereign nation with all its rights and privileges. We
are battling terrorism, clan mentalities and corruption.
It is our expectation that the leadership of the United
Nations will support that strategic picture.

The Member States represented here will agree that
proscribed individuals fromAl-Shabaab or otherterrorist
organizations sanctioned by this very institution cannot
assume leadership positions without going through a
stringent, established rehabilitation programme. During
the past two federal electoral cycles, United Nations
representatives in Mogadishu have reiterated again and
again that the candidature and potential election of any
individual with a history of violent extremism would
represent a regressive step. Therefore, while we strive
to re-establish the rule of law and to end the culture
of impunity, we reject the criticism and attempts to
rebrand resurgent terrorists as ice-cream salesmen
before they have redeemed themselves.

Finally, as a maturing nation undergoing a
challenging evolution, we do not shy away from the
task ahead of us as we are hard at work laying the
foundation for generations to come. The Federal
Government of Somalia remains committed to its
reform agenda to establish effective institutions that
abide by our Constitution, respect the human rights
of all citizens, adhere to international humanitarian
law and create forces that are accountable, transparent
and able to defend the people, sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia.
In those endeavours, we continue to promote the respect
of human rights and commit to fully investigate any
violations or abuses against our people.

The challenges facing Somalia are complex, but
Somalia is gradually taking the lead in addressing
them through Somali-led initiatives. As we fulfil
our responsibility as a sovereign nation, I recall
that the speakers in this Chamber often call on host
Governments to act on their responsibility to govern
and to identify national solutions to challenges. Somali
has demonstrated a strong political will to do so. That
should be applauded, not extinguished.

Somalia continues to make considerable progress
across an ambitious and challenging reform agenda. We
cannot do so alone; we are grateful for the support of
international partners and their commitment to Somalia.
That support will be most effective when it is delivered
in line with objectives we have set out in our road map
and when it is directed towards Somali priorities. We
look forward to continuing to work closely with our
partners to align their support and to build a bridge and
a bright prosperous future for Somalia.

I cannot conclude my remarks without once
again reiterating our appeal to the Security Council
that the United Nations and its representatives have a
duty - even an obligation - to respect their mandate
not to interfere in our internal affairs, and to let the
Somalis control their own destiny. We believe that
collaboration with the United Nations on that basis
is more likely to have a concrete positive outcome.
With the help of our partners, Somalia is on the right
path to recovery from several decades of civil war
and anarchy. The Somali Government is committed
to bringing political stability to the country and will

take the measures necessary to maintain those hard-
earned gains, in accordance with our Constitution and
international law.

