Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I would like to start by
thanking you, Madam President, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Denmark and your delegation for the
initiative to convene this public debate, aimed at
enhancing the role of international law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
quite a challenge to answer all the vital questions
raised in your informal paper on this important matter
(S/2006/367, annex) during the limited time available
for delegations, to which you just referred. Therefore, I
06-4010]

will limit my delegation's remarks to a few salient
points. Before I proceed, however, I would like to
thank the President of the International Court of Justice
for her inspiring remarks today. We also express our
deep appreciation to the United Nations Legal Counsel
for his excellent presentation this morning.

We fully agree, first of all, that the Security
Council should improve its capabilities to face the new
challenges and threats to international peace and
security. That should be done in full and strict
adherence to the provisions of the Charter of the
Organization and to the various rules and norms of
international law, regardless of any political
consideration.

Second, the peacebuilding activities of the
Security Council, particularly in the context of
peacekeeping operations, must be based on the fact that
the responsibility to apply laws and regulations should
at all times remain with the national authorities of the
country concerned, with the full application of the
principle of national ownership of peacebuilding
activities as one of the principles governing the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 60/180,
which was adopted without a vote. In that regard, I
would like to pay a special tribute to the significant
contributions made by Denmark and the brotherly
African country Tanzania in facilitating agreement on
the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Third, the role of the Security Council in
addressing human rights issues should remain within
the parameters of the delicate distribution of
competencies and the strict balance of authority among
the Council, the General Assembly and its subsidiary
bodies, including the Human Rights Council. To argue
otherwise would run counter to the wisdom of our
leaders, who urged the establishment of the Human
Rights Council in the outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) to get rid of selectivity,
double standards and politicization.

Dealing with violations - even gross and
systematic violations - of human rights is primarily
the responsibility of the Human Rights Council, as we
agreed in the resolution establishing it. If the Human
Rights Council requires enforcement measures against
a certain country, the decision to refer the matter to the
Security Council should be taken in accordance with
the Human Rights Council's rules of procedure. On the
3
other hand, if the Security Council finds that a
particular human rights situation threatens international
peace and security, it should seek the intervention of
the Human Rights Council and inform the
Organization's larger membership before undertaking
any enforcement measures. A general debate on the
issue, in accordance with the principles of transparency
and accountability, would also be highly beneficial so
as to take the pulse of the larger membership of the
Organization.

Fourth, as the Peacebuilding Commission was
established by a resolution of the Security Council and
a resolution of the General Assembly, both organs
should play an essential role, along with the Economic
and Social Council, in stabilizing a situation and in
promoting peace and stability. The Security Council
should concentrate on achieving the peaceful
settlement of all international disputes, without
exception and with equal enthusiasm. It should also
help other United Nations organs in their efforts to
support the national endeavours of the countries
concerned so as to consolidate peace and prevent any
recurrence.

Fifth, any enforcement mechanism applied by the
Security Council should fully respect the principles of
the sovereignty and political independence of States,
and any encroachment by the Security Council on the
competence of the General Assembly or the Economic
and Social Council should cease. The issues of human
rights, terrorism and disarmament are the main
responsibility of the General Assembly. Resolutions
adopted by the Security Council on those issues should
be limited to cases involving a threat to international
peace and security, and such resolutions should be
elaborated in close consultation with the wider
membership of the Organization. Sanctions must be
carefully targeted and justified so as to increase the
likelihood of their implementation and enhance their
effectiveness. Any decision to resort to military action,
or merely authorizing such military action, should be
made by the Security Council in consultation with the
Organization as a whole, given the potential negative
impact on the people of the State concerned and the
adverse effects on the region in question and on the
international situation as a whole.

Sixth, the role of the International Court of
Justice is of paramount importance if the Security
Council is interested in strengthening the rule of law.
Frequent resort to the Court to render advisory
opinions is required, even on the scope of competence
of, and the distribution of power between, the General
Assembly and the Security Council, or on any other
issue under consideration. All of this will enhance the
credibility of the Security Council as a principal organ
aspiring to adhere to legality. In that regard, the
Council should respect the legal and moral values
reflected in the Court's judgments and advisory
opinions and should be guided by them in dealing with
the issues on its agenda.

Seventh and lastly, the good governance to which
we all aspire should start with good governance at the
international level, in this Organization and by the
Security Council, through the full application of the
norms of democracy; the principle of equality in
relations between States Members of the Organization,
regardless of which principal organs they belong to;
and, most of all, the full application of the Charter and
of the rules and norms of international law in a just,
fair and equitable manner.

