Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Jordanian presidency for convening this briefing
on the situation in Syria and its neighbourhood. I also
thank the briefers for their passionate contributions.

In 2014, the number of people forcibly displaced
reached the highest total recorded since the Second
World War, a staggering 51.2 million. United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees Antenio Guterres
called it a quantum leap in forced displacement in the
world. Destitute, desperate people trying to escape
extreme poverty, persecution and war pay thousands
of hard-earned dollars to traffickers to be loaded onto
cattle ships, shoddy boats and crumbling barges, only to
find death in the middle of the Mediterranean. Images
of capsized boats and boats abandoned midway by the
traffickers have become almost daily news. Last year
alone some 3,500 died trying to reach the other shore.

Among those trying to escape, conflict-affected
Syrians account for about a third. Even more Syrians
flee to neighbouring countries or remain inside Syria,
trapped by the Government's barrel bombs, mortar
fire and shelling and suffering chlorine attacks and the
brutality of terrorist groups, in hard-to-reach or besieged
areas, constrained to survive on tree bark, grass and
leaves and occasional humanitarian deliveries.

At this time and day in the twenty-first century,
starvation and death by starvation are not something
we read in history books, it is a reality for those trapped
in besieged areas. Twice this month we have spoken
about Yarmouk, where when aid even reaches people,
400 calories per day are allotted to them, well below
even the most minimal nutritional requirements. Aid
deliveries have not been seen in Darayya since October
2012, in eastern Ghouta since January of this year, and
in Mouadamiya for over a year. It is frightening to even
try to imagine how people survive there.

The Syrian Government's failure to protect its
own population is astounding. Bureaucratic and other
obstacles compound the humanitarian suffering.
Ms. Valerie Amos has spoken repeatedly about the
obstacles, and she did so again today very eloquently.

Just recently, nine World Health Organization
requests to deliver assistance to locations in Aleppo,
Dar'a, rural Damascus, Idlib and other areas have gone
unanswered. Last month, United Nations agencies were
able to reach only 4 per cent of the people under siege
with food, and only 0.3 per cent with health assistance.
More than 60 per cent of hospitals have been damaged
or destroyed; doctors have fled or been killed. Even the
very basic services are often unavailable. The regime
continues to systematically remove surgical supplies
and other necessary items, including, as we have heard
today, even polio vaccines - what harm does polio
vaccine do to any one? - from humanitarian aid. Why?

The shameful constraints imposed on humanitarian
operations and the attacks on humanitarian and medical
workers are a clear breach of international humanitarian
law and show blatant disregard for resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). If the Security
Council does not take its own resolutions seriously, how
can it expect others to implement them? The Council
must be firm in its demand for the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions and seek accountability for
the failure to do so. After four years of lawlessness and
impunity, it is time to increase the pressure.

The stakes are high, and not only the stakes
pertaining to the credibility of the Council, which
has certainly been dented by the crisis in Syria. The
stakes are particularly high for the people of Syria
and Syria's neighbours who have absorbed the largest
numbers of refugees. Lebanon, for example, has the
most refugees per capita in the world. Jordan must
have received 1 million. That is a huge strain on their
economies and stability. Tensions between refugees and
host communities risk destroying local infrastructure,
complicating services and fraying the social fabric. If
that happens, the consequences will be overwhelming
and spill well beyond the region. Today's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2015/10) speaks clearly of these
risks.

Children under the age of 17 make up almost
50 per cent of the refugee population. They struggle
with multiple challenges, including family separation,
exposure to physical and psychological violence, child
labour and exploitation, early forced marriages and
recruitment by armed groups. According to Save the
Children, four out of five Syrian children who fled to
Lebanon are out ofschool. Inside Syria, a fifth ofschools
were either destroyed, damaged or are used for military
purposes. An entire generation is being lost. Children
grow up deprived of access to education and therefore
of a future - a future that is also Syria's lost future.
Women refugees are forced to break with the traditional
familial and social roles and become breadwinners for
their children in a highly hostile environment and are
much more likely to become targets of abuse, rape and
prostitution. Ms. Cousin referred to these issues very
eloquently. Refugees are easy prey to traffickers and
organized criminal gangs; while refugee camps, a boon
for radicalization and terrorist recruitment. Given the
much too common marriage of convenience between
transnational organized crime and terrorism, the
risks posed by such extended crises, as in Syria, are
enormous.

We therefore welcome the adoption today of the
comprehensive presidential statement S/PRST/2015/10,
which stresses the importance of comprehensive
responses, including sustainable funding; providing
support for national response plans; addressing the
humanitarian needs of refugees, in particular women
and children; strengthening the resilience of host
countries; preventing radicalization and countering the
threat of terrorism and foreign terrorist fighters.

Mrs. Kawar took the Chair.

As much as we may seek to curb the flows of illegal
migrants and refugees, the core of the issue is the
political settlement of the crises that plague the region.
The only sustainable solution to the current crisis in
Syria is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political
process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people, with a view to the full implementation
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) of
30 June 2012.

Likewise, viable political solutions must be found
in Libya and elsewhere in the region and existing
legitimate grievances must be addressed. We shall
choke and run out of funds at an increasing pace if
conflicts themselves are not tackled. Inclusiveness,
justice and accountability are the key building blocks
necessary to tackle the crises that are at the core of the
unprecedented refugee flows.

The Council must throw its full weight behind the
ongoing mediation and peace efforts in order to change
the current deadly calculus. At the same time, it must
be ready to use all the instruments at its disposal to
put an end to impunity and bring the perpetrators
of ongoing horrific crimes and abuses to account,
including through the International Criminal Court.
Failure to act condemns new generations to a life of
destitution, displacement and violent death. Failure to
act increasingly questions the relevance of the Council
in today's world. Is this a legacy we are willing to leave
to the future?

