Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate Ukraine on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to wish the Ukrainian delegation every success.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

(spoke in English)

I would like to express my delegation's appreciation
for the convening of today's open debate and the
relevant choice of topic, one whose connection to the
security of my country and the life and well-being
of my people is critically important. We would like
to take this opportunity to once again reiterate our
strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of motive and wherever,
whenever and by whomever it is committed. Algeria
also reiterates its determination to continue fighting
terrorism and violent extremism, as well as warning
against any misconceptions or tendentious associations
of terrorism with specific religions, civilizations or
geographic areas.

From our point of view, the fight against violent
extremism and terrorism must also include the fight
against xenophobia and Islamophobia. Algeria strongly
believes that preventing and combating terrorism,
including protecting critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks and threats, require a high level of
vigilance and mobilization. It is clear that this battle
cannot be limited exclusively to the security dimension;
it must deploy a coherent national strategy, upstream
and downstream.

Inthe specific areaoftheprotectionofinfrastructure,
Algeria has enacted significant qualitative measures
and made major efforts that have helped to ensure a
secure environment for all its infrastructure, public and
private. We won our battle against terrorism, a scourge
that affected much of our national infrastructure during
the 1990s. In addition, we have taken significant steps
to ensure the security of our borders. The protection of
our infrastructure remains at the heart of our national
strategy, through action that is well coordinated among
the various security forces, each in its specific field
of action.

Resolution 2341 (2017), adopted earlier today,
puts the emphasis on international cooperation and
timely information-sharing. For its part, Algeria's
efforts to combat terrorism and to improve regional
and international awareness and cooperation in
that connection predate the manifestation of major
international acts of terrorism. From the beginning, we
have striven to strengthen anti-terrorism efforts at the
national, regional and international levels. We would
like to underline the importance of consolidating efforts
with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy by enhancing cooperation at bilateral, regional
and international levels, strengthening capabilities
and exchanging best practices and expertise on
combating terrorism.

Algeria continues to make every effort to enhance
coordination and cooperation, especially in the Sahel
region. The current context requires both coordination
and strengthening the capacities of the countries of
the region on the basis of the principle of ownership.
Algeria has engaged in a concerted approach via
many cooperation mechanisms, thereby ensuring a
great contribution to facilitating the deepening of
security cooperation among the countries concerned,
by coordinating and strengthening border-control
measures and sharing intelligence. The significant
military forces deployed at Algeria's borders participate
in the Government's efforts to ensure not just our own
national security but also that of our neighbours.

While we support the importance of protecting
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks, we
firmly believe that the battle against that dreadful
scourge must be waged every day and in every area
of activity, whether political, institutional, economic,
cultural, religious, educational or social. Any hope of
success requires the active involvement of all national
institutions, all societal stakeholders and all citizens.

Lastly, Algeria will remain actively engaged in
efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism
at every level, and will contribute constructively to
advancing efforts to put an end to terrorism, including
through the work of the General Assembly.

