Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Herve Ladsous and the three Force
Commanders for their briefings.

United Nations peacekeeping has evolved
throughout its history, overcoming new challenges that
have arisen from time to time. As resolution 2086 (2013)
epitomizes, a multidimensional approach is increasingly
important. There is also growing recognition ofthe need
for a more robust mandate. The Intervention Brigade in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali offer the most recent evidence of that
evolution. There are also cases like that of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force, where a
typical mission with a traditional mandate has to adapt
itself to a harshly changing environment.

The changing environment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations may raise challenges for
the Force Commanders on the ground. Against that
backdrop, my delegation salutes all heads of military
components here today and everyone under their
command for their professionalism, dedication and
courage. In order to ensure the efficient implementation
of peacekeeping mandates, the capabilities of missions
should be enhanced with strategic insight, utilizing
all available means, including troop enforcement, the
application of modern technology and inter-mission
cooperation.

I would like to comment on two points. First,
inter-mission cooperation is useful in its nature as a
short-term stopgap measure. Nonetheless, the transition
of troops between missions cannot be considered
lightly and should be dealt with very cautiously because
it requires the consent of the relevant parties, including
the troop-contributing countries. Even the successful
case of inter-mission cooperation between the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and United Nations
Mission in Liberia, which Major General Iqbal Asi
elaborated on today, did not include major troop
transitions, but mainly the movement of equipment
such as helicopters.

Secondly, with regard to modern technology, my
delegation supports its application to peacekeeping
as a matter of principle. We are well aware that new
undertakings always entail new questions. However,
we believe that the development of technology will
strengthen efficiency and reduce the cost of our future
activities, as it has in the past. It was in that vein that
we supported the Secretary-General's recommendation
to enhance the operational mobility and surveillance
capability of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The adoption of new technologies for
peacekeeping is likely to bring about new tasks for
the Secretariat. We expect the Secretariat to exert
extra efforts in this regard, to cooperate with the
troop-contributing countries that have the ability and
willingness to provide technology. Also, the political
and legal implications for introducing technology need
to be fully and further analysed.

In terms of the presentation by General Dos Santos
Cruz on the adoption of advanced military technology in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I have a similar
question for the Force Commander of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. In places such as Darfur or
Jonglei, the technological improvement of the Mission's
intelligence capability could greatly contribute to the
protection of troops and the implementation of their
mandate. The question I would appreciate answered is
whether a sufficient level of intelligence is available
for his decision-making. Does he find any specific
limitations on the Mission's capabilities?

In conclusion, today's briefing reminded us all that
the responsibility of the Security Council lies not only
in giving tasks to field missions, but also in ensuring
that they are provided with sufficient capabilities. May
we all be equal to the task.

