Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to start by
saying that, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), we welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2501 (2019), on the
renewal of the mandate of the 1267/1988 Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, which will
contribute positively towards efforts to bring about
peace and stability. That is a good start and shows that
the Security Council is united in helping Afghanistan.
We would also like to thank Special Representative ofthe
Secretary-General Yamamoto as well as Ms. Khurram
for their briefings. I also listened attentively to
Ambassador Adela Raz, the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, and thank her for her statement.

Afghanistan's resilience in the face of the issues
described by the briefer is admirable. As crucial as
intra-Afghan reconciliation and a collective Afghan
effort are to achieving durable peace and development,
we in the Council must also be united and unremitting
in supporting Afghanistan. As I just mentioned, the
adoption of resolution 2501 (2019) is clearly a show of
our unity.

Indonesia remains fully committed to assisting
Afghanistan in restoring peace and normalcy. As
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto also said, which I heard clearly, there are
numerous positive developments. We concur with those
assessments, but the most important part is to build
on those gains. That is a significant point. We should
continue to build with care in the areas of human rights,
justice, good governance and, of course, inclusiveness.

We would like to highlight three additional points,
the first being the election. We welcome the presidential
election that took place on 20 September at 4,678 polling
centres across 34 provinces. A total of 2.69 million
Afghans voted amid grave security challenges.
Indeed, many more would have voted if there had been
better security. The election once again demonstrates
Afghans' clear commitment to a democratic system.
We hope that the results will not be delayed further and
that once they are announced, all parties will address
any complaints they have through the appropriate
channels and processes, in line with Afghanistan's
legal framework. We also thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its
support to both the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission. As the
country moves towards stability, UNAMA's work will
continue to be indispensable, and in that regard I join
others in thanking Mr. Yamamoto and his team for their
excellent work so far. We of course hope that after the
election is finalized the future leaders of Afghanistan
will continue with national reconciliation efforts, good
governance and development as a priority, without
which it will be hard to achieve stability.
My secondpoint concernsthe security andprotection
of civilians. Indonesia is deeply concerned about the
continued high numbers of casualties, particularly
among civilians. According to UNAMA, 41 per cent of
all the country's recorded civilian casualties in the third
quarter were women and children. That is unacceptable.
The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/935) states
that the conflict in Afghanistan remains the world's
deadliest for children. The numbers are heartbreaking
and include attacks on United Nations personnel and
innocent workers from humanitarian and international
organizations, which we condemn. In that regard, I
would like to express our condolences to the families
of Mr. Anil Raj and Dr. Tetsu Nakamura. That must all
end. Indonesia appeals urgently to all the parties to stop
the violence and to abide by international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

My third point is about the peace process and
the role of women and young people. We concur with
the Secretary-General's observation that the current
moment represents perhaps the most significant chance
to date for a negotiated settlement. Underscoring the
importance of an intra-Afghan peace process that is led
and owned by the Afghans themselves, we emphasize
the need for the continued support of all the countries
of the region to the promotion of peace in Afghanistan.
Enduring peace and nation-building will also be elusive
if the role of Afghan women and young people does
not increase. We are glad that today we have Ms. Aisha
Khurram representing youth here and giving a clear
voice to the call for reconciliation and to us all. I hope
that all of us, not only here in the Chamber but outside
as well, will hear her appeal to us on behalf of the young
people of Afghanistan to continue helping in the peace
process. We salute her for the work she has done.

With regard to the role of women, Indonesia is
actively supporting activities that include capacity-
building for Afghan women and their active participation
in the peace process. In Jakarta we recently hosted a
dialogue for Afghan women and women from every
party in Indonesia on the role of women in building
and sustaining peace. Afghan women from both rural
and urban regions discussed experiences and lessons
learned with their Indonesian counterparts, and
hopefully, as my colleague the Ambassador of Germany
mentioned, that can also lead to greater participation
by women in Afghanistan's active political life.
Mrs. Marsudi, our Foreign Minister, is keen to remain
personally engaged in helping to facilitate Afghan
women's robust participation in peacebuilding. She
has also joined the Group of Friends of Women in
Afghanistan, recently launched by my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives of Afghan and the United
Kingdom, whom we thank for that. I can assure them
that Indonesia will continue to contribute positively to
that effort. We believe in that cause, and we believe in
helping Afghanistan.

In conclusion, as we are almost at the end of 2019,
we pray that the new year will bring the normalcy and
peace that the people of Afghanistan have waited for so
long. While all Afghan stakeholders should resume an
intra-Afghan dialogue accompanied by an immediate
nationwide ceasefire, we should also work to contribute
effectively to helping Afghanistan emerge from its
challenges. Ms. Khurram has challenged us and clearly
articulated the hope of Afghan youth, so it is up to all of
us here to fulfil her dream and her destiny.

