Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Madam Minister, we are very happy to see
you presiding over this meeting of the Security Council
and leading the Philippine delegation, which has been
providing a very effective presidency for the current
month.
The Security Council's consideration of the
various conflict situations on its agenda and the
experiences of United Nations peacekeeping operations
have shown that restoring solid peace and achieving
genuine settlements in countries that have undergone a
crisis is possible only by means of a comprehensive
approach. An integral part of that approach is civil
society's participation in that process. Civil society's
active participation is an important requirement for
achieving true national reconciliation. That
participation spans a broad range of activities, from
establishing national commissions on truth and
reconciliation and organizing international dialogues to
participating in transitional Governments of national
unity.

Civil society is an important link between a
Government and the various political groups and often
emerges as a factor in the promotion of peace talks and
in overcoming obstacles to national reconciliation.
Unfortunately, not all participants in civil society take
unbiased positions that are politically neutral. The
outbreak of violence that took place in March in
Kosovo and the recurring crises in Haiti are persuasive
evidence of the importance of establishing a mature
civil society for post-conflict consolidation.

Peace-building work can be most effective when
a national Government successfully interacts with civil
society and peacekeeping missions, with a key role
played by the United Nations. An important role can
also be played by regional organizations and by
international non-governmental organizations. It is
clear, therefore, that the United Nations could help
pool the efforts of all the participants and channel them
into a common, constructive direction.

The activities of civil society are closely
interwoven with the question of the protection of
human rights. It is only natural; NGOs, in their work
with civil society, unfortunately encounter instances of
human rights violations, to which they react. Moreover,
non-governmental organizations can serve as a
barometer, detecting trends that could pose a threat to
the stabilization process. In that way, they can be a key
element in conflict-prevention machinery at an early
stage. We must also bear in mind, however, that
information provided by NGOs can sometimes be of a
subjective nature.

The experience of the United Nations in various
parts of the world makes clear the indissociable link
between the establishment of peace and fully fledged
socio-economic recovery for those in countries that
have suffered from conflicts. Our discussion today
corroborates the importance of interaction between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
in the area of post-conflict peace-building and
restoration. That is the area where, first and foremost,
mutually complementary efforts must be made by the
principal organs of the United Nations, including
appropriate consideration of the potential of civil
society.

We believe that, with respect to the work of
NGOs in rendering humanitarian assistance and
helping those in need, we have an international
clearinghouse for these matters - namely the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
has at its disposal a full array of interaction
mechanisms in that area. The Inter-Agency Standing
Committee is also a very effective instrument for
coordination.

The role of civil society in post-conflict peace-
building is not limited to the provision of assistance in
the resolution of thorny humanitarian and socio-
economic problems. In the restoration process, it must
also be a driving force in State-building and in setting
up criminal justice and rule of law systems. Without
the active participation of civil society, it is impossible
to work, on a solid and long-term basis, for the
restoration of a normal civilian life and ensure the
irreversibility of the peace process as well as the
establishment of political institutions and judiciary and
law enforcement systems.

A comprehensive approach to resolving such
crisis situations requires uninterrupted and consistent
work in the transition from one phase to the next. In
that regard, it is of great importance to have the
political support of the Security Council for
peacekeeping efforts, which are to be carried out under
the Charter of the United Nations and through the
relevant United Nations organs and its specialized
agencies. It is the active involvement of civil society
organizations in such peace-building efforts that will
help truly to strengthen the role of NGOs in post-
conflict situations.

Finally, in terms of the interrelation between the
Security Council and NGOs, it is our delegation's
opinion that a positive kind of practice has developed
in this type of cooperation, which pleases us. That
practice is based on the Charter of the United Nations
and relates to the real need for communication between
the Security Council and civil society. It does not seem
to us that we should deviate from the framework of
that practice.
