Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I'd like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report and for his
presence here and once again Mr. Kouchner for his full,
comprehensive and exhaustive briefing today.

One year on, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
international security force (KFOR) have a substantial
record of achievement, which is all too easily obscured
by individual events. Mr. Kouchner and his staff
deserve the thanks of the Council for their efforts and
for the progress they have made in extraordinarily
demanding conditions since last June. It would be
wrong to minimize the present difficulties in Kosovo or
the future challenges. But it would be even more wrong
to forget how bad the inheritance was, a province most
of whose population had been expelled or displaced by
its own Government, the effects of a decade of
apartheid and 18 months of accelerating repression and
immense physical and social destruction. As Mr.
Kouchner has said, UNMIK has laid the foundation for
a new society in Kosovo. The international community
needs to sustain its help, in particular in justice, law
and order.

The United Kingdom is actively engaged in this
endeavour. We have just doubled our contribution to
the United Nations international police. Fifty-six
Ministry of Defense police officers arrived in Kosovo
this week. We are working with UNMIK to establish a
criminal intelligence unit. Today, UNMIK officials are
in London interviewing United Kingdom candidates to
serve as international prosecutors. We hope this will
meet at least some of the need for international legal
personnel that Mr. Kouchner has identified. We are also
making our best effort to respond promptly to
UNMIK's demands for staffing and other resources.
We encourage - and indeed it is vitally important -
that other Member States should do the same. We
welcome action taken by the United Nations to
decentralize and accelerate recruitment. The right
procedures, which cut through red tape and which
safeguard transparency and accountability, are essential
if we are to respond to UNMIK's needs fully and
quickly.

In his report, the Secretary-General has recorded
the progress being made in developing institutions in
Kosovo. We commend UNMIK for this work. The Joint
Interim Administrative Structure has made some
important progress. In particular, we welcome the
establishment of some 20 joint departments and some
recent statements from the IAC, the Interim
Administrative Council, which demonstrate significant
inter-ethnic cooperation. We believe that the best way
for the Kosovo Serbs, Roma and other communities to
promote their legitimate stake in Kosovo's future is to
play a full part in these joint institutions, in the
municipal elections this autumn and in UNMIK's
further work.

We regret the decision by the Serb National
Council to suspend its participation in the Joint
Administration. We understand and share the security
concerns of the Kosovo Serb community, and I too saw
the delegation yesterday and was impressed by the
points they made. But we strongly believe that the best
way forward is for the Serb community to continue
their cooperation with UNMIK, KFOR and with the
other communities in Kosovo. The United Kingdom is
contributing special assistance to improve life for Serbs
in Kosovo, in particular through helping to fund an
independent radio station for that community. Mr.
President, I hope this will go some way towards
providing the information capacity for which the Serb
delegation asked you this morning.

We support UNMIK and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in their
efforts to organize free and fair elections this autumn.
We call on all residents of Kosovo to register and vote
in order to guarantee Kosovo's multi-ethnic future. We
regret that Belgrade is, so far, preventing registration
by Kosovo Serbs now in Serbia. That is not in the
Serbs' own interest. We call on the authorities in
Belgrade in the strongest terms to immediately reverse
this policy, to allow registration in Serbia and to
encourage Kosovo Serbs to exercise their democratic
rights.

We support strongly Mr. Kouchner's intention, as
he told us in March, to develop provisional institutions
to provide for the substantial autonomy and self-
government for Kosovo foreseen in Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). This process, which will follow
naturally from the local elections later this year, should
help take forward democratization, promote
moderation and marginalize extremism.

I want to close by referring to extremism and
violence. Both are the strongest single threat to our
efforts in Kosovo. Whether inspired locally or
manipulated from outside the province, extremism and
violence represent a menace which we must all
confront. We welcome the statements issued by Mr.
Rugova and Mr. Thaci today calling for all violence to
cease. I cannot underline too strongly the necessity for
Violence to cease. This point was made forcefully in
Kosovo by the recent Security Council mission to the
territory, and it bears repeating. The people of Kosovo,
particularly the majority Albanian community, must
realize that the support of the international community
is bound to be adversely affected if violence and
intimidation are not curbed. That, Mr. President, is the
key message I would like to leave with you and them
today.

