Mr. Qin Huasun (China)(interpretation from Chinese): During the deliberations on the present item in
the Security Council, the Chinese delegation has
reaffirmed on many occasions that it has consistently and
resolutely been opposed to any form of terrorist activities.

In our view, all terrorists should be brought to
justice. The attempt on the life of President Mubarak of
Egypt constitutes a serious incident. All sides concerned
should join in a common effort to apprehend the suspects
for prosecution. Ever since the Council adopted Security
Council resolution 1054 (1996), all sides concerned have
made considerable efforts to implement its relevant
provisions. In his report, the Secretary-General also
pointed out that as a party directly concerned, the Sudan
has on many occasions indicated in specific terms its
opposition to terrorism and has taken some practical
actions. In our View, the Council should continue to
encourage all sides to make greater efforts in order to
settle the question as soon as possible.
China's position of principle on sanctions is a
consistent one. We do not consider sanctions a panacea
because sanctions, or the tightening of sanctions, cannot
solve a problem; they may, on the contrary, further
aggravate the problem. Restrictions on Sudan Airways
constitute an escalation in the sanctions regime on the
Sudan.

 

Although the draft resolution before us does not
determine the date of entry into force of its provisions, it
represents a clear decision on imposing such sanctions. This
question concerning the Sudan is already quite complicated.
We are concerned that tightening sanctions against the
Sudan might further compound the problem. The Chinese
delegation proposed some amendments to the draft
resolution during consultations. These reasonable
suggestions have regrettably not found acceptance.
Therefore, we cannot but abstain in the vote on the draft
resolution before us.

We believe that as long as the parties concerned
pursue the path of dialogue and consultations in good faith
and with seriousness of purpose, a satisfactory solution can
ultimately be found to all problems. We earnestly hope that
this will happen.

