Ms. Mohammed: I would like to start by
commending the presidency of Indonesia for convening
today's open debate on the very important subject of
civilian protection in times of conflict. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
briefing today, as well as his report on the topic
(S/2019/373). and I thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of the Center
for Civilians in Conflict, for their insightful briefings
at the start of today's debate.

The African Union (AU) is fully committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and continues
to strengthen its normative and legal frameworks for
enhancing such protection. Over the past decade, the
AU has responded to many situations in which civilians
were caught up in the middle of fighting or directly
targeted by the negative forces of terrorist groups. In
that regard, it should be recalled that the transformation
in 2002 of the Organization of African Unity into the
African Union was marked by the transition from a
doctrine of non-interference to one of non-indifference
to human suffering. As a result, AU peace support
operations in Africa have been increasingly tasked
with protecting civilians. To a greater or lesser degree,
almost all the peace operations authorized by the Peace
and Security Council since 2003 have faced protection
challenges throughout the course of their deployment
and have used varying strategies to address them.
This is in response to the fact that in the context of
contemporary conflicts, civilians are victims of
atrocities and violations and have become clear targets
for attack by armed actors. At least 600,000 African
civilians, in 27 countries, have been killed during
conflicts in the past 20 years, with millions more
wounded and displaced.

In that regard, I want to highlight the experience
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
which remains one ofthe best illustrations ofthe growing
AU commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In the more than a decade since its deployment
in 2007, AMISOM. has achieved undeniable security
and political gains while ensuring the protection of
the Somali civilian population from the terrorist threat
through its active military operations in the country.
AMISOM. continues to ensure that its operations are
conducted in compliance with the applicable provisions
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In that regard, a series of training
and awareness-raising programmes were conducted to
familiarize personnel with appropriate measures for
protecting women and girls from sexual and gender-
based violence, including sexual exploitation and abuse.

The importance of the protection of civilians for
the AU is further demonstrated by its zero-tolerance
position on sexual exploitation and abuse. In order
to maintain it, we have been working very closely
with the United Nations to enhance compliance with
international instruments in peace support operations,
which is in line with the joint African Union-United
Nations strategic framework documents, including
the 19 April 2017 Joint African Union-United Nations
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, as part of the ongoing efforts to secure
predictable and sustainable financing for AU peace
support operations.

We recognize that women are still the principal
victims of sexual and other forms of violence and
discrimination in times of conflict, and that they also
remain key partners as leaders at the community,
national and regional levels. We therefore have a
responsibility for ensuring the protection of women
and children in situations where they are threatened
or affected by violence, in line with the relevant AU
and international instruments. While the necessary
instruments for the protection of women and children
in conflict and for the promotion of their rights exist,
the pace of their implementation, despite the progress
that has been made, remains slow, and we must call on
all concerned stakeholders to fully implement them in
the promotion of the protection of civilians, particularly
in conflict situations.

Before concluding, I would like to share a few
lessons learned from the AU's experience in the field.
The African Union's experience has highlighted the
importance of the protection of civilians for the overall
success of peace efforts on the ground. The gaps and
challenges confronting today's multidimensional peace
support operations go far beyond the protection debate
as such. The protection of civilians is central to the
purpose and legitimacy of any peace operation. Any
failure in properly implementing the protection-of-
civilians mandate carries a high risk of turning
populations against an international military presence,
which is very detrimental, particularly in asymmetrical
threat environments. We recognize that peace processes
that do not bring a level of security to the civilian
population cannot succeed. Successful peace operations
must rely on both the local civilian population and
external partners to help to build peace and sustain the
political momentum behind peace processes.

Finally, our experience has highlighted the need to
devise effective systems of information-gathering and
analysis that detect patterns of atrocities and develop
strategies and operational approaches that would
enable militaries to effectively protect civilians from
physical violence.

