In any armed conflict, the most important thing is to put an end to the bloodshed and suffering of the civilian population. To ensure that, the warring sides need to sit down at the negotiation table. The Libyan crisis can have only a political and diplomatic solution. There is no alternative to a peaceful settlement that would meet the interests of all elements of the Libyan community. We regret that the once powerful State of Libya now lies in ruins because of a NATO intervention and that the whole region has to pay for the consequences of those illegal actions. We welcome the signing of a domestic ceasefire agreement in Libya and call on both sides to meet their obligations under it. We also commend the ongoing round of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum as a means of ensuring a peaceful settlement in the country. In our contacts with a wide range of Libyan stakeholders, we have called on them to join this dialogue in a constructive and responsible manner. Many believe that to hold the guilty accountable means to unlock the path towards peace. That is not always the case, especially when the matter involves a biased, politicized and incompetent international judicial body. The report presented today by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), like all of the Court's previous reports on Libya, is yet further evidence of the strategy of discriminate justice that the ICC has chosen. When dealing with the events of 2011, the Court decided not to investigate civilian deaths caused by NATO strikes. Similar approaches are characteristic of investigations of crimes committed in Tripoli, Tarhouna and their suburbs. The ICC is not likely to take real steps to investigate the acts committed by all sides of the Libyan conflict. The question then is, does the ICC serve as a stabilizing factor or as an obstacle to the peace process? Once Libya has ensured sustainable peace, its national judicial system will be able hold the guilty to account on its own. It will not need the ICC.
