Mr. Abe: Allow me to introduce the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms as contained in
document S/2003/12l7. The present report was
prepared by the Department for Disarmament Affairs in
close consultation with the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(Interpol). Pursuant to the request made by the
President of the Security Council in his statement on
31 October 2002, the report provides an overview of
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General's previous report on small
arms (S/2002/1053). Those recommendations covered
four main topics, namely: first, the implementation of
the Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons; secondly, Security Council mandated
sanctions and arms embargoes; thirdly, conflict
prevention, peace-building and the demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration of former combatants,
and fourthly, confidence-building measures.

The present report highlights the progress made
in respect of tracing illicit small arms and light
weapons; demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration; control over the export and transit of
small arms and light weapons; the links between illicit
small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources, and
transparency in armaments.
The report also identifies some areas of greater
challenge, namely: the enforcement of Security
Council resolutions on sanctions; the imposition of
coercive measures against Member States that
deliberately violate arms embargoes; restriction on the
supply of ammunition to areas of instability; and the
need to finance demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration programmes through the assessed budget
for peacekeeping operations.

Today's open debate on small arms takes place in
the wake of two events of particular significance in the
global fight against the proliferation of illicit small
arms and light weapons. I am referring first, to the First
Biennial Meeting of States, held in New York from 7 to
11 July 2003, which allowed States, international and
regional organizations and civil society to draw lessons
from the first two years of implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted at the July 2001 United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects; and secondly,
the establishment, by the General Assembly at its fifty-
eighth session, of an open-ended working group to
negotiate an international instrument on tracing illicit
small arms and light weapons, which will start its
substantive work soon.

The Secretary-General is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council to address the
challenge posed by illicit small arms and light weapons
in the context of situations under the Council's
consideration. I trust that this meeting will contribute
to strengthening the achievements obtained thus far, as
well as to identifying the best approaches to address
the areas of continued concern.

