Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Martin Griffiths for
his very detailed and illuminating briefing and for
his initial assessment of the steps needed to revive
political negotiations in the difficult situation we are
seeing. I would like to assure the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen of the full support and
faith of France. I also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
efforts and for his briefing, which shows how worrying
the situation is in Yemen.

Today I will focus on three points: the growing
intensity of the Yemeni conflict and the regional
impact of the crisis; the ongoing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation; and the need to relaunch the
political process.

We are all aware of the gravity of the situation in
Yemen. France has consistently called on the parties
to resume the path of negotiations under the auspices
of the United Nations without preconditions, because,
as we all know, there is no military solution to the
conflict. We also emphasize the urgent need to lay
down weapons.

In that context, the latest firing of missiles into
Saudi Arabia is unacceptable and must stop. In addition
to the gravity of those indiscriminate missile launches
and their impact on regional security and stability, they
reduce the potential of a political outcome in Yemen.
We have repeatedly expressed our concern about the
launching of Houthi ballistic missiles into Saudi Arabia
and the Red Sea and have condemned those launches.
In this extremely tense regional context, we call for
calm from the parties. Let us also bear in mind that
the continuation of the conflict benefits only terrorist
groups, who use the chaos to strengthen and expand
their presence. That is an important factor that must
bring us together.

The first victims of this conflict are civilians, in a
context where the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. This humanitarian crisis is among the most
serious in the world. We have repeatedly welcomed the
announcement of the Coalition's humanitarian plan,
which is a positive and encouraging step. We also
welcome the adoption of the recent presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/5, which defines the humanitarian road
map. Finally, the donor conference held earlier this
month in Geneva enabled the mobilization of about
$2 billion for the 2018 Yemen humanitarian response
plan. That is a very good result, even though the gap
has not yet been completely filled.

In that context, access to humanitarian aid remains
our main concern. It is crucial that all parties ensure
rapid, safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance and commercial supplies to those in need.
Access to all ports and airports, including the ports of
Al-Hudayda, Saleef and Sana'a airport, must be fully
assured and kept open. In that regard, we welcome
the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism, which is intended to shorten the waiting
time for commercial vessels. It is essential that supplies
cover all needs, be they food, medicine or gasoline. The
current coverage rate is still insufficient, especially
for fuel.

Another top priority is to ensure full respect for
international humanitarian law in order to protect
civilian populations and humanitarian and medical
personnel. The parties must respect the zones and
periods reserved for the arrival of supplies and
humanitarian and medical personnel. I am referring in
particular to Sana'a airport.
We remain concerned about the situation
of displaced persons, and specifically about the
vulnerability of over 3 million women at risk of sexual
violence, as well as the threat of a new cholera and
diphtheria epidemic in the coming months. The parties
must help the United Nations respond to that danger in
at-risk regions.

France will remain fully mobilized to concretely
improve the situation of the Yemeni population. The
President of France, Emmanuel Macron, has announced
that a humanitarian conference on Yemen will be held by
this summer in Paris in order to launch new initiatives
for the civilian population and better protect them from
violations of international humanitarian law. Naturally,
we wish to be in close contact with the Special Envoy,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, but also with Mr. Mark Lowcock,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, as well as relevant United Nations agencies in
order to prepare this conference properly.

In that critical context, we must, alongside our
humanitarian commitment, remain more mobilized
than ever to support a new political dynamic - the
only sustainable outcome to this conflict. The arrival
of Martin Griffiths gives the opportunity to all parties
to re-engage seriously without preconditions in the
negotiations. To carry out its mission, the Special
Envoy must have access to all regions and countries
where he wishes to go, without any party preventing or
jeopardizing his movements.

In the same spirit, we must continue to convey
to regional actors a clear message on the need to play
a responsible and constructive role in Yemen. We
believe that everyone can contribute to a solution. Our
common goal must be to achieve a lasting cessation
of hostilities and to encourage the parties, in support
of United Nations mediation, to resume dialogue for a
comprehensive and inclusive political agreement, while
respecting the territorial integrity of the country.

Finally, the unity of the Security Council is
of vital importance, and we - individually and
collectively - have a role to play in that regard.
The robust and united support of the international
community is indeed essential if we are to prompt the
parties to resume the path of dialogue. Despite the scale
of the difficulties we are experiencing, there is now an
encouraging alignment of the planets that could create
a historic opportunity to end the Yemeni conflict. Let
us work together to bring about the conditions for such
an outcome by supporting the Special Envoy. Council
members can rest assured of France's firm commitment
to that end.

