The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing. Japan appreciates the efforts by the Secretariat
to compile the recommendations contained in the letter
of the Secretary-General.

This year the Council has had several meetings on
peacekeeping, including the open debate on reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations (S/PV.8051),
in which resolution 2378 (2017) was adopted,
under Ethiopia's presidency. It has been repeatedly
emphasized that there are persistent force generation,
capacities and capabilities gaps. Japan believes that
training and capacity-building are important tools
to fill the gaps. In particular, training and capacity-
building need to be well linked to actual deployments
of troop- and police-contributing countries. To ensure
that training and capacity-building happens, successful
matchmaking by the Secretariat between providers and
recipients is essential.

Not only the Secretariat but also missions on the
ground can play a role in ensuring the linkage between
training and capacity-building and deployments.
Missions can contribute to identifying training and
capacity-building requirements from their experience
on the ground and report them to New York. A
mission review provides a good opportunity for
recommendations from the field. The Council should
consider including in the mandate of a mission review
an evaluation what the Secretariat and missions can do
to address the specific gaps ofthe mission under review.

The ongoing United Nations reform should result
in a more effective working relationship between
the Secretariat Headquarters and the missions.
Through United Nations reform, fragmentation
within the Secretariat should be eliminated, and
nimble communication between the Secretariat and
the missions should be enhanced. There should be
increased synergy in the area of training and capacity-
building between New York and the missions.

The United Nations is not the only actor that is
called to address the capabilities gaps. Filling the gaps
must be a collective effort by the wider community of
Member States. Many good examples were shared in the
2017 United Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Conference held in Vancouver. The Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations can
also be utilized. I propose that the Working Group
and the Special Committee organize a joint session
to take stock of existing efforts and pledges, identify
challenges and share ideas for improvements.

Tangible contributions and assistance by Member
States are also vital. Japan welcomes the Secretary-
General's letter recommending the expansion of the
Triangular Partnership Project to include additional
geographical regions and additional enabling
capabilities. This month Japan decided to provide
further support to the United Nations Signals Academy.
Japan will further enhance training and capacity-
building support in countries of the Indo-Pacific region
which spreads from the Asia-Pacific to Africa.

I sincerely hope that views and proposals raised
by Council members today will lead to discussions
and concrete actions in 2018. That is how we will be
able to institutionalize a virtuous loop of training and
capacity-building and deployment within the United
Nations system. Japan will continue to be committed to
this collective endeavour to fill the gap by contributing
in discussions in New York and providing tangible
support to troop- and police-contributing countries.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 5.50 pm.
