Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Miroslav Jenea,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, for their substantive briefings. The
complex, multifaceted topics they touched on require a
painstaking and consistent approach on the part of the
international community and thorough and impartial
study by experts. Any labelling or attempts to use
contradictory and subjective media reports, often
hastily put together, to identify the guilty and condemn
them only make it harder for us to arrive at a solution.

In our opinion, the situation in the Rakhine
national region, including its northern areas adjacent
to Bangladesh, remains difficult but in general under
control. The Myanmar authorities' planned social and
economic development efforts there have in large part
contributed to that, and steps are being taken to create
special economic zones in the region. In the town of
Maungdaw, in particular, the central market, which
has more than 400 trade outlets, has reopened, and 16
closed-circuit television cameras have been installed
for security and monitoring purposes. It is important
to note that the central and regional authorities are
prioritizing housing construction and modernization
of road and transport infrastructure. In northern
Rakhine, one transit and two reception centres for
receiving refugees have been built, with 640 shelters
that can provide temporary housing for more than
30,000 refugees.

Regarding the international community attention
to the efforts in Naypyidaw to implement the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission led
by Kofi Annan, we commend the work of the group
of advisers under the Myanmar ministerial committee
led by Thailand's former Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Surakiart Sathirathai.

The expanded access to Rakhine state being
granted to foreign observers is a positive step. In
particular, a number of groups of journalists have
visited the region in recent weeks, including employees
of Russian television. On 6 February, representatives of
neighbouring states visited Rakhine, and the authorities
organized a similar trip for representatives of the local
diplomatic corps on 9 February. They visited the Kanyin
Chaung economic zone and Ngakunya settlement,
as well as refugee transit and reception camps. An
inspection of the border zone was even arranged for the
first of those groups.

The situation regarding the repatriation of refugees
continues to be very difficult, but we see some positive
signs there too. We note the steps taken by Naypyidaw
and Dhaka to implement their agreement, signed on
23 November 2017, on a programme for the return
of persons displaced from Rakhine, including the
convening on 15 and 16 January of the first meeting of
the bilateral working group and its adoption of a plan
for the return of Muslims who have fled to Bangladesh.
In our View, the document has laid a foundation for
solving the most difficult issues related to refugees'
repatriation to Myanmar. We believe that in the current
circumstances it is important to facilitate a resolution of
the Rakhine situation, focusing on practical assistance
to the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh in a
spirit of equality and mutual respect. We would like
to emphasize that the Myanmar refugee situation is
a issue of bilateral relations between Myanmar and
Bangladesh that should be resolved through appropriate
consultations. We realize that the Dhaka authorities
are bearing a tremendous burden with regard to
hosting and sheltering this huge number of refugees
on their territory, one beyond the capacities of any
single country, and the international community must
therefore provide Bangladesh with all the support it
needs in this area.

However, we are very concerned about the attempts
to delay a resolution of the repatriation issue on the
pretext that Myanmar lacks the conditions for the safe,
dignified and sustainable return and resettlement of
repatriates. Needless to say, their living conditions
must comply with humanitarian standards, but the
arguments of those who are creating artificial obstacles
to the process and inciting refugees by fuelling their
anxiety are unacceptable. We will continue to urge
all the parties to refrain from violence, emphasize the
importance of respecting Myanmar's sovereignty and
work to resolve the multilayered and complex problems
in Rakhine by exclusively political means, through a
dialogue between Naypyidaw and Dhaka and between
representatives of all nationalities and faiths.

