Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I join previous speakers in
thanking the honourable Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their comprehensive reports on
their respective completion strategies (S/2010/588, annexes I and II, and S/2010/574) and their work.

Since this is the last Security Council debate on
the two Tribunals this year, I wish to take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Thomas Mayr-
Harting of Austria and his team for their remarkable
work in the chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals and also the diligent
way in which they conducted negotiations on matters
pertaining to both ad hoc Tribunals.

I would like to briefly address four points related
to the Tribunals: their completion strategies and the
progress achieved so far, staff retention, international
cooperation, and outreach activities.

Both Presidents have reported on the significant
challenges and obstacles that the Tribunals have faced
in their ordinary activities. We believe, however, that
despite those significant hurdles, both ICTY and ICTR
have indeed made clear progress in discharging their
functions and fulfilling their completion strategies.
Their efforts are commendable and should be further
supported by the Security Council in order to allow for
a prompt conclusion of all remaining judicial activities.

On staff retention, my delegation is deeply
concerned at the current situation and the trend noted
in both Tribunals with respect to personnel attrition.
Keeping qualified personnel at the Tribunals is
necessary to ensure that they will continue to carry out
the completion strategies while fully respecting the due
process of law. Therefore, we continue to believe that
some form of arrangement needs to be made in order to
ensure that the Tribunals continue to be staffed by the
most highly qualified people.

Cooperation between Member States and the
Tribunals remains a key element not only for the
success of their completion strategies but also for the
appropriate delivery of justice. All States concerned
should be encouraged to do their utmost to promptly
respond to requests issued by the Tribunals, including
with regard to arrests of fugitives and possible referral
of cases to national jurisdictions. We are encouraged
by the increasing cooperation with the Tribunals and
welcome the arrest of another fugitive.

Regarding outreach, activities of that kind and
capacity-building become even more important as the
implementation of the completion strategies
progresses. The affected communities should be well
informed of the evolving process and how it is going to
impact the administration of justice. They should also
be made aware of the new mechanism that will replace
the Tribunals as soon as possible.

Furthermore, in View of the efforts to refer cases
to national jurisdictions, in particular with respect to
the ICTR, Member States interested in receiving those
cases should have access to enhanced international
cooperation to improve their national capacities, if they
so require. The Tribunals could play a central role in
that regard. Still on that topic, we took note with
interest of the request made by the Prosecutor of the
ICTR to refer three cases to a national jurisdiction. In
our View, that may contribute to the completion of the
Tribunal's activities and allow States to exercise their
responsibilities in terms of the realization of justice.

Before concluding, I wish to say a few words on
the issue of the residual mechanism. One of the main
challenges in relying on an ad hoc tribunal instead of a
permanent one is precisely what to do when the
institution has fulfilled most of its core functions but
important tasks remain, such as eventual trials of
fugitives, supervision of the execution of sentences,
witness protection and preservation of documentation.
In devising a completion strategy, one should not
overemphasize the goal of a speedy conclusion of
activities to the detriment of the principle of due
process. Otherwise, the legacy of the tribunal may be at
risk and, consequently, its impact on the affected
communities' perception of justice threatened. At the
same time, no effort should be spared to make progress
and comply with deadlines.

The early establishment of a residual mechanism
will add another element of certainty to the delivery of
justice. My delegation hopes the current efforts to
create such a mechanism for the International Tribunals
will bear fruit soon. Brazil has participated actively in
that endeavour and will continue to do so in the
coming days and weeks. The Council can continue to
count on my delegation in that regard.

