Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me start by welcoming Kosovo Foreign Minister
Hyseni and Serbian Foreign Minister Jeremie to the
Council today. Let me also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zannier for his
excellent and comprehensive briefing. The United
States deeply appreciates the work he and his team are
doing to support peace and security.

The second anniversary of Kosovo's
independence was 17 February, an occasion to mark
Kosovo's development as an open, multi-ethnic and
democratic republic. Sixty-eight countries have now
recognized Kosovo, and the United States
congratulates Kosovo and its citizens on the progress
they have made to strengthen their democracy and
governing institutions and to contribute to stability in
the Balkans during these two years.

With this in mind, I would like to focus on five
points. First, we welcome the progress made by the
Government of Kosovo in enhancing its institutional
capacity as it pursues democratic development,
regional stability and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Kosovo authorities are building on the strong
foundation of last fall's municipal elections in
implementing the decentralization process laid out in
the Ahtisaari plan, which will improve governance and
empower all communities. With help from the central
Government, newly elected mayors and Serb majority
municipalities are putting good governance structures
in place and reaching out to the population to address
local needs. Deputy Secretary of State Steinberg met
with these Serb mayors in April. He found them to be
enthusiastic about decentralization and the resources it
affords them. We commend these forward-thinking
leaders of Kosovo's Serb community for their
constructive and courageous engagement on behalf of
their communities.

This effort is still a work in progress, but we
believe that success here will encourage engagement
by Kosovo Serbs in the North, who also demand and
deserve responsive local Government that serves their
communities' real interests.

The upcoming June elections in Partesh/Partes
will provide another opportunity for citizens to make
their voices heard and effect real change. In contrast,
the parallel elections again planned for Mitrovica later
this month are not the path to a thriving community.
They only detract from good faith efforts to promote
stability and reconciliation in Kosovo and the region.

Secondly, improving governance and the rule of
law in northern Kosovo is essential. We welcome the
Government of Kosovo's efforts to refine and
implement a strategy - which was endorsed by the
Kosovo Assembly with the support of representatives
of all Kosovo's communities - to extend the benefits
of good, accountable, legitimate Government to
citizens in the North.

We also welcome the European Union's (EU)
plans, with the help of the robust presence of the EU
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo in the North, to step
up efforts there. We call on Belgrade and Pristina to
find opportunities for pragmatic cooperation that can
improve life for communities in Kosovo's North,
including on cross-border, crime, customs and other
rule of law andjudicial issues.

Thirdly, we commend the efforts of Kosovo and
Serbia to resolve issues affecting displaced persons,
including setting the conditions for safe return to their
homes in Kosovo. We welcome the recent decision to
reopen the Kosovo Property Agency offices in Serbia
under the auspices of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. We now look to the
stakeholders to expedite the Agency's work and
remove impediments to resolving remaining cases. As
the Secretary-General's report (s/2010/ 169) notes,
there were nearly five times the number of returns in
January and February this year than in the same period
in 2009. We call on both Kosovo and Serbia to support
conditions to extend this constructive trend to facilitate
sustainable returns.

Fourthly, let me commend the statements made
recently to promote reconciliation by the leaders of

both Serbia and Kosovo, including President Tadie's
remarks on Orthodox Christmas and President Sejdiu's
remarks on Orthodox Easter. It is an encouraging sign
that Easter services were held in the Sveti Sava Church
in South Mitrovica for the first time since 2004. I
should note that the United States is pleased to support
the reconstruction efforts at Sveti Sava and at other
sites, working with the Reconstruction Implementation
Commission, in which the Government of Kosovo
actively participates. We hope that the Commission's
work can now move forward more rapidly with the
cooperation and participation of all affected parties. To
this end, we support the EU's newly appointed
facilitator, Ambassador Moschopoulos.

Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General's
conclusion that the overall situation has remained
relatively calm but fragile. We condemn recent
incidents of inter-ethnic violence, although, as the
report notes, there has been no overall increase in the
number of incidents, including those affecting minority
communities. The 20 April attack against 26 Kosovo
Serb returnee families in the Istog/Istok municipality
was unacceptable. We commend Prime Minister
Thaci's swift response, including the commitment to
providing financial and technical assistance to the
Victims and 24-hour Kosovo Police patrols for the
returnees. The Kosovo Police's smooth assumption
from the Kosovo Force in March of responsibility for
protecting the Gazimestan monument offered another
example of the Government stepping up to its
responsibilities.

We also condemn the recent incidents of Violence
against licensed telephone system operators, apparently
in retaliation against Kosovo Government regulatory
efforts. Violence is an unacceptable response that
undercuts the rule of law and legitimate efforts to
ensure that entities licensed by Kosovo can provide
public services in Kosovo.

Kosovo's independence is irreversible. Partition
is not acceptable. Kosovo's status and borders are
settled. The development of effective democratic
institutions and efforts to maximize the participation of
all citizens is an ongoing process. The United States
stands with Kosovo, Serbia and all of the Balkan
countries as they advance along the path of building
stable, secure democracies that are fully integrated into
European and Euro-Atlantic institutions.

