Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
Security Council deals with diverse challenges, many
of which we struggle to find agreement and consensus
on. On one, however, the will of the Council, and
indeed of the membership of the Organization, could
not be clearer: North Korea. Over the past weeks, North
Korea's dangerous actions and defiance ofthe Council's
previous resolutions merit an unyielding response from
the body mandated by the Charter of the United Nations
to maintain international peace and security.

Let us be clear. North Korea's nuclear tests and
missile launches are often described as "provocations".
However, that euphemism does not do justice to what
the North Korean regime is doing. It is not merely
"provoking", it is not merely acting in defiance of the
demands of the Security Council, and indeed the world.
No, North Korea, with each test, with each launch,
is steadily and practically advancing its operational
capacity to develop and deploy nuclear weapons. With
each test, with each so-called provocation, North Korea
is building its ability to endanger every nation of the
world. And with each act of defiance, our collective
resolve to stop it must become even stronger.

We cannot tolerate actions from a regime that on
a grotesque, widespread and systematic basis flouts
international law by abusing its own people and,
with similar precision and disregard, defies the will
of the Council by developing the most dangerous
weapons known to humankind. That is why yesterday,
after extensive and productive collaboration and
consultation with partners, the United States submitted
a draft Security Council resolution in response to
North Korea's recent nuclear test and ballistic missile
launch. If adopted, the draft resolution would represent
the strongest set of sanctions imposed by the Security
Council in a generation. Those sanctions would send an
unambiguous message to the regime of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea: "the world will not accept
your proliferation, there will be consequences for your
actions, and we will work relentlessly to stop your
nuclear programme".

The sanctions are not punitive; they are practical
and will help our collective efforts to impede the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea programme
by making it harder for the country to raise the
funds, import the technology and acquire the know-
how to advance its illicit nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. As long as North Korea continues to
undermine international security through its dangerous
pursuit of nuclear weapons, we must work together to
impede its ability to endanger our shared security and
to hold it accountable.

In Syria, efforts have intensified to ensure
unfettered humanitarian access while putting in place
a cessation of hostilities leading to the resumption of
political talks. The International Syria Support Group
and the parties in Syria are working together towards a
cessation of hostilities, set to go into effect at midnight
tonight in Damascus, thereby offering a possibility to
halt the horrific violence and relieve the suffering of
the Syrian people. We expect the implementation of the
cessation of hostilities to end the aerial bombardments
and the regime ground offensives, which have cost so
many lives and displaced more than 70,000 around
Aleppo in recent days.

Meanwhile, recent progress on humanitarian
access to a handful ofbesieged areas is welcome, but is
only the beginning. While we commend the work of the
International Syria Support Group's humanitarian task
force, this is only the first step towards full, sustained
and unimpeded access throughout the country. We will
not be satisfied with one-off deliveries to a handful of
areas that should have had unimpeded assistance all
along, and which has been completely denied and, in
some cases, denied for years.

Over the last week and a half, convoys have
provided aid to less than 100,000 people - less than
one fourth of those living in serious besieged areas.
Millions still urgently require aid. The Syrian regime,
and all parties, needs to lift any and all obstacles to
assistance. Ultimately, the only way to end Syria's
conflict is through a political process leading to a
political transition in accordance with the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex).

The crisis in South Sudan continues. Leadership
from the opposing parties is desperately needed. We
heard a comprehensive set of briefings on South Sudan
last Friday, and yesterday's briefing by the Chairperson
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
(JMEC), Festus Mogae, was particularly important.
The JMEC is essential to progress in South Sudan, and
we hope to continue to hear regular updates from the
JMEC Chairperson in order to appropriately support
his work in overseeing the implementation of the peace
agreement.

We continue to be alarmed by the human rights
abuses in South Sudan, and the briefing by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) described a scorched-earth strategy,
a strategy that manifests itself in civilians being
intentionally burned alive in their homes. As the United
Nations detailed in a recent report on Unity state, we are
now seeing coping strategies among the most severely
food-insecure households that include food-security
experts observing things being consumed in South
Sudan that they have never seen before, such as the
consumption of reconstituted dried goatskins, meaning
eating goatskin off of furniture, or eating inner sections
of palm tree trunks, meaning eating wood.

Given the seemingly unending and horrific nature
of the abuses unfolding in South Sudan, we must all
remain committed to supporting accountability for
the perpetrators, including through the mechanisms
outlined in the peace agreement, namely, the
establishment of a credible hybrid tribunal. The people
of South Sudan deserve security and peace, and they
also deserve justice.

In Burundi, while we welcome recent
announcements and reports of prisoner releases,
announcements must be followed by action. Credible
dialogue outside of Burundi with the opposition must
restart now. Unfortunately, the Government continues
to crackdown on civil society and political opposition.
And, also unfortunately, widespread human rights
violations are a daily occurrence. Necessarily, the
Council must continue to examine all options to ensure
that a credible political process proceeds and that
civilians are safe.

Last week, six activists in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were arrested after calling on
President Kabila to step down. On Wednesday, they
were sentenced to two years in prison for incitement.
Intimidation must stop, and the Security Council, in the
months ahead, must remain focused on ensuring timely
and credible elections.

Finally, we were pleased that the Council discussed
Burma's political and human rights situation in
consultations yesterday afternoon. We particularly
welcomed OHCHR's perspective and will continue to
encourage further high-level Council interaction with
that Office in future meetings.

A peaceful post-election period is crucial for
stability and maintaining the confidence of the people
of Burma in this transition. However, there remain
obvious and important impediments to the realization of
a fully democratic and civilian Government. Although
we have seen a number of key important steps in the
right direction, we remain concerned about significant
human rights problems on a variety of fronts, including,
but not limited to, the treatment of the Rohingya.
The situation in Rakhine state remains grim, and the
Government needs to take significant, sustained and
strategic steps to address the hatred and bigotry and
resolve the crisis.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation, for your leadership
during this past month. Our work this month is not yet
over.

