Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We are grateful
to the United States presidency for organizing today's
summit meeting of world leaders focused on countering
the spread and use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). Given that previous speakers have mentioned

the devastating consequences of the use and testing
of weapons of mass destruction, I want the Council
and the world to understand that Kazakhstan, along
with some other nations and vast territories, has been
suffering those consequences since the early days of
the Cold War.

The goal of today's meeting is very close to
Kazakhstan's heart and is one of the key priorities
of my country's foreign policy. Kazakhstan's firm
and unwavering commitment to international peace
and security began at our independence in 1991. Our
Head of State, President Nursultan Nazarbayev, took
the daring and bold decision to renounce our nuclear
arsenal and close the Semipalatinsk nuclear-weapon test
site, the world's fourth and second largest, respectively.
The international community acknowledged the
unprecedented and laudable nature of those actions by
establishing 29 August, the date of the closure of the
Semipalatinsk test site, as the International Day against
Nuclear Tests. In September, the United Nations
community commemorated that Day in a new, official
high-level format, in which the international community
reiterated its plea for more effective steps to rebuild
trust between nuclear and non-nuclear countries.

Earlier this year, in January, the signature event
of Kazakhstan's presidency of the Security Council
was devoted to the importance of confidence-building
measures in achieving the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (see S/PV.8160).
Confidence-building measures succeeded in stopping
the arms race and preventing a nuclear catastrophe in
the past century. Today, the world is hoping for a repeat
of the same visionary actions from the nuclear Powers,
something that is unfortunately not being fully realized
or acknowledged at today's meeting.

At the Security Council meeting in January, as
well as in his manifesto "The World. The Twenty-First
Century", President Nazarbayev noted that the largest
nuclear Powers should be in the vanguard in advocating
for a nuclear-weapon-free world and should lead by
example in reducing their weapons of mass destruction.
Past conflicts have shown that we cannot ensure our
own security by undermining the security of others.
President Nazarbayev has therefore urged all of us to
understand that only complete elimination of all nuclear
weapons and full disarmament can be an absolute
guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons. He has therefore called on all States Members
of the United Nations to build a nuclear-weapon-free
world by 2045, the centenary of the founding of the
United Nations.

We have seen some good examples of
confidence-building measures in the case of the
inter-Korean rapprochement and the Singapore
summit, due in part to the successful personal
efforts of President Trump, which have the potential
to inspire other positive outcomes of goodwill and
sincere collaboration. Kazakhstan fully supports
such promising beginnings and is ready to share its
practical experience and expertise, if necessary, based
on our sad legacy, as I have mentioned. However, trust
alone cannot guarantee sustained success unless it is
supported by the strict implementation of all existing
regulatory legal instruments and the Security Council's
sanctions resolutions. Without diminishing the role
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), it is clear that the world needs a
stronger international legal framework against WMDs.
The current asymmetric implementation of the Treaty
is an obstacle to trust between nuclear and non-nuclear
countries. Nevertheless, the NPT should not lose its
effectiveness and relevance amid such scepticism.

The early entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty should also become one of
the most important and essential building blocks for
the global non-proliferation architecture. When fully
operational, it will definitely help to foster mutual trust
and confidence. Kazakhstan cooperates actively with the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
and annually conducts high-level international events
aimed at implementing effective practical steps to
achieve a world without nuclear threats, as a natural
outcome of our commitments. To realize that goal, we
must first and foremost establish a final ban on nuclear
testing. Secondly, Atoms for Peace should remain our
important moral compass. However, in the meantime,
we should not cease our struggle to achieve a legal ban
on nuclear weapons, keeping in mind our paramount
goal of attaining a nuclear-weapon-free world.

By opening the International Atomic Energy Agency
Low-Enriched Uranium Bank last year, Kazakhstan
made another contribution towards strengthening the
non-proliferation regime and ensuring the safe and
reliable use of uranium for peaceful purposes. We are
grateful to all donors - the United States, the European
Union, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Norway
and the Nuclear Threat Initiative - whose generous
financial contributions made the project possible. We
also thank China and Russia for their cooperation
regarding the transit through their territories of low-
enriched uranium and equipment for the Bank.

How can we enforce non-proliferation and
disarmament through the measures of the Security
Council? First, the Council must maintain its unity
and common understanding in order to send the world
a clear and unambiguous message about our strong
stance on those issues. It is vital to ensure that everyone
realizes that sanctions are interim measures and not
an end in themselves. Their effectiveness should be
measured by the degree of progress towards reaching
political solutions peacefully.My President has also
suggested that withdrawing from the NPT should
be made extremely difficult, possibly by crafting
a special Security Council resolution with serious
implications for countries in breach of the Treaty. He
has also proposed developing a legally binding system
of guarantees to be given by nuclear Powers to States
willing to voluntarily renounce their nuclear weapons,
as well as those with non-nuclear status, as an incentive
for the latter not to acquire such weapons. That is a fair
step that can be undertaken without significant costs.

Nuclear-weapon-free zones continue to be an
effective way of combating the spread of nuclear
weapons. My President has therefore proposed
strengthening the cooperation between nuclear-
weapon-free zones by organizing a high-level
inter-zone meeting in Astana next year. The permanent
five members should encourage the expansion of those
zones by providing them with security guarantees. We
therefore hope that Central Asia's nuclear-weapon-free
zone will be endorsed by the last hold-out among the
permanent five.

Given the criticism of the considerably weakened
non-proliferation regime in Syria, Kazakhstan is firmly
convinced that the Council has to be united in working
tirelessly to find a comprehensive solution to the issues
of arbitration and prosecution, without transferring
such prerogatives to other structures and subjecting
them to further polarization and politicization. A
political settlement of the Syrian conflict will also help
eliminate the vacuum that allows chemical weapons to
be used with impunity. For its part, Kazakhstan will
continue to provide the Astana platform of ceasefire
and confidence-building measures as a complement and
support to the Geneva process, under the leadership of
the United Nations.

Regarding the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), that multilateral document has fulfilled its
primary mission by putting Iran on a nuclear-free path,
with the IAEA confirming that Iran has fulfilled all
its nuclear obligations. Kazakhstan, with its reputation
as an honest broker, hosted two sets of talks during
the negotiations that led up to the agreement. As the
world's top uranium exporter, Kazakhstan contributed
significantly by supplying 60 tons of raw uranium
to Iran in exchange for Tehran sending over 300
kilograms of highly enriched uranium to Russia. All
the parties to the agreement have acknowledged this
measure as a significant milestone, with this action
constituting the first start of JCPOA implementation.
Notwithstanding certain complications related to the
obligations of some parties to the agreement, we hope
for its further implementation. We propose that new
concerns and challenges be considered through all
possible means of diplomacy, without destroying our
hard-won achievements.

Finally, it is necessary for all in the Council to
demonstrate responsibility, political will and wisdom
in order to make a quantum leap forward of great
historical significance. We need the moral compass to
go from narrow national interests to a greater vision of
a safe and secure world.

