Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): It is an
honour to have you, Minister Hoyer, preside over the
Council, and I thank Special Coordinator Serry for his
briefing here today.

The United States is committed to a just and fair
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Last May,
President Obama outlined a comprehensive vision for
peace between Israelis and Palestinians. He noted that,
at a time when the people of the Middle East and North
Africa are casting off the burdens of the past, the drive
for a lasting peace that ends the conflict and resolves
all claims is more urgent than ever. The President's
remarks laid out a firm foundation for future

negotiations, and those remarks have been strongly
supported by the international community. My
Government has been clear all along. The only place
where permanent status issues can be resolved,
including borders and territory, is in negotiations
between the parties - not in international forums such
as the United Nations.

We must all ensure that our actions help move
peace efforts forward. Our focus has been on
encouraging direct engagement by the parties on the
basis of President Obama's remarks. We are also
continuing our support for the Palestinian Authority's
important efforts to strengthen the Palestinian
economy, enhance the capability and professionalism
of its security forces and build up the necessary
institutions of statehood. However, as President Obama
has made clear, Palestinian leaders will not achieve
peace or prosperity for their people if Hamas insists on
a path of terror and rejection. Palestinian leaders must
also take further steps to combat incitement to
violence, and Hamas must immediately and
unconditionally release Gilad Shalit, who has now
suffered in captivity for more than five years.

Today is our last open debate on the Middle East
before the opening of the next General Assembly. Let
there be no doubt: Symbolic actions to isolate Israel at
the United Nations in September will not create an
independent Palestinian State. The United States will
not support unilateral campaigns at the United Nations
in September or at any other time. A viable and
sustainable peace agreement can only be achieved by
mutual agreement of the parties themselves. Only
through serious and responsible negotiations can the
parties achieve the shared goal of two States for two
peoples, with a secure Jewish State of Israel living side
by side in peace and security with an independent,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine.

This is the goal; this is the vision. But there are
no shortcuts. We call again on all Member States to
encourage the parties to take constructive actions to
promote peace and to avoid actions that could
undermine trust, prejudge negotiations or place the
temptations of symbolism over the hard work of
reaching agreement.

Let me also reiterate that, like every United
States administration for decades, we do not accept the
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity. The
fate of existing settlements must be dealt with by the
parties along with other permanent statues issues, and
Israel should continue its efforts to deter and prosecute
anti-Palestinian violence perpetrated by extremists.

Let me turn briefly to the situation in Gaza. The
recent seizures of advanced weaponry bound for Gaza
as well as the recent and alarming rocket and mortar
attacks on Israel from Gaza should remind us all that
Israel continues to have clear and legitimate security
interests regarding cargo bound for Gaza.

While Israel has eased restrictions on the
movement of goods and people in and out of Gaza,
more needs to be done. Ordinary Gazans still have very
real humanitarian needs. So we are working closely
with Israel, the international donor community and the
Palestinian Authority to deliver critical assistance to
the people of Gaza. We continue to urge those who
wish to deliver assistance to use established channels
to ensure that Israel's legitimate security needs are
addressed, while the Palestinians' humanitarian needs
are met.

Let me say a few words about the ongoing crisis
in Syria. The world has been inspired by the courage of
the peaceful protesters who have taken to the streets
across the country to demand their universal rights.
The regime has responded with violence, brutality and
mass arrests. But Syria is currently headed towards a
new political order, shaped by the Syrian people, in
which the Government will derive its legitimacy from
the consent of the governed. A transition to democracy
is already under way. President Al-Assad may try to
delay that transition, but he cannot stop it, and Syria
can never return to the way it was before.

The United States fully supports the Syrian
people's demands for a unified Syria, with a
democratic, representative and inclusive Government
that respects basic liberties and provides equal
protection under the law for all citizens, regardless of
sect, ethnicity or gender. We call on the Syrian
Government to stop the violence and arrests
immediately, and to allow peaceful protests and
freedom of speech. Human rights abuses must end now,
and human rights monitors must immediately be
granted access to all of Syria. We again call on the
Syrian Government to permit access for the fact-
finding mission called for by the Human Rights
Council in April. The Security Council has a
responsibility to address the situation in Syria and the
Government's ongoing repression, which could further
destabilize the country and undermine peace and
security in the region.

Finally, let me say a word about Lebanon. We
hope that Lebanon's new Government will live up to
all of its international obligations, including the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006), and uphold the country's
commitment to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. In
particular, we call on the Government of Lebanon to
continue to meet its obligations under international law
to support the Tribunal. Lebanon's independent judicial
proceedings offer the nation a chance to move beyond
its long history of political violence and achieve the
peace and stability that the Lebanese people deserve.
Those who oppose the Special Tribunal seek to create a
false choice between justice and stability. Lebanon,
like every other country, deserves both.

