Mr. Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Government and the people of the State
of Kuwait, I should like to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, and the friendly Republic of Kazakhstan
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. The choice of the topic for our
debate today at the first high-level briefing of 2018
under the agenda item "Non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction: confidence-building measures" is
extremely important to the international community
and to members of the Security Council, which seek to
safeguard the world from weapons of mass destruction
in the interest of maintaining stability, peace and
security in the region and the world. We affirm the
full support of the State of Kuwait in carrying out your
responsibilities and in fulfilling your mandate.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his valuable briefing, which
illustrates the need to promote confidence-building
measures in the context of preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, in order to put an
end to the threat that they represent. Disarmament
and non-proliferation efforts are key to maintaining
international peace and security.

The State of Kuwait attaches particular importance
to all issues relating to disarmament, non-proliferation
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy, which constitute
the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
ofNuclear Weapons (NPT). I would like to reiterate the
steadfast position of the State of Kuwait with regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security and
to disarmament issues, in particular its commitment
to the NPT and the outcomes of the 1995, 2000 and
2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to the NPT,
in line with its absolute commitment to respecting
international treaties and our belief in their usefulness.
We also confirm that the best way to eliminate the
danger and threat of nuclear weapons and to ensure
their non-proliferation is the complete and holistic
elimination of nuclear weapons as soon as possible. We
call on nuclear-weapon States to eliminate such weapons,
to meet their commitments under article VI of the NPT
and to lead the efforts for the universal commitment
to the Treaty, which remains the very cornerstone of
the international security, and the basis of the current
disarmament and non-proliferation structure.

In considering international initiatives and the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, we must
remember the challenges facing the Middle East region
with regard to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone. Unfortunately, the Middle East remains a
flagrant example of the threat to the non-proliferation
regime and to the selectivity of the Security Council
in dealing with such threats. It is therefore no surprise
that the region, and the Arab countries in particular,
are experiencing an unprecedented level of frustration
because of the ongoing failure to implement the agreed
commitment to establishing a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.

That is highlighted in the resolution on the Middle
East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the NPT and in the action
plan adopted by the 2010 Review Conference of the
Parties to the NPT. Those documents remain relevant
until the objectives are achieved. It is the responsibility
of all parties to the Treaty to implement the resolution,
in particular the nuclear-weapon States and the three
States that deposited the Treaty and submitted the
resolution on the Middle East in the context of the
indefinite extension of the Treaty.

Our debate today reaffirms the seriousness with
which the Security Council deals with the threat of
weapons of mass destruction, which is not limited to
the declaration of preventive measures under resolution
1540 (2004) but also addresses future threats if such
measures fail. Any use or threat of use of those deadly
weapons will have consequences and will cause
untold destruction. The Security Council therefore
unanimously adopted resolution 2325 (2016), which
reaffirms that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons constitutes a threat to international
peace and security, and sets out a road map for the
future work of States and the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) until 2021. We hope that that
committee of the Security Council will become a
standing committee, and not a temporary one, given
its importance in preventing terrorists from acquiring
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

Moreover, we once again condemn the use of

chemical weapons in Syria, as affirmed by international
reports. We are following with concern the ongoing
allegations of the use of those internationally prohibited
weapons by the warring parties. The inability of the
Security Council to uphold the international mechanism
to determine which party has used such weapons means
that the perpetrators of such crimes will enjoy impunity.
We must find alternative solutions and a new mechanism
that enjoys the consensus of all Security Council
members to ensure that such criminals are brought to
justice and held responsible. We also support the work
done by the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, through its fact-
finding mission, to investigate the allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria.

Finally, I reiterate the steadfast, principled position
of the State of Kuwait with regard to non-proliferation
issues and its ongoing commitment to cooperating in
order to achieve our people's aspiration to a world free
of weapons of mass destruction. We look forward to
the day when, together, we will once and for all get rid
of these weapons. Nuclear accidents do not recognize
national borders. They affect all parts of the world.
Our world no longer needs any proof of that. We call
on all States that bear special responsibility to maintain
international peace and security and all nations that
constantly state their commitment to respecting the
Charter of the United Nations to take clear and honest
measures in order to achieve the goal of establishing
a world free of nuclear weapons and weapons of
mass destruction.

