Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to say a few words
in French.

I wish to recall for Council members quotations from
a former director of the Louvre museum, Andre Parrot,
and the famous French archaeologist Charles Virolleaud.
Why do I refer to those two persons? It is because both
of them said something of great importance about Syria
a long time ago that should nevertheless be recalled by
all today. Charles Virolleaud was the first archaeologist
to decipher the Ugaritic alphabet - the first alphabet
in the world - discovered in the ancient port of Ugarit
next to the city of Latakia on the Syrian coast, which
inspired the following pronouncement by Andre Parrot:

"Every civilized person has two homelands - their
own and Syria".

That leads me to another quote attributed to Diderot,
who purportedly said:

"Politics is not a frivolous anecdote but rather
a responsibility".

(spoke in Arabic)

My colleagues in the Security Council will perhaps
remember that, from the first day of this terrorist war
led by the Governments of certain countries against my
country, we have been saying that its main goal was to
ensure the Israeli occupation of Arab territories and its
perpetuation, based on the plan set forth by the United
States. The latest decision by the United States President
to recognize what he termed, "Israeli sovereignty"
over the occupied Syrian Golan justifies what we
have been saying. That sheds light on the plan that
targets my country in particular, and the entire region
in general. It is a criminal plan for which the United
States Government and its allies have used every tool at
their disposal to carry out. They used all immoral and
illegitimate tools to ensure the spread of chaos, in and
the destruction of, our region so as to divide it along
religious and ethnic lines in order to create a new reality
like that which was imposed by colonists under the
Sykes-Picot Agreement and the Balfour Declaration.
All of that is adorned with the ideas and theories that
certain politicians have repeated, such as creative chaos
and the new Middle East.

Those States of the new occupation plans have
spared no effort to implement them. They have used
every weapon in their arsenal at their disposal. They
have defamed religion. They have encouraged radical,
extremist and takfirist movements. They have applied
political pressure. They have spread disinformation. All
of that has been accompanied by support for terrorists
and foreign fighters in their various groupings, names
and allegiances, the most prominent of which are the
terrorists of Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front, which
have waged systematic attacks against Syria, its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. They have done
so through individual acts of aggression and through
collective acts of aggression, as well as within the
framework of an illegal international coalition which
committed war crimes and crimes against humanity
in my country. In addition, that illegal coalition waged
economic terrorism against Syria by using unilateral
coercive measures intended to bring down the Syrian
Government and its legitimate institutions.

The illegal coalition that invaded Baghdad in 2003
led to the rise of Al-Zarqawi, who was the head of
Al-Qaida in Iraq, followed by Al-Baghdadi, who was
the leader of the terrorist Da'esh group. The illegal
coalition against my country has given birth to yet
another terrorist personality - Al-Julani - who heads
the Al-Nusra Front, and quite clearly neither Baghdad
nor the Golan have anything to do with those terrorists
and those who share their obscurantist and takfirist
ideology. Someone named Al-Baghdadi, a native of
Baghdad, extended his influence to attack Baghdad.
Today a new personality - Al-Julani - a native of the
Golan, has been created to attack Syria and the Syrian
Golan. There is no coincidence regarding those names.
The Pentagon invented Al-Baghdadi and Al-Julani.

They did not stop there, however. The enemy
Governments of my country have used the humanitarian
situation and the untold suffering of our people to
undermine the credibility of the Syrian Government,
its reputation and the significant efforts that it has
made to support Syrians in overcoming this deplorable
situation. We see the relentlessness of such practices in
the fact that the United States forces and the terrorist
organizations supporting them have taken thousands of
unarmed civilians hostages in the Rukban camp in the
area ofAl-Tanffor 1,791 days, without any consideration
for the suffering and disastrous living conditions that
the United Nations itself has observed. In that regard,
we recall that the representative of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said, when the
second United Nations convoy arrived in the area,
that a survey was taken among the Al-Tanf refugees,
according to which the United Nations realized that
95 per cent of them wanted to return to their villages
and cities - 95 per cent of those in Rukban camp. I
ask the Council: Why are the Americans keeping
them there?

In that regard, we note that the Syrian Government
has taken all the necessary measures to free those
persons detained in that camp and end their suffering.
We call on the Security Council and the international
community to call upon all illegal forces to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally from the Syrian
territories. We also call on them to apply pressure on
the Americans so that those living in the camp can
move freely and unhindered, guarantee the security
of humanitarian convoys to end their suffering and
dismantle the camp.
I stress today before the Council to Israel, the
occupying Power, and its supporters in the United
States Administration, that betting on the war that they
have waged against my country for the past eight years
to destroy Syria and reduce its role as an Arab, Islamic
and regional leader has been a monumental mistake and
great failure.

I reaffirm Syria's readiness to pursue its cooperation
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General so that he can carry out his mission successfully
by facilitating the intra-Syrian dialogue to bring about
a political solution that will serve the interests of
Syrians and ensure the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria and its people. That would
lead to eradicating terrorism and ending the illegal
foreign presence in Syria. Those many issues echo what
you said earlier, Mr. President. Syria reaffirms that the
political process must be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned.
The Syrian people have the exclusive right to decide on
the future of their country, their Constitution and all that
relates to national sovereignty, which are the domain
of the Syrian people, without foreign interference, as
provided for under international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and all the relevant Security Council
resolutions on Syria.

In conclusion, my colleague, the representative
of the United States, talked at the beginning of his
statement about killing and burning a l3-year-old boy.
That is an outright lie. There was no killing and burning
of a 13-year-old boy at the beginning of the conflict in
Syria. Let me repeat. That is a lie. With regard to the
child Aylan Kurdi, whom he mentioned, yes, he was
a Syrian child but he died in Turkey on the Turkish
coast because of Turkish smuggling gangs who put
300 people onto each boat rather than 50. That is why
people used to drown in the Mediterranean because of
the Turkish smuggling gangs.

With regard to the child Omran, who was on the
front page of The New York Times, the accusation was
that the Government had bombed Aleppo and killed
that child. Later it was proved that that was false and
that the child, Omran, had gone with his father to The
Hague and Geneva and proved that everything people
had seen was a pretence. They had forced him to look
like a child who had been seriously injured and he
was told what to say. That child and his father gave
testimony that it was all a lie.

The United States representative mentioned
the killing of persons in Khan Shaykhun. As we say
in Arabic, when there is no shame, people can say
whatever they want. Everyone knows that a commission
ofinquiry was supposed to go to Khan Shaykhun but it
refused to go. The site was not examined. The United
Nations mission did not go to Khan Shaykhun despite
our insistence that it should and despite our scores of
repeated requests for it to do so. Our United States
colleague concluded that there were killings in Khan
Shaykhun due to an attack by the Syrian regime, as he
says. That is a lie and a disgrace.

Our United States colleague also said that he wanted
to send a third humanitarian convoy to Rukban. Let me
repeat that the United Nations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have attested that
95 per cent of the people in that camp want to leave it.
So why organize a third or fourth humanitarian convoy
unless the real objective is to continue that anomaly?
They want to continue blackmailing Syria and the
international community by using the Syrian refugees
in Rukban. Let them leave. The Syrian Government
wants them to leave the camp. The vehicles are ready to
take them. The Syrian Red Crescent is ready. Let them
go and put a stop to that blackmail.

The United States is imposing economic sanctions
not only on Syria but also on those who assist Syria. The
most recent United States sanctions is that the office
linked to the United States Treasury that controls assets
issued a new circular yesterday threatening ships that
transport humanitarian aid to Syria with an embargo.
But the United States colleague wants to send aid to
Rukban. I say that he sheds crocodile tears regarding the
humanitarian situation of the Syrian people, while his

Government is at the same time preventing such ships
from transporting humanitarian assistance to Syria.

Regarding the positions that have been liberated by
the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces and the United
States forces, can the Americans tell us where the
Da'esh leaders are? Where are they? Da'esh has been
eliminated, is that not so? So where is Al-Baghdadi?
Where are the leaders? Where are he and his gang?
Where are the Da'esh fighters? What happened to those
people? What about the investigations? Where does the
information come from? Where did the people come
from? Who sent them? Where is the accountability in
that regard? Who is going to request accountability
for the crimes committed by Da'esh terrorists in Syria
and Iraq? Why are their leaders now hiding or being
hidden? They have been transferred to special camps
under American control. Why? Why do we not disclose
the identity of those who have been arrested? Who
are those leaders? Or is the United States planning to
recycle them and send them to another front somewhere
else? I expect answers from my United States colleague
to all such questions.

Syria is a victim of manipulation by the intelligence
services under the auspices of the United States of
America. That is what Hamad bin Jassim Al-Thani,
former Prime Minister of Qatar, said. He noted that
Qatar had spent $137 billion to destroy Syria on the
basis of a directive from Washington. It is a disgrace.
That is all.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.
