Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to address the Council today and for
your presidency this month. We are, as always, very
appreciative of Council meetings which are held in
open session, like this one, as well as of other
mechanisms to strengthen dialogue with Council
members, such as the very useful troop-contributor
meeting held on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) last week.

We are also very pleased to see Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta here participating
in the discussion today so eloquently and perceptively,
as they always have in the past.

New Zealand is very happy to support the
renewal of UNTAET's mandate through to East
Timor's forthcoming independence in May this year.
We very much commend the hard work and
determination of the East Timorese people and of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor and the leadership provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in laying the
foundations for independence in such a very short
period.

The Secretary-General's report of developments
in East Timor, from mid-October 2001 to the present,
summarizes very well both the achievements and the
ongoing challenges. New Zealand very warmly
endorses that report. We welcome in particular the
innovative step taken by the East Timorese Council of
Ministers to hold open meetings in each of East
Timor's 13 districts as a means of educating the
population on the workings of government. We also
very much applaud the interim Government's ongoing
efforts to strengthen East Timor's relations with its
neighbour, Indonesia. We also note with some pleasure
how the small seeds planted by New Zealand customs
officers back in January 2000 have today grown into a
very respectable East Timor customs, immigration and
quarantine service responsible for bringing in
significant government revenue.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
however, the partnership venture between East Timor
and the United Nations is not yet over. I noted the
words of Prime Minister Howard of Australia in his
most eloquent statement, when he said that, without
continuing support, these successes cannot be
maintained. I think that, if one looks at the themes that
have come through from the discussion in the Council
both this morning and this afternoon, that has certainly
been a very consistent theme. Our colleague from
Singapore used the term "unfinished business" and I
think that is very much what everyone has in mind.

It is certainly true that the challenges that lie
ahead are considerable and, as underlined in Oslo last
month, will call for constant vigilance that precious
funds are directed to top-priority activities. Both the
East Timorese leadership and the international
community have a particular duty to ensure that mutual
expectations - both those of the East Timorese people
and those which the international community has of
East Timor - remain realistic and within the capacity
of donors and the East Timorese Government to
deliver.

For our part, we take this occasion to renew New
Zealand's unequivocal support for what the people and
the interim Government of East Timor, with
exceptional international assistance, are striving to
achieve. We all share the same end-goal - self-
sufficiency for the country and people of East Timor -
and look forward to donor relations with East Timor
reverting to a normal development model as soon as
feasible.

We are therefore very happy to endorse the
Secretary-General's concept of a successor mission
whose primary objective will be to enable an
independent and stable East Timor to stand on its own
two feet and for the United Nations to quickly fulfil its
post-independence mandate.

For its part, New Zealand will continue to
contribute to East Timor's and international efforts in
the build-up to independence and beyond through
ongoing military and civilian expertise and through
development assistance. We are now well-launched
down the path of a new bilateral relationship with a
new and very valued regional neighbour. It is thanks to
the determination of the United Nations to do right by
that new and small country that the possibility for such
constructive links exists.

We therefore reiterate New Zealand's support for
this last extension of UNTAET's mandate and look
forward to the Council's detailed consideration of the
United Nations post-independence presence at a later
date.

