Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on both joining the Security Council and directly assuming its presidency, and to assure you of our full support. I would also like to thank the United States delegation for its presidency in December. I would further like to warmly thank Special Representative Chambas for his comprehensive briefing. Belgium commends the work that he carries out on a daily basis to promote prevention, mediation, sustainable peace and the rule of law in West Africa and the Sahel. The precarious security situation continues to be a source of concern for us. I am thinking in particular of the intensification of intercommunal violence in several countries of the region, such as Nigeria, Burkina Faso and Mali, as well as of terrorist attacks, which have unfortunately not diminished. That deterioration has a direct impact on the humanitarian situation, causing hundreds of thousands of innocent people to suffer. The persistence of conflicts between pastoralists and farmers deserves special attention, as those tensions are currently a major driver of insecurity in the subregion and even beyond. I commend the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for substantially raising awareness of that issue. The task now is to implement the various good practices identified, in particular in collaboration with the Economic Community of West African States. In Burkina Faso, the spread and increase in number of attacks on the civilians and the State of Burkina Faso in the north, east and even south of the country is a particularly alarming development. Those terrorist attacks undermine development and threaten regional stability. We commend the Secretary- General’s efforts to adjust the United Nations presence in Burkina Faso in order to support the country in addressing the challenges that it faces. In Nigeria, the persistence of violent attacks by Boko Haram is also a disturbing phenomenon. Belgium commends the courage and sacrifices of security forces throughout the region in their fight against terrorists. It is crucial that this fight be carried out in accordance with human rights and international humanitarian law. Otherwise, the successes of the security forces will be only ephemeral and jeopardize reconciliation and a lasting end to the crisis. Moreover, as the Secretary-General points out in his report (S/2019/1005), the response to the challenges in West Africa cannot be solely security-based. A holistic approach is needed to deal with violent extremism, with emphasis also on good governance, the fight against impunity and sustainable and inclusive development. The efforts of several countries of the region, such as the Gambia, Liberia and Sierra Leone, deserve our support. National reconciliation, post-conflict reconstruction and security sector reform are major challenges for those States, the democratic institutions of which are in the process of consolidation. The political will to entrench good governance, democracy and human rights will be decisive in order to sustain the gains made and ensure sustainable development. In that regard, I wish to underscore the important role played by the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting those countries by maintaining dialogue among all interested parties. Likewise, the activities carried out by the Peacebuilding Fund remain essential to meeting specific needs. Belgium welcomes its approach focused on prevention. Those efforts must be based on the new structure of resident coordinators in an integrated approach common to the three pillars of United Nations action: peace and security, humanitarian development and human rights. UNOWAS also plays a leading role in studying the impact of climate change on security as part of a conflict prevention approach. That is crucial work, and I encourage the Special Representative to pursue such efforts. In conclusion, I would also like to stress the key role played by regional and subregional organizations. I commend their close coordination with UNOWAS and encourage them to maintain it in the future.
