Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America):
Thank you so much, Mr. President, for your creativity
in having a discussion on an issue which at first seems
abstract, but which in fact goes to the heart of the
responsibilities of the Security Council and of the
United Nations.

Thank you also for calling a meeting on exit
strategies at a time when my own nation is looking for
one in Florida. I am sure we will find one, but we
watch with attention and interest. I want to state at the
outset, because it has been raised by so many of my
colleagues in the United Nations, that the United States
has an Administration until 20 January; our President is
currently in Brunei at the summit meeting with leaders
of many of the Governments represented here. I believe
he just met, or is about to meet, with President Jiang
Zemin, and President Putin and he have just concluded
their meeting. I just want to underscore for all our
friends in the United Nations that, while we have a
genuine drama going on as to who the next President of
the United States will be, at this point we have an
Administration in place; it is functioning; and in no
way, shape or form is there any diminution in the
strength of the United States or in our ability to
conduct foreign relations at this point. I need to
underscore that because it has been raised by so many
people recently.

Your creativity, Sir, in forcing us to address, in a
theoretical context, a real and practical problem
deserves special commendation. This is a time when
United Nations peacekeeping is challenged as it has not
been before - and this is an issue on which I have
spoken out many times as a private citizen as well -
and when the demand for peacekeeping is outpacing
capacity and resources, as has been made clear by the
report (8/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations chaired by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.
Indeed, the very nature of peacekeeping has been
transformed. It used to be defined mainly as border
patrol efforts between States, and in some cases, such
as Ethiopia-Eritrea, it will still be that. But
increasingly, it raises questions of bringing peace and
stability in conflicts within States. That is the most
difficult issue for the United Nations.

Many countries represented in this Chamber are
legitimately concerned about the issue of sovereignty,
and about the limits of infringement upon that
sovereignty by the United Nations. The principle of
sovereignty is fully enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, and I would just state on that delicate
point, which is of particular concern to several
members of the Security Council, that it is precisely for
that reason that, on an issue such as the proposal for
the protection of the Palestinian people put forward by
Ambassador Al-Kidwa and Chairman Arafat, we say
that it cannot be decided without the full consent of
Israel.

But once a peacekeeping operation is in place,
which is what the proper subject of today's discussion
is, deciding what conditions are necessary for scaling it
down - in other words, an exit strategy - should be a
vital part of any peacekeeping mission. Establishing
realistic goals and understandings must be a basic part
of every decision we make. To be sure, many of our
goals are not easy to meet. In places such as Bosnia,
Kosovo, East Timor, the Congo and Sierra Leone, the
international community faces extremely difficult
problems. Those societies have been torn apart
internally by divisions - ethnic, political, religious
and externally fuelled - by corruption and by tragedy.
In such places, peacekeeping is a source of stability,
and the engagement of the international community
offers the best hope for people to rebuild their lives.

If we do not deal with the causes of conflict, the
United Nations is reduced to dealing with the
consequences of conflict, and that means that the
United Nations specialized agencies - such as the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the World Food Programme - end up spending much
more money - I stress that, much more money - on
dealing with the consequences than we would dealing
with the causes. I need to underscore that one of the
oldest sayings in the English language, "an ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cure", applies directly
in this case.

This means that we must be very careful, when
we talk about exit strategies, not to confuse them with
exit deadlines. We agree that it is highly preferable that
peacekeeping operations have an end state, and not be
absolutely open-ended. But an exit strategy must be
directed towards a defining overall objective, not an
arbitrary, self-imposed, artificial deadline. Artificial
deadlines encourage belligerents to out-wait the outside
intervention, to delay and to wait until the international
community goes away, at which point they can resume
what they had been doing before. Artificial deadlines
give hope to warlords, to criminals and to corrupt
officials that they can outlast the international
community.

We learned that lesson in Bosnia where, after the
Dayton Peace Agreement, five years ago next week,
the United States set two arbitrary time limits for its
own troop presence: first a 12-month limit right after
Dayton, then, secondly, an 18-month time limit in
January 1997. Both those time limits were wrong, as I
argued at the time. Finally, in December 1997,
President Clinton took a brave decision reversing
American policy and announcing that United States
troops would remain in Bosnia beyond the June 1998
deadline. As President Clinton said at the time, the
mission should be achievable and "tied to concrete
benchmarks, not a deadline". I cannot emphasize too
strongly how important that was. It told those people
who were trying to out-wait the international
community that the United States at least was going to
fulfil the mission, not have the mission defined by an
arbitrary deadline.

To put it differently, our goals must determine the
timeline, not the other way around. To take an extreme,
but important, example, consider the case of Korea.
Nobody in the world thought that international troops
would still be in Korea 47 years after the ceasefire
there. There was no politician, of any country, in the
United Nations command in 1953 who could have
envisaged such a thing. But today more than 35,000
American troops are still in Korea, and they are
universally accepted as an important part of stability
there. They have the support of the American people,
and they are no longer an object of criticism by other
nations. The reason for that is that the United States
moved away from arbitrary withdrawal deadlines,
which were erroneously put forward in 1976-1977 by
the Carter Administration, and moved forward towards
a policy of keeping the forces there until the mission
was fulfilled. When we saw the historic summit of the
two leaders of North and South Korea last month, we
saw an event that could not have taken place had the
troops not remained there. So, again, an exit strategy
yes, an exit deadline, no.

The term "exit strategy" should never be allowed
to mean a hasty or arbitrary departure from a
strategically stated goal that is supported by the
international community as expressed through the
United Nations Security Council. Rather, the term
should mean the implementation of a comprehensive
settlement. For example, crucial interim goals could be
the establishment of the rule of law, the arrest of those
indicted for war crimes, and the creation of legitimate
democratic institutions. In that regard, I want to praise
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bernard Kouchner for the excellent
way in which they have conducted and fulfilled part of
one of the goals of United Nations Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), namely, the elections in
Kosovo last month. That was a partial step, but it is
part of a long-term exit strategy, although there are
many more things that must be done.

Let me suggest that the ultimate goal - and
therefore the ultimate exit strategy - must be
accountable governance and stability, and the fact that
international forces can leave without their departure
triggering a return to the very things that caused the
initial intervention. That is the sine qua non of a just
and lasting peace. History shows this truth: peace
processes in El Salvador, Bosnia, Namibia,
Mozambique, South Africa and Cambodia have all
been successful, or partially successful, because they
have steered toward democracy and accountability. But

the critical result - apart from the fact that armed
violence was de-legitimized and that political
competition could continue - was that in those

countries the wars were over. Those examples deserve
to be registered as peacekeeping successes in a world
that continually looks at the most difficult cases and
tends prematurely to judge peacekeeping as hopelessly
difficult. We reject that; we think peacekeeping is of
vital importance to the world. The United Nations has
an important role to play in peacekeeping, but not an
exclusive one. These are examples of successes.

A lack of desire for peace is not what sabotaged
the peace processes in Angola and Sierra Leone. What
sabotaged the peace in those troubled countries was
Jonas Savimbi and Foday Sankoh. Therefore the
United Nations role in Sierra Leone needs to be
strengthened, not diminished. I think we should take
another look at the tragedy in Angola. If we look at the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo we
will again see that peace-making and ensuring
accountability go hand-in-hand. At the end of the
twentieth century and the beginning of the twenty-first
we are learning that peace and stability are inextricably
linked to democracy and questions of tolerance and
good governance. You cannot want peace if you are not
prepared to accept democracy and accountability.

I fully support the views of your Government,
Mr. President, and those of our Dutch colleagues, that
we should focus on getting the job done right rather
than on getting out. Getting the job right is the primary
responsibility of the Member States of the United
Nations acting through a Secretariat that has the
institutional capacity to help shape and implement our
resolutions.

I welcome our new Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
to the Council this morning. I say to him, and again to
my colleagues, that the implementation of the Brahimi
report, while not sufficient, is an essential next step in
moving forward. I welcome the resolution that was
passed earlier this week on that issue, and I hope that
the United Nations, and other bodies within the United
Nations, will act to give the new Under-Secretary-
General the additional resources he needs to carry out
his incredibly difficult and vital job.

I feel, by the way - and I must say this quite
frankly - that troop-contributing countries, some of
whom are represented in our audience today, have not,
in my View, been adequately consulted by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the past. I
do not believe they are adequately represented in the
staff of the Department. I say here today that, as part of
improving peacekeeping, I strongly urge that troop-
contributing countries, which carry the burden and,
increasingly, the human risks involved, have a stronger
role in the consultative process and in the personnel
structure of the Department. I cannot understand why
major troop-contributing countries do not have any
significant representation in the Department. As for my
own country, I do not feel that we have much
representation either, right now. Of 420 people in the
Department, only one is an American. I hope that will
also be corrected. I speak here on behalf of my many
friends in the audience who have talked to me directly
about this. I support them strongly.

We are all aware that the capacity of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to plan,
manage and backstop peacekeeping is severely
inadequate. That is why we want the Brahimi report
implemented to the maximum extent possible. Unless
we move decisively on meaningful peacekeeping
reform, those that threaten peacekeepers across the
globe may draw the conclusion that the United Nations
lacks the will, the cohesion and, even, the capability to
perform its essential peacekeeping functions. Absent
reform, those people who rely on the United Nations
and look to us for hope in places like East Timor,
Kosovo, Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will suffer, as they have in the past. As we
have said many times before, we need to make sure the
resources the United Nations needs to conduct
peacekeeping are in place as rapidly as possible.

The military component of peacekeeping, while
important, can only bring the stability necessary for the
search for political solutions to political problems. Our
job in the Council is to create the conditions necessary
for that dialogue, to assist it and to remain in place to
help build and rebuild shattered societies with more
democratic institutions. The United Nations must
provide countries and regions a chance for peace.
During the Millennium Summit, President de La Rua of
Argentina found a word he thought would describe this
doctrine. Speaking about the principle of non-
interference, he said that there was an equally valid and
countervailing principle, non-indifference. I do not
know what the term is in Spanish. What is it? No
indiferencia; it sounds much nicer in Spanish. But in
either language it is a wonderful concept and I strongly
endorse it. Non-indifference commands us to fix
United Nations peacekeeping, to save it by giving our
Blue Helmets the means they need to succeed. Those
include a realistic exit strategy based on sustainable
commitments to peace and accountable governance.

In conclusion, let me again thank you, Mr.
President, for giving us a chance to discuss this issue. I
hope and pray that we will continue this discussion in
private and that the underlying thoughts that bring us
here together will also underlie the ongoing debate
about implementation of the Brahimi recommendations
so that they will assist our new Under-Secretary-
General - who has our prayers, hopes and support -
in his difficult task.

