Mr. Tanin: During the three months since my last
presentation to the Security Council (see S/PV.7760),
there has been some consolidation of the political
situation in Kosovo. Regionally, some new, positive
developments, together with some new reasons for
concern, have emerged. Some of these are well covered
in the Secretary-General's report before the Council
(S/2016/90l); others have emerged since the submission
of the report and deserve to be highlighted.

I take note that, besides this being the last briefing
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) of 2016, it is also the last UNMIK
report by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who has
personally dedicated considerable time and attention to
this issue during the past decade.

Many of the political expectations with which
Kosovo the year yielded fewer results than hoped.
Difficulty building a broad political consensus has
meant that the territorial delineation agreement with
Montenegro, agreed in 2015, remains unratified, with
attendant consequences for Europe's visa liberalization
plans for Kosovo. Political divisions have also made
it more difficult to reap the benefits of normalizing
relations with Serbia within the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union (EU). Kosovo's EU Stabilization
and Association Process, a major development with
far-reaching potential, has been given little focused
attention by officials or the public, despite holding
the promise of much wider opportunities than the visa
liberalization matter can offer by itself.

The political violence of earlier months has
subsided. However, the divergent positions of the ruling
and opposition parties are just as entrenched, and the
general political atmosphere remains deeply polarized.
For Kosovo, this is unfortunate at a time when relations
among traditional regional rivals - for example
Tirana, and Belgrade - have benefitted from renewed
dialogue and the strengthening of economic ties.

Despite the political polarization, some of Kosovo's
leaders are forging ahead with a farther-sighted view of
reconciliation and the rebuilding of mutually beneficial
relations. I would like to highlight President Thaci's
recent engagement jointly with the family associations
of both Albanian and Serb missing persons, and his
emphasis on treating this issue on humanitarian, not
political grounds. He has also recently met with a
mixed Serb and Albanian youth group to encourage
understanding of the possibility of a common future
that would be better than is the situation today.
Such gestures remind us of the potential of genuine
dialogue, including but not limited to the EU-facilitated
political process.

In contrast, the accelerated passage through
parliamentary procedure of a new law on the Trepca
industrial complex emerged as another obstacle to
constructive dialogue. Irrespective of the details of
the law itself, the manner of its adoption was certain
to produce the negative reactions that we witnessed.
Assembly members were given less than 48 hours
to review the draft, with almost no opportunity for
analysis and argument. Both the law and the procedure
generated strong protest among the Serb community,
as well as from Belgrade, to the extent that Kosovo
Serb representatives and officials have suspended
their participation in governing institutions. The
international member of the Special Chamber of
the Kosovo Supreme Court has requested that the
Constitutional Court review the constitutionality of
the law, based on concern that it appears to contravene
fundamental property rights.

The divergence between the preoccupations of
governing elites and their electorates is a common
pattern. This phenomenon is present in Kosovo as
well. The priorities identified as being most important
by voters at the community level are often strikingly
distant from the issues dominating the elected bodies
and popular media spaces. The results of recent
surveys, including one commissioned by UNMIK,
indicate that there is little ethnic division in priorities
at the community level; unemployment, corruption and
lack of economic development are the biggest concerns.

Among other recent notable findings are the facts
that the level of trust in governing institutions is low;
the level of trust in international institutions is also
low; a range of party political allegiances appear to
be shifting; all ethnic groups place more emphasis
on dialogue among community leaders as the method
for advancing reconciliation than on political level
dialogue; and the normalization of relations with Serbia
is considered to be an important priority in roughly equal
proportion in both Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb
communities - over 50 per cent in both cases. Kosovo
Serbs and Kosovo Albanians alike, in substantial
majority, believe that the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities will increase the security
of Kosovo Serbs.

In their annual reports, the EU and the World
Bank continue to highlight low levels of employment
generation, and the exceptionally high rate of youth
unemployment, as fundamental issues to be tackled in
Kosovo.Youngpeopleunabletofindopportunitieswithin
accepted parameters are vulnerable to the temptations
of alternative narratives, including extremism.

Regardless of these familiar dichotomies between
political issues and ground-level concerns, the European
perspective remains a force for stabilization throughout
the Balkan region. The dialogue process delivered
progress during this period, including on the freedom
of movement, and in recent days a breakthrough
was announced on the telecommunications issue. In
contrast, there have been few visible signs of progress
on the implementation of the community/association of
Serb-majority municipalities.

Ultimately, political and societal reconciliation
processes must reinforce each other. I hope that political
dialogue is what awaits Kosovo in 2017, accompanied
by the necessary progress at the community level. In
those efforts, the roles of the EU and the United Nations
continue to converge.

Itake this opportunity to praise some of the excellent
efforts towards reconciliation at the municipal level,
where municipal authorities have listened and responded
to the concerns of their communities, resulting in real
progress. In Ferizaj/Urosevac, the Mayor appointed a
Deputy Mayor for communities, despite being under
no obligation to do so. The municipal authorities
responded to a request for assistance to clean and
secure a Serbian Orthodox cemetery, and undertook to
provide ongoing support to maintain the cemetery. In
Fushe Kosove/Kosovo Polje, the municipal authority
approved the allocation of funds to clean three Serbian
Orthodox cemeteries. In North Mitrovica, the long-
standing barricade on Prince Milos Street was quietly
and voluntarily removed on the evening of 28 October.

Unfortunately, exceptions do exist. The declaration
by the Suhareka/Suva Reka Municipal Assembly in
late October, opposing the return of Kosovo Serb, is
regressive and regrettable. The absence of a response by
the Kosovo governing institutions is disappointing. The
pain caused by the unresolved cases of missing persons
is real and understandable, but the right to a safe and
dignified return is also fundamental. An opportunity
to demonstrate a commitment to reconciliation has
been missed.

I wish to highlight the progress in efforts to advance
the rule of law in Kosovo. Commitment to the impartial
application of the rule of law should be recognized
and supported. There is deserved recognition for
the determination to pursue cases of high-profile
corruption, including the investigations into organized
criminal activities a few members of Kosovo's political
class. A clear distinction should be made between
individual and institutional responsibility. While the
Assembly of Kosovo moved to adopt a resolution on the
values of the Kosovo Liberation Army, it is individuals
who have been convicted of crimes, and not groups
or organizations.

One week ago, I had an opportunity to meet with
David Schwendiman, the newly appointed Specialist
Prosecutor of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers. He
informed me that preparations for the full functionality
of the Specialist Chambers were well advanced. The
integrity ofthe judicial process requires that all parties
refrain from seeking to exert improper influence or
sway public opinion, including through unfounded
speculation about the specific content of the judicial
process. The death in custody of Vetevendosje party
activist Astrit Dehari has raised concerns and provoked
indignation in many quarters. In the light of the many
questions that have been raised, an objective, thorough
and transparent investigation into that incident
is essential.

Violent extremism and terrorism are evolving
threats in Kosovo and the region. Countering those
threats requires a holistic approach in which law
enforcement is one essential component. Last week, the
authorities in Kosovo arrested a number of individuals
who had allegedly been recruited by extremist militants
in Syria to plan and conduct attacks in Kosovo and
the region. Kosovo's security bodies deserve special
commendation for their vigilance.

As I have reported to the Security Council, UNMIK
is steadily adapting itself so as to more effectively
address the contemporary challenges in Kosovo. A
logical optimization of our existing resources is helping
to ensure that the Mission discharges its mandate in a
focused and constructive manner, together with all of
its partners. Of crucial importance is the Mission's
relationship with the Kosovo institutions, and I am
pleased to confirm that the improvement in relations
reported in the Secretary-General's most recent report
on Kosovo is continuing. Among the many benefits
for all parties, that improved communication helps the
Mission to ensure accurate and balanced reporting on
the situation in Kosovo.

As highlighted by members of the Council in
past meetings, we can all help to advance the cause
of reconciliation. Empirical data from knowledge
products such as the surveys I mentioned help to update
our understanding of the real concerns among the
different geographic and ethnic communities. What did
not work yesterday might work today. That concept,
and constructive innovation in general, should guide
our endeavours.

To play our part in supporting a better future for
all people in Kosovo, the Mission continues to rely
upon the support of the Council. I thank the Council
sincerely for that support.
