Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
hope that I will be given an opportunity to make my
statement in response to the report of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) and her briefing
to the Security Council.

I congratulate Spain on its presidency of the
Council this month and thank its predecessor for the
excellent leadership last month. Again, I also thank the
President for this opportunity to address the Council
in response to the report of the Prosecutor of the ICC.

This is the twenty-fourth report delivered since
2005 pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), which provides
for two reports per annum, thereby leaving the ICC and
its Prosecutor with no option but to repeat a pointless
monologue about the deterioration of conditions in
Darfur and compelling the Prosecutor to fake blatant
lies in order to rally Council support on an issue that
has long been settled - first, by the conclusion of the
comprehensive agreement, which was welcomed by
the Council in resolution 2003 (2011), and, secondly,
by the agreement's implementation across the board,
whose completion was celebrated three months ago,
in September.

In that regard, we should like to call the Council's
attention to the records of the implementation follow-
up commission of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, which meets every six months. It is paradoxical
that the Prosecutor also presents her report every six
months, theatrically gearing up absurd presentations
that are completely contrary to the facts cited by the
commission, whose membership includes permanent
members of the Security Council, in addition to the
State of Qatar, neighbouring African States, the United
Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab States
and the European peace partners.

I should like to stress at the very outset that the
Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute of the ICC.
Let me also state that that Court is not an organ of the
United Nations, in spite of fervent attempts by some
parties to paint it otherwise in the meetings of the Main
Committees of the General Assembly. Again, I want to
emphasize that the Sudan is not a party to the Statute
nor to the ICC, in spite of such statements.

I would like to hand out two documents in English:
one on the issue of access to all areas of Darfur and
another on the fallacy of accusing the political leadership
of genocide. They have been prepared on the basis of
credible and well-documented international testimony,
to which I would like to draw the Council's attention.

This last accusation is no different in nature from
other erroneous accusation made by the ICC, but in
this instance there is a strange urgency on the part of
the Prosecutor and a suspicious keenness on the part
of some international non-governmental organizations
to manipulate this accusation in a bid to inflict as
much political harm as they can on the Sudan and its
existence and integrity.

Since 2005, reports of the Prosecutor of the ICC
have repeatedly demonstrated an inclination to address
the President of the Republic of the Sudan - who,
as we have previously stated and as is enshrined in
our Constitution, "personifies the sovereignty and
authority of the State" - in an inappropriate and
derogatory manner. That is inappropriate in general
and unacceptable to us in particular. It is deplorable in
the light of our national and human dignity, and indeed
unprecedented in our history.

As evidenced by successive trivial reports, the ICC
is completely disoriented. It is plagued by institutional
failure and corruption. It has made an enemy of the
Sudan and of the Sudanese Government in a manner
completely unbefitting an institution that proclaims
itself to be of the highest calibre at the international
level. We shall duly come to prove the fickleness of
the foundations on which the ICC is built, foundations
that are driving more and more nations and countries to
withdraw from the Court.

The 2005 Interim Constitution of the Sudan is, in
essence, a peace agreement, one adopted by consensus
following the proclamation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement signed that same year with South
Sudan. That Agreement clearly and equally addressed
both principles: justice and peace. Therefore, the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur is a compilation of
virtually all the principles universally agreed upon for
the voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons, for the implementation of the principles of
transitional justice, and remedial measures for Victims,
ensuring the prosecution of human rights violators and
providing for compensation and reparation to victims.

Guided by those principles, the Government of the
Sudan established a special tribunal for the prosecution
of crimes perpetrated in Darfur, and the Sudanese
Department of Justice appointed a special public
prosecutor for that very purpose. We have formally
provided the United Nations and the Security Council
with the statistics on the achievements of the tribunal.

We would like to draw the Council's attention to
this year's report of the Joint Tripartite Commission,
made up of the United Nations, the African Union and

the Govenrment of the Sudan, which states
(spoke in English)

"the Joint Working Group acknowledges the
efforts of the state Governments and Prosecutor
for Darfur Special Crimes Court to address the
crimes committed during the conflict and restore
law and order through the deployment of additional
police, corrections andjudicial human and material
resources across the five states of Darfur, including
legal advisers, prosecutors, legal aid assistants and
family child protection units".

(spoke in Arabic)

Although the report of the Prosecutor of the ICC
stresses the significance of resolution 1593 (2005),
which referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC, it has
nonetheless deliberately ignored what I mentioned with
regard to paragraph 5 of the same resolution:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council also emphasizes
the need to promote healing and reconciliation
and encourages in this respect the creation of
institutions, involving all sectors of Sudanese
society, such as truth and/or reconciliation
commissions, in order to complement judicial
processes and thereby reinforce the efforts to
restore long-lasting peace, with African Union and
international support as necessary".

(Spoke in Arabic)

Contrary to arrangements by the Government of
the Sudan to achieve justice and peace together, and the
Security Council's keenness to maintain that balance,
the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC issued policy
papers in 2007 giving political interpretation to article
53 of the Rome Statute. The latter stipulates that the
Prosecutor has the right to not - I repeat, not -proceed
with an investigation if that is detrimental to the
interests of justice, stating that such interests do not
mean peace. The Prosecutor alone created a statute
and imposed it on States parties to the Statute. That is
very dangerous. It gives the Prosecutor discretionary
political power to prematurely abolish peace initiatives
and agreements.

The report presented to the Council contains
many examples of inconsistency, contradiction and
unworthiness. As we have previously stated with
regard to the situation in Darfur, the ICC and its
Prosecutor have become an adversary and judge both
at the same time. According to some international law
jurists, the ICC is a kangaroo court. The following are
examples of those contradictions.

First, as we explained in our response to the
previous report, the Court was transformed into a
monitoring mission with a political agenda in Darfur,
as opposed to a judicial body. The twenty-fourth report,
submitted today, states in paragraph 25,

(spoke in English)

"[t]he Office of the Prosecutor continues to
monitor" - I repeat, "to monitor" - "and inquire
into current crimes allegedly being committed
in Darfur".

(spoke in Arabic)

It should be noted that this report relies on the
reporting of mechanisms put in place by the Security
Council, such as the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan, and even on reports of
non-governmental organizations. We have taken up
various aspects ofthose reports in the Security Council,
and disagreed with many of them. The members of the
Council, as I have said, have themselves disagreed
with many of the paragraphs in those reports. We have
shown on numerous occasions the self-contradictions of
those paragraphs, which render them invalid testimony
before any credible judicial body.

Secondly, the same International Criminal Court,
which refers cases of noncompliance to the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute, refused to refer
to that Assembly the case of its first Prosecutor, Luis
Moreno Ocampo, who is alleged to have committed
rape in 2006. It refused to refer it to the Assembly of
State Parties. Furthermore, it ordered the destruction
of incriminating evidence and approved the dismissal
of Christian Palme, an employee in the Office of
the Prosecutor, who came forward about the case of
rape. Mr. Palme later contested his dismissal at the
Administrative Tribunal of the International Labour
Organization, which decided he should be compensated.

Thirdly, in paragraphs 18 and 35, the twenty-fourth
report is cheaply appealing to emotions by shedding
tears for the victims, knowing very well that justice for
the victims is fully incorporated in the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. I hope that the Council will look
carefully at paragraph 35. It states that

(spoke in English)

"the Office will continue to do everything it can
to deliver justice to the countless victims of Rome
Statute crimes in Darfur".

(spoke in Arabic)

The Court is ultimately political; it therefore is not
qualified to achieve any kind ofjustice. In the 14 years
since its establishment it has ruled on four - just
four - cases, all ofthem concerning African nationals,
after rejecting more than 9,000 other complaints.

Fourthly, certainly no one was surprisedthat the ICC
hailed the report of Amnesty International concerning
allegations that the Government of the Sudan, between
January and September 2016, used chemical weapons
in Jebel Marra in Darfur. In that connection, I would
like to refer the Council to the statements by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons

(OPCW), to the fact that at its annual meeting it
welcomed the report of the Government of the Sudan.
In addition, the members of the OPCW renewed the
Sudan's membership in the Executive Council of the
OPCW for another two years.

I believe there is no need to concern the Council, or
myself, with such vexations and fabrications. However,
I am duty-bound to mention that the establishment of
an international criminal court was advocated by the
international Coalition for an International Criminal
Court. The Court is indebted to Amnesty International,
an organization that boasts in its statements that it
pushed the Security Council in 2004 to constitute the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, whose
report (see S/2005/60) was the basis for referring the
situation in Darfur to the ICC. Amnesty International
also prides itself on forcing the Court to rescind the
decision of the Trial Chamber 1 that no crime of
genocide was committed in Darfur.

We cannot entrust to the International Criminal
Court, under its present Statute, with the important and
noble goal of combating impunity for many substantial
reasons. I will mention only three, since time is short.

First, the text of the Statute enshrines the inequality
among those who are subject to its jurisdiction,
because it differentiates among them according to their
nationality and not by the evidence presented against
them. Exceptions in the Statute are not implemented
with regard to nationals of developing States. Moreover,
referrals of cases on the basis of article 13 of the Statute
cannot, and do not, take place except for nationals of
developing States - and African States alone.

Secondly, fully half of the budget of the Court
comes from voluntary contributions from States and
non-governmental organizations, and indeed even
individuals, and those parties ultimately exercise
control over the ICC.

Thirdly, the Court's policy papers, as well as its
practices since 2002, have driven a wedge between the
principles of justice and peace. They have suspended
one of the most fundamental principles of international
humanitarian law relative to internal conflicts, that
being amnesty, and all of that results in the ongoing
killing and violations of all forms, which brings us
back, regrettably, to the hellish circle of impunity.

The African Union, as represented by the African
Ministers of Justice, since 2009 has been seeking an
answer to a fundamental question: Has the Rome Statute
annulled the immunities enjoyed by officials according
to international law? The African Union has yet to
receive a reply. Furthermore, and regrettably enough,
the African Union High-level Committee of African
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, headed by the Ethiopian
Minister for Foreign Affairs, which was mandated to
meet with the Security Council, was not able to hold
its agreed meeting in September. I will not go into the
details of that regrettable episode, which was preceded
by the contempt displayed by the ICC towards African
States and Africans.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
