Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I sincerely thank you, Sir, for including
today's very important issue in your programme of
work, enabling us to discuss the situation in the Lake
Chad basin region for the first time this year and give
greater visibility to a serious crisis that has received
very little media attention.

We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Mr. Mohammed Bila, representative of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, and Ms. Chitra
Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser at Adelphi, for
their briefings, which underscored the severity of
the situation in the Lake Chad basin region and
its relationship to peace and security in Africa, in
particular in Central and West Africa. The violent
activities of the armed terrorist group Boko Haram
in north-eastern Nigeria affect Nigeria's neighbours
in the Lake Chad basin - Cameroon, Chad and
the Niger - with devastating implications for food
security and livelihoods. Boko Haram's acts of
terrorism have killed more than 15,000 people in the
region, led to the displacement of another 2.5 million
in those four countries and hindered access to land
and farming activities, which in turn has resulted
in enormous humanitarian deprivation in a region
already plagued by food insecurity, poverty and
environmental degradation.

The emergence of terrorist groups such as Boko
Haram and other non-State actors that operate outside
the law, undermining States' sovereignty and exploiting
their vulnerabilities, is both a cause and effect of the
factors I just mentioned. This situation is particularly
apparent on our continent and we commend the Council
for the initiatives it has already undertaken to address it.
However, we must remain vigilant and take preventive
and proactive measures to explore all of the variables
that play a role in the peace and security equation in
the region.

The Lake Chad basin is facing a complex
humanitarian situation in north-eastern Nigeria, the
far northern region of Cameroon, western Chad and
south-eastern Niger. In the areas of those countries
that are worst affected, conflict and displacement
are compounding the other structural factors that
undermine people's livelihoods, exacerbate food
insecurity and poverty and reduce access to basic social
services such as water, sanitation, health and education.
There is no need to cite all the statistics, but according
to several reports, about 11 million people are extremely
vulnerable and in need of humanitarian assistance.

As many representatives underscored at the
international conference on saving Lake Chad to
revitalize the basin's ecosystem for sustainable
livelihood, security and development - held from
26 to 28 February in Abuja - Lake Chad, part of
the common heritage of humankind, is testament to
the fact that global warming is closely linked to food
insecurity and instability. Climate change, exacerbated
by inefficient management of water resources over the
years, has shrunk the surface of Lake Chad by 90 per
cent in the past 40 years. The fact that the lake has dried
up and now contains only 10 per cent of its previously
normal volume of water, added to the resulting acute
food shortage, has created many security and peace
crises in the region.

The Council's unanimous adoption of resolution
2349 (2017) in March of last year testified to its resolute
and firm decision to support regional efforts to combat
the Boko Haram terrorist movement, resolve the
humanitarian crisis and eliminate the root causes of the
particularly difficult situation in which the Lake Chad
basin finds itself. The dual security and humanitarian
crisis there is putting us to the test in adopting a truly
integrated and comprehensive approach to the region's
multidimensional challenges. The problems facing the
region, which range from terrorism, the illegal trade
in arms and the trafficking and abduction of people
to food insecurity, climate change and environmental
degradation, cannot be solved in isolation from
one another.

Equatorial Guinea would like to commend
the praiseworthy efforts of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the African Union and, in particular,
the Multinational Joint Task Force, which have made
significant progress in their struggle to recover
territory captured by Boko Haram, and which have
thereby shown that African regional and subregional
organizations can play a very active role in such
contexts. The supranational structures of the Joint Task
Force's configuration and the Group of Five for the
Sahel have also been instrumental in regional efforts to
eradicate violence in the area. A coordinated regional
approach to the crisis is fundamental to achieving the
results we want.

However, the security gains must be accompanied
by support for development, with a focus on emergency
assistance with food production - in agriculture,
livestock and fisheries - while addressing the factors
creating instability in the region. Meeting immediate
needs will pave the way for the medium- and long-term
activities that can help to improve the resilience of
the population.

I would like to conclude by underscoring and
expressing our appreciation for the great determination
of the Governments of Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon and
the Niger to combat Boko Haram.

