Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Italian
presidency for organizing this very timely and
important debate on trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. We thank the Secretary-General; the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children; and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Ambassador Chergui, for their briefings on
the theme of our debate today. I wish in particular to
express my appreciation for the frankness with which
Ambassador Chergui delivered his briefing and spoke
on this critical matter.

Armed conflicts, poverty, inequality and the impact
of climate change, among other protection challenges,
increase the vulnerability of migrants and forcibly
displaced persons to falling victim to trafficking in
persons. Migrants continue to face unimaginable and
often fatal dangers along their journey at the hands of
traffickers, as opportunities for embarking upon a legal
path are very limited, thereby increasing the human
cost. That is particularly alarming in countries affected
by armed conflict, where armed transnational organized
criminal groups and terrorists have the space to engage
in trafficking in persons, as clearly indicated in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939).

Many migrants from Africa, including women and
children, who are fleeing persecution and/or searching
for a better life in Europe and the Middle East are
falling Victim to those terrorists and criminals. In
that regard, we note with concern reports of serious
Violations of international humanitarian law and
inhumane acts associated with trafficking in persons,
particularly reports of sexual exploitation and abuse,
forced marriage and the offering of women and children
as rewards to fighters and associates. The gruesome
stories of the victims, their trauma, torture and death
at the hands of those terrorists and criminals are a stark
reminder for us of the need to address that challenge
individually and collectively.

What we saw on the news only few days ago
concerning African migrants in Libya, who were
reportedly being sold as slaves, has certainly drawn
international attention to the challenge of human
trafficking. Let me say here that it is not the amount
of money involved in purchasing humans that should
be the centre of focus, but the very idea. It is against
that backdrop that we are holding this meeting, and we
strongly condemn such inhuman and despicable acts,
which, as many have said, should have no place in our
world today.

We fully support the statement issued by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General on the matter calling, for swift
action to identify the perpetrators of that crime and with
a View to bringing them to justice. However, we know
full well that condemning such acts and calling for an
investigation of the crimes committed will not take us
very far in addressing the issue of human trafficking.
We need to have a very serious and honest conversation
about trafficking and tackling the root causes in a
holistic and comprehensive manner. Accordingly, two
very weighty issues would need to be considered in
connection with the painful reality of humans being
sold as slaves in Libya.

The first issue involves the actual situations that
migrants are running away from. At the root of that are
poverty and hopelessness. Such situations should remind
us of the extent to which there is Virtually no alternative
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Secondly, there is an urgent need to sort out the
political situation in Libya so that the rule of law wll
prevail throughout the country under an authority whose
legitimacy is recognized by the Libyan people. In the
meantime, the role of the Security Council is becoming
much more relevant and significant, and we welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2388 (2017). We
hope that it will contribute to enhancing the Council's
engagement in addressing human trafficking, which
has emerged as a very serious challenge to international
peace and security. We also appreciate Italy's important
role in addressing this particular issue and its efforts in
facilitating negotiations on resolution 2388 (2017).

In terms of an effective international response to
the scourge of trafficking in persons, attention should
be paid to reducing the vulnerability of migrants and
refugees, particularly women and children, including
unaccompanied and separated children, as they are at
the highest risk of falling victim to human trafficking.
Recent reports clearly indicate that tighter immigration
controls and border security measures, as well as limited
humanitarian assistance, increase the vulnerability of
migrants and refugees to becoming victims of human
trafficking. As such, much more needs to be done
by countries of transit and destination in expanding
legal channels for migration or for the resettlement of
refugees, as that would decrease the number ofpotential
victims of trafficking undertaking a fatal or dangerous
journey in a manner consistent with international
humanitarian and human rights standards.

Recognizing the positive contribution of migration
to the global economy and sustainable development
is absolutely imperative. That requires developing
an agenda aimed at fostering fair migration that not
only respects the fundamental rights of migrants, but
also offers them real opportunities for decent work
and integration into the society in which they find
themselves. In that regard, countries of origin, transit
and destination might consider creating a framework
for well-regulated, regular and fair migration, while at
the same time prioritizing the human rights ofmigrants.

While searching for solutions and mechanisms to
prevent and combat trafficking in persons, maintaining
the capacity to respond to humanitarian emergencies
in countries affected by conflict remains central.
Lifesaving humanitarian assistance and international
protection of refugees and migrants, regardless of
their status, should continue to form the cornerstone
of humanitarian response, including in mixed flows.
The adoption of an open-door policy for people
seeking humanitarian assistance, regardless of their
status - particularly in the context of search, rescue and
disembarkation of people on mixed movement - should
continue to be encouraged.
Ethiopia, for its part, has been trying to take
various measures to prevent and fight trafficking in
persons, including the ratification of relevant legal
framework such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. Aside from what each
of us can and must do at the national level, however,
there is certainly a need to enhance bilateral and
multilateral cooperation between countries of origin,
transit and destination regarding the identification,
assistance, protection, repatriation and reintegration of
victims of human trafficking.

In our View, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, the United Nations
Global Plan ofAction to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
and regional frameworks such as the Khartoum process
could provide a framework for such cooperation
and coordination.

In conclusion, discussions on the global compacts
on migration and refugees should be informed by
practical steps taken to address trafficking in persons,
and we hope that the discussions we are having today
will contribute to that objective.

