Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to thank the President
for convening this important meeting. I would also
like to welcome the presence of the Malaysian Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs at
today's meeting.

The initiative to organize this meeting on the
implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004) is particularly
important for my country. Twelve years ago, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1540
(2004) because it was convinced of the importance
and the need to enhance efforts aimed at putting an
end to the emerging threat of the possible acquisition
by terrorist groups and non-State actors of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs), raw materials for their
manufacture and their means of delivery. National,
regional and international efforts have succeeded in
ensuring some positive outcomes. Despite all that,
however, there remain serious shortcomings and gaps
that are being exploited by terrorist groups to obtain
weapons of mass destruction and to use them to achieve
their criminal goals.

Furthermore, we also see States Members of
the Organization providing terrorist groups with
chemical weapons or their raw materials. We also see
some countries claiming to do one thing while in fact
doing something quite different on the ground. They
close their eyes to serious violations that represent a
grave threat to international peace and security. Their
effects go beyond one particular State or particular
geographical boundaries.
Serious violations of resolution 1540 (2004)
are unfortunately a reality in Syria, where criminal
terrorist groups have on many occasions used chemical
weapons against civilians and the military. They
have been supported by Arab and regional countries,
as well as by the intelligence services of important
countries in the region and in the Organization, even
including some members of the Security Council. As
an unfortunate example of the use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups active in Syria, I would like to
highlight the fact that, on 13 June, terrorist groups
in the vicinity of Haush Al-Fara launched a chemical
weapon against a number of Syrian soldiers. For a more
recent example, on 2 August, armed terrorist groups
targeted Al-Awamid square, in the Old town of Aleppo,
with toxic-gas missiles, which caused six deaths among
civilians, and 20 others suffocated.

Some members of the Security Council are
absolutely determined to identify the terrorist groups
that launch chemical weapons while at the same time
referring to them as the "moderate opposition", their
having been thus classified by their intelligence
services. Those countries are providing that terrorist
"opposition" and mercenary groups with weapons,
financing, cover and logistical support, which is
exacerbating the crisis at great cost. According to
statements made by Robert Malley, an assistant to
the American President and White House coordinator
for Middle East, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has informed the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons of the incident in
Al-Awamid and requested a fact-finding mission to be
sent to verify the allegations about the use of chemical
weapons in Syria and to undertake an immediate
investigation into the incident.

Given Syria's concern and its determination to
reveal the truth behind the use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups, I was also called upon by my
country, Syria, to inform the Office of the Secretary-
General and the chairmanship of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism. I provided them with
information on terrorist groups linked to or affiliated
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).
They have produced 45 chemical weapons, including
the use of chlorine and mustard gas. They used them
in Mosul in Iraq and in Raqqah governorate in Syria,
under the supervision of a member of ISIS, namely,
Abdel Rahman Al-Nawi. Some of those rockets went to
Deir ez-Zor governorate.

The Syrian Arab Republic has transmitted through
dozens of official letters, communicated to the
Secretary-General and to the various Presidents of the
Security Council and the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), information as to certain Governments that are
supporting terrorism in my country. I am talking about
Turkey and Saudi Arabia, which facilitate terrorist
groups in obtaining chemical weapons. We submitted
this information to the Security Council and the 1540
Committee. As of 8 December 2012 through 8 August
2016, we have provided detailed information that some
of the Al-Qaida groups have tried and tested chemical
weapons in a laboratory in a town in Turkey to use
against civil targets in Syria. We have seen efforts by
terrorists to smuggle a substantial amount of sarin gas
through Turkey and into Syria. The gas went to Turkey
from Libya via a commercial jetliner. That began in
2013, and they tried to accuse the Syrian Government
of that. We also have voice recordings and videos
related to that, which confirm the fact that terrorist
groups have obtained chemicals and have used them in
many areas of Syria.

Despite all that has been revealed with regard to
these attempts, which include the trafficking of sarin
gas through Turkey into Syria, there have been detailed
reports that concern the involvement of certain States
that are behind the attacks that have targeted Khan
Al-Asal, near Aleppo, and the area near Damascus on
21 August 2013. The Security Council has taken no
steps, because powerful countries prevented the team
led by Mr. Ake Sellstrom from fulfilling its role and
assuming its responsibilities to deal with the terrorism
to which Syria is exposed. The countries I am referring
to - which support terrorism have set out red, green
and yellow lines - have not played their due role
and assumed their responsibilities, but have assigned
responsibility to countries that in fact support terrorism.
There has also been an attempt to obstruct the Russian-
Chinese draft resolution submitted to the Council that
aims at taking early measures to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring and using chemical weapons.

My Government reiterates once again its total
commitment to the international instruments and the
procedures now under way to promote cooperation,
exchange information and coordinate in order to face the

threat ofterrorists and non-State actors gaining access to
weapons of mass obstruction. The Government of Syria
has done so in a continuous way. We have submitted
five national reports to the 1540 Committee on the
implementation of that resolution. The Government
of my country now calls upon the Security Council
and its various subsidiary bodies to assume their
responsibility to ensure that terrorists groups that are
active in Syria do not get hold of chemical weapons and
to hold responsible those countries that are supporting
terrorism. That would contribute effectively to efforts
aimed at maintaining international peace and security
and would ensure the implementation of the mandate of
the 1540 Committee.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the two
colleagues representing the United States of America
and the United Kingdom mentioned that the Joint
Investigative Mechanism would consider or review the
various cases where chemical weapons were recently
used. That means that those two delegations, which
represent permanent members of the Security Council,
do not know what they are talking about at all, because
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism does
not include recent incidents. It limits its work to the nine
cases identified by the earlier fact-finding mission. It is
not right for a representative on the Security Council
to speak of an issue of which he is totally ignorant,
particularly if he represents a permanent member.

