Mr. ElBaradei: Mr. President, thank you for
inviting me to address this timely, and I hope
groundbreaking, summit. I would like to thank you,
Sir, for taking this courageous initiative, an initiative
that rekindles hope for a world at peace with itself and
a security system that is balanced, equitable and
humane.

I will limit myself to a few key issues.

First, the global nuclear non-proliferation regime
is fragile and has many shortcomings. The legal
authority of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) is severely limited in some countries because
many States have not concluded the required
agreements with the Agency. As a result, in over
90 States the Agency either has no verification
authority at all or its authority is inadequate. That
means we often cannot verify whether or not a country
is engaged in clandestine nuclear activities.
Furthermore, our verification mandate is centred on
nuclear material. If the Agency is to be expected to
pursue possible weaponization activities, it must be
empowered with the corresponding legal authority.

A second issue is the growing number of States
that have mastered uranium enrichment or plutonium
reprocessing. Any one of these States could develop
nuclear weapons in a very short span of time, if, for
example, it decided to withdraw from the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

To address this, I believe that we need to move
from national to multinational control of the nuclear
fuel cycle. As a first step, I have proposed the
establishment of a low enriched uranium bank to assure
States a guaranteed supply of nuclear fuel for their
reactors so that they might not need their own
enrichment or reprocessing capability. A number of
complementary proposals have also been made in that
regard. Our ultimate goal, however, should be the full
multinationalization of the fuel cycle as we move
towards nuclear disarmament.

A third issue is providing the highest level of
security for nuclear and radioactive material. In my
view, the biggest risk the world faces today is that of
extremists getting hold of such material. More than
200 incidents of illicit trafficking, losses or thefts were
reported to the IAEA last year. And this might be only
the tip of the iceberg. We need to intensify our efforts
to secure vulnerable nuclear and radioactive material.
The Council's initiative to secure such material within
four years could not be more timely.

A fourth issue is the need to strengthen the IAEA.
I should emphasize that, at the current level of funding,
the IAEA will not be able to fulfil its mission in
nuclear verification and security. The Agency
infrastructure is dilapidated, and we lack state-of-the-
art technology key to modern-day verification.

A fifth issue is that the IAEA cannot do its work
in isolation. It depends on a supportive political
process, with the Security Council at its core. The
Council needs to develop a comprehensive compliance
mechanism to address, in a consistent and systematic
manner, cases of non-compliance with safeguards
obligations or of countries withdrawing from the NPT.
This should include giving the Agency the additional
authority it may need to deal with specific cases.
A sixth issue is that the Security Council must put
more emphasis on addressing the insecurities that lie
behind many cases of proliferation, such as endemic
conflicts, security imbalances and lack of trust.

Finally, I am grateful to see nuclear disarmament
back at the top of the international agenda. I would like
to express my gratitude to the "four horsemen" -
George Shultz, Henry Kissinger, Sam Nunn and
William Perry - for their pioneering work, their
statesmanship and their contribution to making this
environment a reality. I am also grateful to see a
recognition of the intrinsic link between nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation, an idea that you,
Mr. President, have expressed quite often.

By demonstrating their irreversible commitment
to achieving a world free from nuclear weapons, the
weapon States can greatly contribute to the legitimacy
of the non-proliferation regime and gain the moral
authority to call on the rest of the world to curb the
proliferation of these inhumane weapons.

To turn the ideas discussed today into action will
require an environment of mutual trust, which I hope
this summit will help to create.

