Mr. Dauth (Australia): I should like to begin by
suggesting that no one take too much notice of the
draft statement that has been circulated in my name. I
saw it only a few minutes ago, and it is so manifestly
unsatisfactory that I shall be extemporizing for much
of the time.

Apart from anything else, the draft that members
have is tasteless enough not to offer our
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and not to thank our
French colleagues for their very effective leadership of
the Council last month. We should also particularly
like to thank Danilo Turk and his colleagues for their
contributions and for his presentation today. In that
respect, I am delighted to see Valery Marusin in the
Chamber and to congratulate him on the work he has
done over many years on this issue.

We commend the role that the United Nations has
played in the Bougainville peace process. But today, I
want particularly to applaud all the parties - the
Government of Papua New Guinea, the
Bougainvilleans themselves and the United Nations -
for bringing an international peacebuilding operation to
a successful end. That is not a usual occurrence here in
the Council, and I think we should all take great
satisfaction in success when we see it.

The Bougainville conflict was one of the South
Pacific's longest-running and bloodiest conflicts.
Indeed, by global standards, it was quite nasty:
between 1989 and 1998, an estimated 10,000 to 18,000
people may have died as a result of the conflict. Of a
population of around 200,000 people, up to 70,000
were displaced from their homes and moved into care
centres and camps. Those are shocking statistics.

Frankly, the situation in Bougainville - as we
have said many times - has received too little
international attention, not here in the Council, but
more broadly. I must say, with a slight note of
bitterness, that that is altogether too typical of the
attention that issues arising in our part of the world
generally receive in the world at large.

The establishment of the Autonomous
Bougainville Government last month, following
successful elections, was a momentous event in the
process of establishing and consolidating peace in
Bougainville. The United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville (UNOMB) was small, but it made a
strong - indeed, vital - contribution to the peace
process. In that respect, it would be wrong not to
acknowledge the contributions of the members of
UNOMB on the ground.

We particularly appreciate the Security Council's
past agreement on a couple of occasions to extend the
time of UNOMB'S presence in Bougainville. Ending
that presence too soon would have risked a recurrence
of the problems there. In that respect, I particularly
congratulate the Security Council for taking a cautious,
prudent and conservative approach to the end of a
peacebuilding operation. The Council has done very
well, but I should just like to say in passing that that is
a reminder of the particular potential utility of a
peacebuilding commission in this house.
As I said, we congratulate the Government of
Papua New Guinea and the people of Bougainville on
their hard work and the progress they have made. In
particular, I would like to recognize the contribution of
the women of Bougainville, who - if one is familiar
with the situation on the ground there - have had a
wonderfully normative impact on their male leaders.
The contribution of the Bougainvillean community in
general is a shining example to the world as a whole.

We have been a consistent and proud supporter of
the Bougainville peace process, and we are pleased to
have worked alongside the United Nations and regional
partners - including New Zealand, Fiji and
Vanuatu - through the Truce Monitoring Group, the
Peace Monitoring Group and the Bougainville
Transition Team. Australia remains strongly committed
to efforts to ensure lasting peace and development in
Bougainville. We look forward to continuing to work
with the United Nations through its agencies and
programmes, including the United Nations
Development Programme and UNICEF.

Lastly, I particularly congratulate my friend and
colleague the Ambassador of Papua New Guinea, Mr.
Robert Aisi, on his consistent and strong focus on this
issue during his tenure here. It has been a delight to
work with him.

