Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, for his briefing. It is timely and useful, as the

plight of over 40 million people displaced from their
homes remains precarious and serious in many parts of
the world, including Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine,
Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
elsewhere. In addition, there are 26 million people
displaced by natural disasters.

This morning, I should like to comment on three
issues. The first is the root causes of displacement.

As the High Commissioner has pointed out, the
tragic phenomenon of displacement is growing
increasingly complex. More and more people are being
forced to move not only because of conflicts and
persecution, but also as a result of extreme poverty,
natural disasters and environmental degradation. As he
noted, we are also all too aware of the negative impact
that climate change and the global food crises are
having on those refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs). We need to address these root causes
so that the number of displaced persons does not
continue to swell. As the root causes are different in
each case, there is no single policy measure which can
resolve the issue worldwide.

However, particularly in the context of the
Security Council's responsibility, I am convinced that
conflict prevention is one of the most effective
measures to reduce displacement. Peacebuilding efforts
to prevent the recurrence of conflict are indispensable
to addressing protracted refugee situations. The
reintegration of displaced persons should be accorded a
higher priority as we develop and implement integrated
peacebuilding strategies, which has begun very well in
the context of the Peacebuilding Commission.

The second issue is finding durable solutions. The
protection of those who are forced from their homes is
naturally the most urgently needed first step. However,
to achieve a durable solution, it is necessary not only to
protect but also to empower refugees and IDPs. We
believe that assistance for return and reintegration,
such as vocational training and education for returnee
children, is essential in seeking a durable solution.
Japan has placed emphasis on the empowerment of
vulnerable people, particularly refugees and IDPs and
the women and children among them, and on an
integrated approach by promoting the human security
perspective. I am very grateful to the High
Commissioner for mentioning that in his closing
remarks. We very much look forward to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) continuing to strengthen a people-centred
approach in implementing its programme. People must
always be at the centre of our attention.

The third point is the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel. The staff members of UNHCR
and partners, implementers and other humanitarian
personnel on the ground are selflessly devoting
themselves to helping those most in need, very often in
difficult and dangerous situations. It is a source of deep
concern that casualties among humanitarian personnel
are on the rise and that humanitarian workers are
increasingly becoming a target of attack, which is
totally unacceptable.

We call upon all parties concerned to take
appropriate action to secure humanitarian space, fully
respecting the neutrality and impartiality of
humanitarian assistance. As a matter of great urgency,
we must find a way to meet the challenge of securing
humanitarian space and the safety and security of all
who operate within it.

A number of peacekeeping operations authorized
by this Council have a mandate to protect humanitarian
workers. Many Security Council resolutions contain
calls to the relevant parties concerned to secure the
safety and security of humanitarian workers.

However, we are very often disappointed with the
reality. We wonder if this relates to the problems
emanating from the mandate of the mission itself or the
structure and capacity of the mission or support
mission to implement these mandates. These are the
questions we must answer in detail. We in the Council
need to consider actively any improvement we have to
make to protect the workers more effectively. We hope
that the study jointly commissioned by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
implementation of Security Council mandates on the
protection of civilian lives will analyse this issue in
depth and come up with recommendations for action.

We also welcome the recent adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 63/139, designating
19 August as World Humanitarian Day in order to raise
public awareness about humanitarian activities
worldwide.

In conclusion, Japan has consistently been a
strong supporter of and one of the top donors to
UNHCR, and we are very pleased with this. During a
recent visit by the High Commissioner, my
Government conveyed to him its continued support and
its recent decision to become the first Asian country to
accept refugees from Myanmar for resettlement.

I wish to commend the High Commissioner for
his strong leadership in addressing the issue of
displacement effectively by making UNHCR a more
decentralized and field-oriented organization. We hope
to see UNHCR engaging even more effectively in its
vitally important activities to assist people.

