Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. We would also like
to thank the delegation of Qatar for the work
accomplished. I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of the Russian
Federation for giving us this opportunity to formally
welcome the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to whom we wish success in his
undertaking and to whom we offer support. At the
same time, we welcome this opportunity to address an
issue of utmost transcendence, namely, current threats
to international peace and security and how best to
confront them.

Panama is a country where people of many
ethnicities, cultures and religion live in peace and
harmony. It is a country that historically has
maintained friendly relations with States of different
political and ideological orientations. It is a country
that by its Constitution is demilitarized, a country that
adheres to the doctrine of human security as part of its
national laws and a country with a canal that is neutral
in accordance with an international treaty and by its
own wishes. That is why no one should be surprised
that this subject attracts our special attention.

More than sixty years ago, when our predecessors
entrusted the United Nations Organization with the
responsibility for and the obligation of maintaining
peace and security, they did so with the conviction that
by doing so they were contributing to saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
However, since then, the world has changed
dramatically, and the main threats no longer stem from
wars between States. Today, these threats derive
principally from destabilization caused by poverty,
injustice and marginalization. They come from the
spread of infectious diseases, from the scarcity and
abuse of natural resources, and from destruction of the
environment. They stem from ethnic, cultural and
religious conflicts, and from the systematic violations
of human rights. They stem from transnational
organized crime, from the stockpiling and proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, and from the illicit
trafficking in small arms. Finally, they derive from
fundamentalism, especially those forms that proclaim
themselves the guardians of the truth and that seek to
impose this truth through force, including through
terrorist acts.

Necessary and timely attention to these great
threats will require us above all to fully know,
understand and address the root causes. While it is true
that a large share of this responsibility falls to the
United Nations, other international organizations,
States themselves, nongovernmental organizations
and - why not say so - all human beings, out of a
common moral sense, must do likewise.

Within the United Nations, the Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. However, not all
potential threats can or should be examined
immediately by the Council. There are other principal
and subsidiary organs within the United Nations that
can and should also contribute to addressing these
threats, including the Secretariat, with its vast capacity
for preventative diplomacy, the General Assembly,
which enjoys universal representation, the Economic
and Social Council and the Human Rights Council.
Each, according to their powers and functions, can
contribute to addressing many of these issues.

In this respect, we should recall that the Charter
not only grants the General Assembly the right to
discuss any question relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security, but also, to a certain
extent, imposes the responsibility upon the Assembly
to call the attention of the Security Council to those
situations that are likely to endanger peace and
security. It is no exaggeration to say that the Assembly
has much to do in this respect.

With regard to the Security Council, there is no
doubt that the spirit and reason for its establishment lie
in the need to have one organ that can effectively and
efficiently contribute to the resolution of critical
situations before they develop into conflicts of greater
complexity.

The Charter, however, imposes on the Security
Council the obligation to exhaust all mechanisms it
offers and all options of prevention and mediation that
are contemplated in Chapter VI, and also demands that
the Council cooperate broadly with regional
organizations referred to in Chapter VIII, before
considering sanctions or the use of force provided for
in Chapter VII.

To address threats to international peace and
security, humanity has placed its hopes in the United
Nations. In the light of this trust, all United Nations
decisions - but in particular - those taken by the
Security Council, given their binding nature - must be
adopted in strictest conformity with international law.
The credibility and legitimacy of its actions and,
accordingly, its ability to address current threats to
international peace and security will largely depend
upon that.

