The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

The Security Council has closely followed the
Palestinian issue in its monthly meetings. I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his update, and Japan shares his
assessment of the alarming situation surrounding the
peace process.

Japan's position remains unchanged. Japan
supports a two-State solution, based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the Quartet road map, the agreements previously
reached by the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The final status of Jerusalem is part ofa range ofissues
that should be resolved through negotiations based on
those parameters.

President Trump reaffirmed his strong commitment
to facilitating a lasting peace agreement and his support
for a two-State solution in his announcement two
days ago. Japan appreciates that strong commitment
and support. Japan also notes the importance of the
President's clear acknowledgement that the final status
of Jerusalem, including the sovereign boundaries
within the city, must be subject to negotiation between
the parties. The United States should continue to
play an important role in advancing peace. However,
Japan is concerned about the fact that the United
States' announcement could worsen the environment
surrounding the Middle East peace process or lead to
a deterioration of the situation in the Middle East more
generally. Japan took note of the Secretary-General's
statement two days ago about the Middle East peace
process and of Mr. Mladenov's briefing today, which
calls for avoiding any unilateral measures that might
jeopardize the prospect ofpeace. Japan has consistently
reiterated its support for that position in the context of
the issue of settlements and violence. We are deeply
concerned about the increasing tension on the ground.
Cases ofviolence at such times can easily snowball into
larger crises. Japan has consistently stated that violence
will not bring peace any closer. We call on the parties
to maintain calm and act in the interests ofpeace rather
than violence.

Against that backdrop, efforts to create an
environment conducive to peace are all the more
important. We have seen various parties put forward
initiatives and proposals for bringing both sides closer
to meaningful negotiations. Their implementation is
key, and Japan calls on both Israelis and Palestinians to
sincerely engage in those initiatives and take advantage
of opportunities leading to peace. For its part, Japan
will support efforts to bring peace in the Middle East
by facilitating confidence-building and the economic
development of Palestine. We are committed to working
with our partners in the international community to
uphold a two-State solution whereby Israel and a future
independent Palestinian State can live side by side in
peace, prosperity and security.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.

