I would like to thank the Russian Federation for organizing this open debate in commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers for their insightful comments. In its resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council recognized the importance of women's full participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, while highlighting the particular vulnerabilities of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict settings and the importance of addressing their specific needs in such situations. For the past 20 years, significant progress has been made in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and security. Countless efforts have been deployed by Member States and international and regional organizations, as well as by civil society and grass-roots movements. However, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary amid a global pandemic that has exacerbated gender inequality, we have seen first-hand how the ambitions and objectives set two decades ago are still far from being reached today. This commemoration should serve not only as an opportunity to take stock of past achievements but also as a reminder that, despite the progress made, the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was not the end of women's long march towards equality. Rather, it set the bedrock for further efforts to achieve women's rights and their empowerment, which now requires scaling up our collective efforts towards implementation. Such implementation needs to primarily be comprehensive and integrated across the four pillars of the agenda based on coherence among the political, security, development, human rights, gender equality and rule-of-law aspects. In that regard, it is crucial to reiterate our commitment to greater implementation that reinforces the mutual interlinkages with the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, particularly as this year also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women. It should also be inscribed within our broader efforts to fulfil human rights and gender equality, including through the full implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. Furthermore, our collective implementation efforts cannot be effective unless they are inscribed within a multi-stakeholder approach that involves all the various actors. In that regard, it is important to recognize the invaluable contributions of civil society, feminist groups and women human rights defenders in the promotion, implementation and monitoring of the women and peace and security agenda. In that spirit, Tunisia established a national committee in charge of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which comprises representatives of the relevant Government structures, constitutional bodies and civil society, with women's representation exceeding 50 per cent. The work of that multi-stakeholder committee culminated in the adoption of a comprehensive and multidimensional national action plan in August 2018, followed by 14 coordinated sectoral action plans covering specific areas, such as law enforcement, security, health and prevention of violent extremism. The coronavirus disease pandemic has had devastating consequences for women and girls, particularly in conflict and post-conflict settings. Unless properly addressed, its impact will continue to be exacerbated, threatening to disrupt, and even reverse, the progress that we have accomplished so far. Civil society organizations are struggling to maintain their activities while being restricted due to the pandemic and as their resources are being diverted towards urgent crisis response. Member States need to ensure the continuity of the necessary funding mechanisms to support the work and enhance the capacities of organizations that support women's leadership, empowerment and participation at all levels of decision-making. We need to further implement the existing normative framework on women and peace and security in order to address the causes and manifestations of gender inequality that increase the vulnerability of women and girls in the face of conflict. Special attention must be given to conflict-related sexual violence. We need to promote a survivor-centred approach that recognizes that women and girls are not a homogenous group and that they require adequate response measures in accordance with their different needs and contexts. We also need to put an end to impunity so as to deliver justice to the victims and prevent such heinous crimes in future. Finally, we need to address the underlying drivers of conflict-related sexual violence by promoting gender equality and human rights and by bringing national legislation in line with international norms and standards. Tunisia is committed to continuing to champion the women and peace and security agenda at the national level through the implementation of our national action plan, the integration of a gender-responsive perspective into our national strategies and policies, and a true partnership and leadership by women in all public and private spheres. We also reiterate our commitment to building on international efforts rooted in peacebuilding priorities and principles that seek to protect women's rights and ensure their full, equal and meaningful participation in peace efforts and decision-making processes.
