Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI). We
reiterate our support for his important work. We would
also especially like to thank Major Anna Patrono for
her briefing as well as for her presence today, and
for showing the Council a clear example of effective
cooperation and the strengthening of institutions in
situations as complex as that in Iraq. We also appreciate
the important work that UNAMI is doing in fulfilling
its mandate, and we encourage its personnel to continue
their progress in their dialogue and coordination efforts
aimed at strengthening the peace and reconciliation
process in Iraq.

We are pleased to see the successful campaigns
that Iraqi security forces have been carrying out to
liberate the people of Tall Afar, Akashat, Ana, Sharqat,
Hawijah and Daquq from Da'esh control. We are also
appreciate the priority that Iraqi security forces have
given to protection measures for civilians and civil
infrastructure in their military campaigns as they fight
to definitively eradicate Da'esh from Iraq. We reiterate
our sincere gratitude for the courage, sacrifice and
determination that Iraqi security forces, and the Iraqi
people as a whole, continue to show in their ongoing
fight against terrorism on behalf of all of us.

We hope that the legislation and legal mechanisms
required for the regional election processes planned
for 2018 will be implemented in a participatory and
inclusive manner and will enable elections to be held
in a peaceful and orderly way to the benefit of the
entire population. We believe that UNAMI's technical
assistance will be very important to achieving that goal.

We are extremely concerned about the serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law reported by the Secretary-General.
They include the atrocities that Da'esh continues
to perpetrate in Iraq in the form of kidnappings,
degrading treatment and torture, the recruitment
of child combatants, the enslavement of more than
1,500 Yazidi women and the summary executions of
civilians. The latter were discovered in August when
the bodies of men, women and children were found in
several mass graves in Mosul, in Ninawa governorate.
In that regard, we support for the work that the Special
Representative and the Iraqi Government are doing
to establish an investigative team in accordance with
resolution 2379 (2017), which will be key to identifying
the perpetrators of such serious crimes and bringing
them to justice, so that they can be duly investigated,
prosecuted and punished to the fullest extent of the law.

We also regret the continuing asymmetric attacks
that kill innocent civilians. During the period under
discussion, 410 people, including women and children,
were reported killed and more than 600 wounded,
360 as a result of explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices. In our view, clearing
and removing such devices and remnants are a crucial
part of peacebuilding, since they enable the tasks of
rebuilding and restoring public services and securing
access to humanitarian assistance to begin. Above
all, they enable displaced populations to return safely
to their homes and resume their normal lives. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the work being done
by the United Nations Mine Action Service in Iraq. It
has succeeded in removing more than 700 explosive
devices in Mosul, thereby helping refugees and
internally displaced persons to return safely. We thank
the Secretary-General for including the subject of mine
action in today's report (S/2017/881). We hope that in
the future we will see a report focused specifically on
the activities of the Mine Action Service, in accordance
with paragraph 15 of resolution 2365 (2017).

We appreciate the determination and efforts of
the Iraqi Government to identify disappeared Kuwaiti
citizens and to identify and return the property stolen
from them during the conflict in 1990 and 1991. We
encourage the parties involved to continue to redouble
their efforts to bring about concrete results and to follow
through on the reconciliation process being carried out
by Iraq and Kuwait.

Finally, it is important to reiterate that policies of
regime change, intervention and interference in the
internal affairs of States have been one of the main
reasons for the destruction of Iraq's State institutions
and for weakening its forces of law and order, thereby
facilitating the rise of terrorism and extremism in the
region with the regrettable consequences that still
persist today.

