Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to begin by welcoming the fact that you,
Mr. Minister, are presiding over this meeting. I also
wish to thank the representatives of the three non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) for their
presentations.

The pacific settlement of disputes is one of the
important principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. Conflict prevention is also what the
United Nations has been actively engaged in over the
years. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have both emphasized the importance of conflict
prevention and the pacific settlement of disputes in
relevant resolutions.

It is clear that the primary responsibility in that
regard lies with the Governments of the countries
concerned. The United Nations and the international
and regional organizations concerned also have
important roles to play. This constitutes an important
component of resolution 1366 (2001) and should be
adhered to in future endeavours related to conflict
prevention and the pacific settlement of disputes.

We have noted that in recent years some civil
society organizations have been playing an
increasingly active role in conflict prevention. They
have undertaken a great deal of useful work and played
a complementary role in the international community's
peace efforts, as confirmed by General Assembly
resolution 57/337 and Security Council resolution 1366
(2001).

We believe that civil society should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in their participation in activities related to
conflict prevention and to the pacific settlement of
disputes and, in their work in the field, maintain
objectivity, impartiality and neutrality. This is
imperative for their work to achieve positive results.

In their participation in conflict prevention,
various civil society groups can put to good use their
expertise and experience in various fields to promote
dialogue and reconciliation. At the same time, civil
society organizations must proactively cooperate with
and assist the Governments concerned and the
international community, especially the United
Nations, and avoid encroaching on their primary roles
or causing hindrances. Of course, the United Nations
should also, in appropriate ways, listen to the views
and proposals of civil society.

In brief, we hope that civil society organizations
will continue to play their own constructive roles in
conflict prevention and the pacific settlement of
disputes, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

