Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Permit me at the outset, Sir,
to express my delegation's delight at seeing you preside
over the affairs of our Council this month. We have no
doubt whatsoever that with you as our President the work
of the Council is indeed in excellent hands. My delegation
would also like to express hearty thanks to your
predecessor, Ambassador Martinez Blanco, and to the entire
Honduran delegation for their excellent stewardship of the
Council during the month of July.

May I also seize this opportunity to formally welcome
to the Council the new Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir John Weston. We feel sure that his
contributions to the work of our Council will be as
distinguished as those of his predecessor.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Angola is on the whole a positive one with
regard to the peace process in that country. The news
coming out of Angola is gradually and steadily getting
better; one could indeed say that the peace process in
Angola now seems truly irreversible. There is a lesson
here for the international community: that the cause of
peace is better served by perseverance than by a policy of
cut and run.
On the political front, the 6 May 1995 meeting
between the President of Angola and the UNITA leader
has created a positive atmosphere and generated a
momentum which has been taken advantage of by all
concerned to advance the peace process. Furthermore, my
delegation is particularly encouraged by the fact that
contacts between the two leaders have become more
frequent. The proposals that have been put forward in the
area of national reconciliation and power-sharing, through
the offer of a vice-presidency to Mr. Savimbi, have the
support of my Government. We therefore urge both sides
to work towards further accommodation in the higher
interest of lasting peace in Angola. In this context, we
were further encouraged by the assurances the Secretary-
General received, during his recent visit to the country,
from both the President of Angola and the leader of
UNITA of their continued and even greater commitment
to the peace process. Experience of other conflict
situations has shown that the success of a peace process
is truly dependent on the will and commitment of a
people and its leaders, supported, of course, patiently by
the international community.

On the military side, we note that no major breach
of the peace has occurred, although the incidence of
violations is still unacceptably high. With regard to the
humanitarian situation in Angola, we are happy to note
that it has continued to improve since February 1995 as
a direct result of the peace process and the expanded
presence of the United Nations in the country. However,
we appeal to the international community to contribute
generously to the funding of other humanitarian activities,
including for demobilization and reintegration and for the
repatriation of refugees. Although these problems do not
catch the attention of the international media or get
headlines, their resolution is no less vital for the
consolidation of peace in Angola.

In spite of these positive signs in the peace process
in Angola, we are concerned, none the less, about the
slow progress in troop disengagement, demining and the
establishment of the quartering areas. It is important to
strive to overcome the various difficulties, including
logistical and financial, that have accounted for the slow

 

pace of progress in these areas. We therefore call on the
Government of Angola and on UNITA, in cooperation with
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III), to finalize arrangements for the
establishment of quartering areas, complete the
disengagement of troops and expedite the conduct of
demining. We also hope that arrangements reached by the
two sides during the high-level meeting in Luanda, from 19
June to early July 1995, concerning the acceleration of the
timetable for the implementation of the various aspects of
the Lusaka Protocol, will be strictly adhered to and that
both sides will further demonstrate their commitment by
cooperating with UNAVEM. III personnel and, in particular,
with the Joint Commission.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that as of July
1995 UNAVEM. III personnel had been deployed to 55 sites
throughout Angola and that 5 additional sites will soon
have a UNAVEM. presence. The current strength of
UNAVEM. III, which stands at 1,970, has, in our view,
undoubtedly had a salutary effect on the peace process in
Angola.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
highlighting the socio-economic aspects of the peace
process in Angola, efforts which are now referred to as
post-conflict peace-building. Angola is a country that has
suffered from the devastating effects of war for over 30
years. Therefore, improvements in the social and economic
areas hold the key to the establishment of durable peace in
that country. In our View, the international community
should assist the people of Angola as they try to tackle the
enormous challenges they will face in what will surely be
a long and arduous process of rehabilitation and
reconstruction.

In conclusion, my delegation is gratified that the
validity of our repeated calls for accelerated deployment of
UNAVEM. III infantry battalions has been borne out by the
View of the Secretary-General that the progressive
deployment of elements of UNAVEM. III has helped
consolidate the cease-fire and promote the spirit of the
Lusaka Protocol. While taking due cognizance of the
practical difficulties of a faster pace of deployment - in
particular, those having to do with mines - we hope all
efforts will be made to match the pace of deployment with
the greater commitment that has been demonstrated by the
Angolan parties. My delegation would also like to remind
the Angolan parties of their responsibility for the safety and
protection of UNAVEM. III personnel and the humanitarian
agencies operating within their respective territories.

Of course, we support the six-month extension of
UNAVEM. III's mandate, as proposed by the Secretary-
General, and my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

Finally, we wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, to Major-General Chris Garuba,
Force Commander of UNAVEM. III, to all the personnel
of UNAVEM. III and to the Secretary-General himself for
his personal efforts and contribution to the peace process
in Angola.

