Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I am
delighted to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting to consider the situation in
Kosovo. It is an opportunity for us to express our
satisfaction for the results achieved by the Council
mission. In fact, we find that the mission, thanks to the
skill of Ambassador Chowdhury, whom we would like to
thank, has achieved its objective by sending a very strong
and clear signal to all the parties concerned. The
exhaustive and useful report that has been presented today
informs us about the realities of the situation in the field.
It also attests to the willingness of the international
community to find a just, lasting and definitive solution
to this complex question in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) of the Security Council.

We consider that the elements set out in the report
encourage in-depth thinking with a view to finding new
directions and the decisions to take in the future. In that
connection, I would like to make the following comments.

It is indispensable to demonstrate realism and to
keep in mind that, in the short time since the deployment
of UNMIK on 13 June 1999, it has not been possible,
despite the efforts, to fully and effectively implement the
mandate of UNMIK. Time is a paramount factor to erase
hatred and to respond to the expectations of the
population. However, we are convinced that the
achievements of UNMIK are remarkable and deserve to
be commended. In that connection UNMIK should

 

continue to be attentive to the requests and expectations of
the Kosovar population.

What is highlighted in the report are numerous
positive signs, such as the desire of all the communities to
live together in peace. The resumption of contacts between
the two communities in Mitrovica, the involvement of Serbs
in mixed institutions and the improvement of relations
among the communities at the local level - all these
factors need to be encouraged. The approach advocated by
UNMIK for the establishment of an interim administration
to prime an economic recovery will no doubt achieve
lasting results, especially by improving living standards and
by job creation. Access by the entire population to basic
social services is another factor that needs to be
strengthened.

The question of detainees and missing persons is still
a serious obstacle to inter-ethnic reconciliation. To that end,
we think it would be appropriate for the Council to respond
urgently to the requests made by the various ethnic
communities for the appointment of a special envoy to
investigate the situation of detainees and missing persons.

We find it necessary to remedy the culture of impunity
that has been rampant in Kosovo. The strengthening of the
rule of law, based on impartial and independent justice, will
enable the judicial system to play its role by applying and
ensuring respect for the rule of law. The return of refugees
and displaced persons is a central issue. The international
community must promote favourable conditions for the
return of refugees and displaced persons. To do so,
receiving structures should be strengthened and inter-ethnic
confidence should be encouraged.

Finally, we believe that the forthcoming municipal
elections will offer a good opportunity for underscoring the
willingness of all parties to live together. We hope that they
will become actively involved in the process.

All these priorities require financial resources that are
adequate, and sustained international support.

