Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, and Ms.
Mojanku Gumbi for once again having responded to
the Council's invitation to brief us on the situation in
Cote d'Ivoire. I would also like to thank our colleague
from Nigeria for his statement on behalf of the
Chairman of the African Union.

At our 5152nd meeting, held on 28 March 2005, I
stated the reasons why the development of the situation
in Cote d'Ivoire seemed worrying to us. My message
today includes a note of hope. In fact, the Agreement
signed on 6 April at Pretoria by the main protagonists
in the Ivorian crisis has opened the way for new hope,
and provides a fresh opportunity for the peace and
reconciliation process in Cote d'Ivoire. I will not speak
about the major provisions of the Agreement, as they
are now well known and as we have just had a briefing
in that regard by Deputy Foreign Minister Pahad. I
shall simply make three points.

First, I welcome the successful efforts undertaken
by President Thabo Mbeki, whose personal
commitment was crucial. France is pleased with the
key role he has played and will continue to play to help
Cote d'Ivoire at last emerge from the current very
dangerous impasse in which it finds itself.

Secondly, it should be pointed out that the
Pretoria Agreement is a complement to previous
agreements, namely, the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra
III Agreements. It also stipulates, at times in detail,
some of the key points in the reconciliation process. I
am thinking, for example, about legislation regarding
the Independent Electoral Commission. In other words,
the road map for the Ivorian parties to reach a final
settlement of all aspects of the crisis is today very clear
and unambiguous.

Thirdly, from now on everything depends upon
effective implementation of the Agreement. We hope
that the Ivorian parties will fully comply with all their
commitments this time, and that elections that are open
to all, fair and transparent will take place according to
the timetable set out in the Ivorian Constitution.

We have already noted some positive signs since

6 April. We believe that the initial discussions between
the chiefs of staff of the Government forces and the
Forces nouvelles on the launching of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process took
place in a positive manner. Dialogue has resumed, and
it must continue and result in an effective renewal of
cantonment and disarmament operations. Heavy
weapons have already been withdrawn from the front
line, which is tangible progress given the prevailing
climate barely two months ago. In particular, President
Laurent Gbagbo must very soon take a decision on
President Mbeki's determination regarding the
amendment of article 35 of the Constitution. That
decision by Cote d'Ivoire's head of State will be
decisive, and we await it with interest. We very much
hope that it will make it possible to overcome one of
the major obstacles once and for all. At the same time,
the disarmament process must begin to go forward,
which would be a clear signal that Cote d'Ivoire is
once again finding its way.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that the
Council must today do its utmost to support the efforts
of President Mbeki and to assist the Ivorian parties to
succeed in making peace. What should we do? For one
thing, as Mr. Pahad has just told us, the Council should
continue to closely monitor respect for the
commitments undertaken at Pretoria in the presence of
President Mbeki. The Security Council must be
vigilant, as is its role.

Secondly, in the coming days, the Council should
renew the mandate of the impartial forces. My
delegation will introduce a draft resolution on that
matter this week. The Council must assume its
responsibilities and give the United Nations a clear
mandate to support the implementation of all
provisions of the Pretoria Agreement. It is also
essential that the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (ONUCI) be given all the means necessary to
carry out its mission successfully. That means that, in
addition to the Secretary-General's requests pertaining
to security in Abidjan, strengthening ONUCI should
make it possible to support the DDR programme and
the holding of sound elections.

Cote d'Ivoire today has a chance to find the path
towards peace and reconciliation. We must all take
advantage of that opportunity. We are therefore pleased
to note today the presence among us of Mr. Pierre
Schori, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire. We congratulate
him on his appointment and are pleased to see that he
has already begun his difficult task. We wish him every
success in his important mission.

