Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
today's meeting to highlight the indisputably central role
of international law in the maintenance of international
peace and security, which is the most solemn task and
duty of the Council. After all, proper consideration of
most, if not all, Security Council agenda items is hardly
possible without taking into account relevant legal
aspects such as centuries-old treaties, customary rules,
general principles and judicial practice.

Before going further into the subject in my national
capacity, I would like to note that Ukraine aligns
itself with the statement made earlier on behalf of the
European Union.

Today many delegations highlighted the importance
of respecting and maintaining the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. I
am proud to recall that my country, as a founding
Member of the United Nations, chaired the drafting
of the Charter's Preamble and Chapter I at the San
Francisco Conference. The principal objective of our
Organization, as set up in Article 1 of the Charter, is
to maintain international peace and security. How can
we achieve that vital goal? The answer can be found
in the same Article 4 through collective, peaceful and
preventive action.

By joining the United Nations, Member States
undertake the responsibility to act in conformity with
international law, including the Charter's purposes
and principles. In that regard, I would like to stress
that every time a Member State votes on matters of
war and peace, either here in the Security Council or
in the General Assembly, that vote should be assessed
according to how it contributes to the implementation
of the United Nations Charter.

There are numerous examples of Charter violations
in the history of the United Nations. I will address
the most recent and blatant one. Russia's temporary
occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol, and of territories in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, clearly demonstrates
that the violation of fundamental principles of
international law by a permanent member of the Security
Council is one of the most serious current threats to
peace and security. Ifwe think back to mid-2013, trying
to recall the situation in the world at the time, and then
fast-forward five years later and look around, we now
find ourselves in a dangerous downward spiral. The
responsibility lies squarely with the Russian Federation,
which, with no remorse, committed what is clearly
defined by General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX)
of 14 December 1974 as an act of aggression against
my country, both in Crimea and Donbas. The pathetic
citations of the Charter and never-ending lectures on
the United Nations by the Russian delegation, which
have become a trademark of their statements in this
Chamber, should not mislead anyone.

Incidentally, the worrying trend of Russia's revanchist
policy of using military force against other States had
already started to emerge in the 1990s in Moldova,
came to the fore in 2008 in Georgia and culminated in
Ukraine in 2014. Moreover, the list of its transgressions
and wrongful acts has continued with its overt support
of the oppressive Syrian Government and covert
operations in the United Kingdom, as well as Clandestine
murders in my country. All of those violations have
taken place against a backdrop of Russia's systematic
abuse of the right of veto and blatant disregard of its
obligation to maintain peace and security.

On several occasions over the past four years,
Ukraine has urged the Russian Federation to accept
its international legal responsibility and has demanded
that such wrongful acts end. We remain committed to
a peaceful resolution of the conflict in our country, in
accordance with Article 33 of the Charter. Ukraine has
always prioritized peaceful, legal and diplomatic means
of conflict resolution. We stand for multilateralism
by turning to the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council
of Europe and other international bodies for support.
And we will continue along that path by resorting to all
means available to the States Members of the United
Nations to resolve the situation that has arisen as a result
of the Russian military aggression against Ukraine.

In that spirit, we have initiated proceedings in
the International Court of Justice against the Russian
Federationconcerningtheapplicationofthelnternational
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. In
April Ukraine requested that the International Court of
Justice provide a definitive interpretation of the order it
issued one year ago imposing provisional measures on
the Russian Federation, which remains unimplemented.
We did so because the situation in temporarily occupied
Crimea continues to be characterized by gross violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and the systematic persecution of
Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars. We are also witnessing
further deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation in the occupied parts of Donbas.

Together with a number of other States, we are
working on establishing an accountability mechanism
for the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. We
initiated an arbitration proceeding against the Russian
Federation under the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea.

We again urge the Russian Federation to reverse
the occupation of Crimea and Donbas, to stop its
aggression, including by withdrawing its regular armed
formations and mercenaries, weapons and equipment
from the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine,
and to fully implement its commitments under the Minsk
agreements and obligations under international law.

It is worth mentioning that the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes creates not only
obligations for Member States but also responsibilities
for the principal organs ofthe United Nations, including
the Security Council, especially in the application of
the provisions of Chapter VI and Chapter VII of the
Charter. The role of the Secretary-General is also
crucially important. As to the Security Council,
its failure to exercise its primary responsibility in
dealing with threats to peace, breaches of peace, or
acts of aggression should trigger a reaction by the
General Assembly.

In conclusion, let me share a few more practical
suggestions. First, we deem it necessary for the
Council to reinforce its preventive function. In order
to better understand preventive efforts, we suggest, as
a starting point, requesting the Secretariat to prepare
an analytical report on actions taken by the Council
before and after conflicts, in order to detect weak
points and help to avoid similar gaps and mistakes in
the future. Secondly, we also consider the Council's
reaction to grave violations of international law to
be slow and inconsistent. In that regard, we propose
elaborating a kind of test-based algorithm that could
serve as an informal guide for Council members
on how to timely, properly and transparently fulfil
the Council's primary responsibility with regard to
conflict situations, including acts of aggression. The
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, presented
by the Secretary-General in 2014, could be used as a
reference document.

