Mr. Schulz (Germany): We very much welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2514 (2020). The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) remains indispensable to supporting South Sudan and its people. I pay tribute to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer and the brave peacekeepers who do their utmost to assist the people of South Sudan in their quest for durable peace. The German Parliament just today voted in favour of the continuation of our military contribution to UNMISS for another year, unchanged in numbers and capabilities. Germany will continue to stand by the people of South Sudan. We reiterate our call on the South Sudanese parties to fully adhere to the letter and spirit of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We encourage them to implement outstanding critical tasks, as stipulated by the Agreement, so that the people of South Sudan can finally enjoy the benefits of durable peace. I want to highlight the following point in particular. While we are pleased to see a reference in the text regarding the adverse effects of extreme weather events on the stability of South Sudan, we are disappointed that a reference to the security implications of the effects of climate change was not included despite overwhelming support for our proposal from the majority of Council members. In his most recent briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.8741), Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer clearly linked the effects of the unprecedented floods in certain areas of the country to a spike in intercommunal violence in precisely those areas. Climate change and its related extreme weather events have started affecting yet another conflict on the Council's agenda. Since at least 2011, the Security Council has repeatedly expressed its concern that the effects of climate change may aggravate existing threats to international peace and security and underlined the importance of conflict analysis and contextual information, including on the security implications of climate change in relevant situations. As the Security Council, we need to look at the situation more closely with a view to including the effects of climate change in our overall assessment and decision-making. To do so, we need a proper information basis, including a_ substantial risk assessment. By including a reference to climate change in the language of the resolution, we wanted to encourage the appropriate observation and analysis in the future, which would enable all actors, and in particular the Security Council, to better address this underlying cause of conflict. Turning a blind eye will not make a threat multiplier such as climate change disappear. Disregarding it and assessing the country situation selectively jeopardize the effectiveness of the Council's work. The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.
