Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expression appreciation to you,
Madam, and the delegation of France for organizing
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM).

We also welcome the report (S/2017/515) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). However, we reiterate the position,
articulated by the representative of Venezuela on
behalf of NAM, on the need for a substantive written
report, which would provide a valuable record of
the implementation process and dissuade continued
violations of the resolution. It should also include an
assessment of the long-term humanitarian impact of
such violations.

This open debate is taking place against the
backdrop of the announcement by Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu that the construction of 3,800
new housing units in the West Bank for Jewish settlers
has been approved. The increased settlement expansion
constitutes a contravention of international law,
particularly the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention. It also
illustrates continued disregard for international norms
necessary for the Security Council to fulfil its primary
mandate of pursuing international peace and security,
as well as a direct violation of resolution 2334 (2016).

The situation on the ground cannot be allowed
to continue. It is a blight of on the conscience of the
international community. There is no doubt that the
pattern of human rights violations associated with
the occupation is inextricably linked to the settlement
enterprise. The ongoing settlement activities by
Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories seriously
undermines the two-State solution and threatens
the viability and territorial contiguity of the future
Palestinian State. It is an enduring impediment to
peace, security, stability and development in the wider
Middle East region.

South Africa would like to emphasize the urgent
need for Israel to lift the illegal land and naval
blockade on Gaza, which has now entered its eleventh
year. The blockade continues to worsen the already
dire socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in
Gaza. Unemployment in Gaza stands at 38.4 per cent,
with youth and women unemployment at a shocking
60 per cent and 84 per cent, respectively. This
economic situation has not been helped by Palestine's
state of energy dependence on Israel, and can only fuel
resentment among a disenfranchised youth population.
The ongoing occupation and the situation in Gaza
makes it virtually impossible to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. These recent actions are part of a
long-established pattern of stifling the development of
a viable Palestinian State and illustrate a disingenuous
approach to finding a solution to the crisis, which has
persisted for half a century without resolution.

South Africa welcomes the positive outcome of
the Palestinian reconciliation deal and hopes that it
will provide an effective and unified base on which
to govern Gaza and promote greater national unity
within Palestine. Such unity should prove vital not only
in pursuing a better life for Palestinians in Gaza, but
in presenting a unified and coherent articulation of
Palestinian concerns.

My delegation continues to express deep concerns
regarding the situation of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees, specifically women and children. This
situation remains of serious concern to the international
community as well. In that regard, we call on Israel to
respect the human rights of all Palestinian prisoners
and abide by the relevant international humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. We
also call on the Israeli authorities to implement in
full and immediately the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, known
as the Nelson Mandela Rules, as well as the Rules
for the Treatment of Women Prisoners, known as the
Bangkok Rules.

My delegation is furthermore concerned about
the funding gap in the operational budget of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). In the absence of
a lasting political solution, the international community
cannot abdicate its responsibility and duty towards
Palestinian refugees and for ensuring the continuation
of the agency's work on a sound financial basis. For its
part, South Africa will continue to support UNRWA
through its financial contributions. As a member of
the group made up of India, Brazil and South Africa
(IBSA), we will provide humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people through the IB SA fund. Furthermore,
in cooperation with the Palestinian Authority and other
international organizations, we support projects in

Nablus and in Gaza.

In conclusion, South Africa concurs with the
international community that the only way to bring
about genuine and lasting peace between Israel and
Palestine is through comprehensive and unconditional
negotiations. Such negotiations should deal with all
final-status issues, including the unrelenting expansion
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, the lifting of the illegal Gaza blockade and
the continuing occupation of the Palestinian territory.
We believe that would contribute immensely to peace
and security throughout the Middle East and resolve
one of the most protracted conflicts the past century
has known.

