Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Ndiaye for his briefing. The
United States looks forward to a collaborative and
productive relationship with him, and we appreciate
the seriousness with which he has taken up his new
role to implement the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to its fullest.

I thank Director Vervaeke for his briefing today
and for the European Union's important work in the
Central African Republic. To Special Representative
Matondo, I say that we appreciate the African Union's
efforts, alongside those of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) and MINUSCA, to
pursue accountability and prevent reprisals following
the May massacres in Lemouna and Koundjili. The
United States condemns those horrific, premeditated
attacks, which were flagrant violations of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, of 6 February.

We take note of and appreciate the role of
the Government of the Central African Republic,
MINUSCA, the African Union and ECCAS in securing
the handover of the three suspects and stopping the
spread of violence. We call on the Retour, reclamation
et rehabilitation armed group that conducted the attacks
to hand over additional perpetrators, dismantle its bases
and barriers in the area of the attack and demobilize and
disarm immediately. The peace agreement is the Central
African Republic's best prospect for ending violence
and achieving lasting peace and security. There must
be accountability for violations of the agreement.

Despite those troubling attacks, there has been
noteworthy progress since February. We welcome
the momentum in the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation (DDRR) process,
including the receipt of many armed groups' lists of
candidates for DDRR and the work of MINUSCA's
first mobile demobilization team with the Revolution
et justice-Sayo armed group in Bouar. That work,
including proper vetting for former armed-group
members, is essential because Central Africans will
trust their national military and mixed brigades to
protect them only when they are confident that those
soldiers are indeed committed to protecting, and not
targeting, civilians.

Central African Republic citizens told us in clear
terms during the 2015 Bangui Forum that justice
and accountability are high priorities. They are also
priorities for the United States. We commend the
signatories to the agreement for acknowledging the
need for justice and accountability and for their work
to establish the inclusive commission. We urge all
parties to fully support and cooperate with the Special
Criminal Court.

The United States is watching the situation in the
Central African Republic and the progress towards
implementation of the peace agreement closely. We
are committed both to ensuring that the signatories to
the peace agreement keep their word and to applying
consequences both through United States domestic
authorities and the Security Council for individuals and
groups undermining the agreement. We hope that we
will not need to resort to such mechanisms. Instead,
we urge the parties to the agreement and all partners to
work to advance the many signs of hope for the Central
African Republic. That means participating fully in the
executive follow-up committee, holding the individuals
or groups that have violated the terms of the peace
agreement accountable and pursuing justice for those
responsible for mass atrocities.

We look forward to continuing to work with the
United Nations, the African Union, ECCAS and other
partners in pursuit of the faithful implementation of the
peace agreement and the lasting peace and security that
the signatories can bring to the people of the Central
African Republic as a result.

