I thank Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing. I welcome the presence at today's meeting of Mr. Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya. Since the escalation of the conflict in Libya in April last year, the situation has finally shone a ray of hope. China welcomes the fact that the parties to the conflict signed a ceasefire agreement on the 23 October, within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, and that the Commission met in Libya last week and reached an important consensus on implementing the ceasefire. We welcome the political will and courage displayed by the Libyan parties to achieve the ceasefire and appreciate the important contributions of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. The ceasefire between the two Libyan parties is a key step in responding to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and in implementing the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative. It also represents important progress towards peace in the region and, for that matter, around the world. The hard-won peace has brought new hope to the Libyan people. We should seize this window of opportunity to effectively implement the ceasefire and expeditiously advance the political process. China appreciates the efforts of Tunisia, Morocco, Egypt, other neighbouring countries and countries of the region aimed at promoting intra-Libya political dialogue, supporting the continued advancement of a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process and encouraging the United Nations and such regional organizations as the African Union and the League of Arab States to continue their good offices and form synergies. The international community should strictly enforce the arms embargo and fully respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Libya. We look forward to seeing Libya achieve lasting peace, stability and prosperity at an early date. I wish to reiterate that China's position on the ICC remains unchanged. Meanwhile, we have noticed that the Prosecutor and other officials of the ICC are being subjected to unilateral sanctions that many countries are condemning. China always opposes unilateral sanctions, as they are inconsistent with international law. We also oppose bullying practices and power politics, as they undermine the international order based on international law.
