Mrs. Pereira: I have the honour to thank you,
Madam President, on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP), for giving me
the opportunity to make this statement before the
Security Council on an item related to one of the
Community's members, Guinea-Bissau - an item,
which, as a consequence, is of close interest to Angola,
Brazil, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Portugal and Sao
Tome and Principe. East Timor - an observer in the
CPLP until it gains statehood and thus becomes a full
member of the Community - is also closely interested
in the issue.

I wish to begin by congratulating the Dutch
presidency on having organized this meeting dedicated
to Guinea-Bissau. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his presence and briefing.

During this month, the importance of a smooth
transition in a continued United Nations presence in
conflict areas was highlighted by the Security Council
through the adoption of resolution 1327 (2000), on the
results of the Council's working group on the Brahimi
report, and through the open debate on the item "No
exit without strategy". The close relationship between
peace-building activities and the objectives envisaged
for the maintenance of international security is
particularly evident in Guinea-Bissau, a country that is
striving to establish the foundations of a durable peace
after a devastating conflict.

Regrettably, during recent days, Guinea-Bissau
experienced signs of serious political and military
instability. We hope those events will not destabilize
the efforts - although such efforts fall short of the
possibilities announced by the international
community- being undertaken to implement a
definitive peace and create a truly democratic State in
that country.

I should now like to switch to Portuguese - the
language of the Community that I am here to represent.

(spoke in Portuguese," English text furnished by the delegation)

The Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries expressed itself in unequivocal terms in
opposing the breach of constitutional normalcy in
Guinea-Bissau. The Permanent Coordination
Committee of the CPLP appealed for dialogue; urged
those responsible for the current situation to observe
the rule of law and the Constitution in accordance with
the commitments undertaken and reiterated by all
regarding respect for democratic values; and called for
the consolidation of the conditions necessary for the
country's reconstruction and the maintenance of peace.

It is our hope that the instability of recent days
can provide lessons for the future and that the
Government of Guinea-Bissau will have its legitimacy
and capacity to govern strengthened. We hope to see a
new impetus provided to the promotion of national
cohesion, with the cooperation of opposition political
parties in a clear demonstration of the spirit of
reconciliation, in order to consolidate the gains of
democracy and to reinforce the chances of achieving
the long-awaited economic development of the country.

In this regard, it is essential for the international
community to send a clear message of support to the
democratic authorities of Guinea-Bissau, expressing, in
words as well as in actions, the interest with which it
continues to follow the process of the country's
reconstruction in this post-conflict phase. We express
our satisfaction with the text of the presidential
statement to be formally adopted in this meeting. While
sending to Guinea-Bissau a message of support for
national cohesion and for reinforcement of the
democratization of the regime, the international
community should make available the means that will
help the Government to face the current economic
situation.

Reversing this unfavourable situation is mainly
the responsibility of the authorities and the people of
Guinea-Bissau. It is imperative that they exercise this
responsibility with realism and a sense of statehood.
The international community, however, should not
abandon Guinea-Bissau to its own fate; rather, at this
key juncture, it must help to coordinate support
measures that can allow Guinea-Bissau to regain the
stability that it needs to radically change the current
situation. It will therefore be essential to support the
Government in responding to the most immediate and
basic needs of the local population, thus giving the
benefit of the doubt to a country that is endeavouring to
succeed in the difficult task of democratizing its
political structures and reconstructing its social and
economic fabric.

Notwithstanding the efforts of the people of
Guinea-Bissau, the country's economic situation has
reached a breaking point. The obstacles faced in
Guinea-Bissau's economic development and the high
level of dependence on donors and programmes
developed on the basis of analyses and points of view
from outside the country have resulted in the country's
inability to benefit from the skills of the majority of
citizens who are able to contribute to the country's
administration.

It is necessary to bear in mind the fact that we are
speaking about a Member State in which water and
electricity supply systems are almost non-existent, fuel
is scarce and the levels of unemployment, especially
among young people, are dramatic. The illicit traffic in
small arms is also undermining the consolidation of
peace in Guinea-Bissau. Poverty statistics are alarming,
and the seriousness of the spread of AIDS can be
measured by experts' statements to the effect that
Guinea-Bissau runs the risk, in the short term, of
becoming a nation of children. This situation is
aggravated by the lack of financial resources, which
means that the Government must devote almost all its
budget to the financing of civil administration and the
armed forces.

Reference to the complex subregional political
context, with its direct impact upon the domestic
stability of Guinea-Bissau, is also necessary. The
members of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries hope that the international community and
the United Nations will support the efforts aimed at the
stabilization of the region and, in particular, at
encouraging confidence-building measures to increase
security along the border between Guinea-Bissau and
Senegal.

Despite a sombre assessment of the economic
field, the bottom line on the transition process in
Guinea-Bissau is undoubtedly positive. Contrary to
many assumptions, Guinea-Bissau was able to institute
a democratic regime in which the main political bodies
are headed by officials elected by direct and universal
suffrage, in elections supervised by the United Nations.

The CPLP deems it fundamental that the
international community assist Guinea-Bissau, inter
alia through the speedy release of funds pledged in the
May 1999 donors round table. Need I recall that almost
none of the financial commitments undertaken during
the 1998 crisis were fulfilled. In the same vein, the
involvement of important development partners, such
as the United Nations, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, is also important. It
would entail the much needed financing for Guinea-
Bissau's demobilization and economic reconstruction
programmes, as well as further consideration of the
country's eligibility to participate in debt relief
initiatives in the context of the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Debt Initiative.

Recognizing the presence here of representatives
of Bretton Woods institutions, the members of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries suggest
that Guinea-Bissau be granted waivers for the
implementation of development programmes needed by
the country. Parameters and conditions for the
implementation of a programme's objectives should not
serve as obstacles to development. They should instead
be flexible, so as to allow these countries to absorb the
international aid in a satisfactory manner. The CPLP
members strongly support the idea that the
international community extend to the people of
Guinea-Bissau this vote of confidence in their capacity
for reconstruction and reconciliation.

We would also like to reaffirm our conviction that
Guinea-Bissau's stability is directly linked both to the
reactivation of its economy and, above all, to the
demobilization of former combatants. In regard to the
latter, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries insists that it is imperative to provide for
demobilization with dignity. Demobilization should
lead to reintegration. It will be successful only if for
those leaving the armed forces an alternative source of
income and occupation, a daily life with dignity and a
less sombre future are assured. It should be noted that
under the present circumstances the local system does
not provide for the payment of pensions for
demobilized individuals. Without an incentive for
former combatants to set down their arms, without
offering alternative employment, a non-traumatic
demobilization will continue to elude us. We underline
Guinea-Bissau's interest in reintegration initiatives that
combine disarmament projects with income-generation
programmes.

For its part, the CPLP continues to support the
reconciliation and development process in Guinea-
Bissau, both in the political and diplomatic field and in
the area of cooperation for development. Member
States of the CPLP are important partners in
cooperation with Guinea-Bissau, particularly with
regard to education, support for entrepreneurial
activities, institution-building and measures related to
external debt. In the electoral sector, members of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries have
contributed to human resources capacity-building, as
well as with observers and material for the process of
voter registration in 1999 and for the legislative and
presidential elections of 1999 and 2000.

Lastly, in the political and diplomatic field,
reference should be made to the important role played
by the contact group of the CPLP in the negotiations
that led to the ceasefire and to the stabilization of the
situation in Guinea-Bissau last year, at a juncture when
peace was threatened and when the people of Guinea-
Bissau needed immediate assistance. In this sense, the
fundamental role of the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries in the process of restoring peace
and security throughout Guinea-Bissau was recognized
by Security Council resolution 1216 (1998). It is only
natural that, having helped to establish the foundations
for peace and stability in the region, the CPLP is
keenly interested in closely following and contributing
to each subsequent step in the process of the
normalization of life in Guinea-Bissau and its
involvement in the global development process.

The members of the CPLP hope that this meeting
will help renew the commitments of the international
community to the people of Guinea-Bissau, and convey
a message of perseverance to them. As recent events in
Guinea-Bissau have proved, the United Nations work,
though successful thus far, is far from over. It needs
ongoing encouragement to achieve the goals set by the
Council in its recent decisions regarding post-conflict
peace-building. This is the time for bilateral donors and
international financial institutions to show that their
determination to consolidate peace in Guinea-Bissau is
lasting beyond the peak of the crisis and is continuing
throughout the current period. At this crucial juncture,
rehabilitating the country's economy means,
simultaneously, preventing the resurgence of
destabilizing factors until a lasting peace can take root.

It is precisely in this immediate post-conflict
period that stability is threatened, including by the
collapse of the confidence of the people. When
political gains - mainly the establishment of a
democratic order - are not followed by better
opportunities and better economic prospects, it is
difficult to overcome basic difficulties. Therefore, we
must avoid distancing ourselves or resorting to
solutions that can only increase the country's debt.

The consolidation of peace will be assured only
through investment in the people's capacity and
through the support of the Government and local
leadership for the implementation of poverty-
eradication programmes, managed by a transparent
result-monitoring system.

We all know that conflict situations are in
themselves threats to the social, cultural and economic
rights of the individual. Thus any way of preventing
the resurgence of conflict will be a victory for the
people of Guinea-Bissau, and the international
community as a whole. The case of Guinea-Bissau
gives the Council an opportunity to put into practice
the principles expressed in resolutions on post-conflict
peace-building.

