Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The Security Council has just adopted -
unanimously - resolution 986 (1995), relating to the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait. This resolution, which
constitutes an exception to the sanctions regime to which
Iraq is subjected, has a humanitarian objective: it is
designed to alleviate the humanitarian situation of all the
Iraqi people.

It is worthwhile recalling in this context that the
Republic of Iraq has been subjected for almost five years
now to a set of sanctions imposed by the international
community as a consequence of its invasion of Kuwait in
August 1990 and its subsequent defiance of the entire
international community. This sanctions regime is still in

 

force because Iraq has not totally complied with its
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Argentine Republic has for some months now
been expressing in the Security Council its concern over the
humanitarian situation of the people of Iraq and,
consequently, the need to seek to correct the situation.

Therefore, my delegation proposed at the appropriate
time the elaboration of a temporary, simple and flexible
regime to replace the regime established under resolutions
706 (1991) and 712 (1991), which certainly had the same
purpose but which, for various reasons, have never been
implemented by the Government of Iraq.

The present resolution, prepared first by the other
co-sponsoring countries and then with the support of the
entire Council, does nothing, however, that is detrimental
to Iraq's eventual full compliance with all its obligations,
which would lead to the lifting of the sanctions. Its
objective is to offer Iraq a flexible tool that would enable
it to improve the precarious humanitarian situation of its
people. The regime we are establishing here can in no way
be interpreted as harmful to Iraq's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. It allows Iraq to export $1 billion every
three months, of which 30 per cent is earmarked for the
Compensation Fund and the remainder for an account upon
which Iraq will be able to draw, through a plan that must
be worked out, for imports of a humanitarian character -
foodstuffs, medicine and so forth - for its people.

This regime requires for its implementation close
cooperation between the Government of Iraq and the
Secretary-General. None the less, efforts have been made
to simplify it as far as possible without compromising the
objective being pursued by the international community
through the sanctions regime.

This decision by the Security Council follows a
growing trend in recent months to try to lessen the
sufferings of the civilian populations of countries under
sanctions. The Secretary-General, in his report "Supplement
to an Agenda for Peace" (S/1995/ 1), describes sanctions'
unintended effects.

Previously, in the cases of the sanctions regimes
established against Haiti and the former Yugoslavia, efforts
were made, and are still being made in the second of these
cases, to lessen the humanitarian impact of the sanctions.
The accumulated experience is thus being taken into
account and this important instrument provided by the
United Nations Charter within the framework of collective
security is being strengthened.

What we are beginning today is both a new course
and a clear opportunity for Iraq to continue rebuilding its
credibility, for whose destruction the Iraqi regime has
been the sole responsible party. Strictly speaking, it
should be recognized that this course began when Iraq, at
the urging of this Council and as a consequence of the
Council's actions, recently recognized, expressly and
formally, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Kuwait and the border separating Iraq from that other
independent nation.

When one emerges from a past without a future, the
difficulties are clear but need not be insurmountable. Now
is the time for moderation, but also for absolute realism
and, as is frequently the case, a dose of patience. First
and foremost it is time for action, since the objective of
living in peace presupposes a responsible attitude, which
is not nourished by rantings.

In a word, confidence is based on conduct and can
therefore be built only on consistency, respect, tolerance
and, of course, time. The corollary is that it can be
destroyed by threats, intolerance, aggressiveness or
overweening pride. In other words, confidence is a picture
that is built up step by step with stability, on the basis of
everyday conduct.

For Iraq, the priority of the hour should therefore be
to continue working - consistently - to rebuild its
credibility, to become predictable once again. Frankly, we
hope that this will happen, because we sincerely hope and
desire that Iraq, by triumphing over adversity and the
trauma of the recent past, will be able to rejoin the
international community.
This is a world that, thank God, wants to live in
peace. To do so, it must forgo threats and build its future
on the tireless search for consensus. In the meantime, the
Council has, by making available to Iraq mechanisms
designed to meet the basic humanitarian needs of its
people, assumed in full awareness and in deed the
responsibilities incumbent on it.

The responsibility for implementing those
mechanisms now rests with the Iraqi authorities, by acting
in cooperation with the Secretary-General and with the
United Nations officials whom this Council has
designated. The exceptional regime the Council has
approved today is of course addressed to all Iraqis,

 

without exceptions or exclusions, and including, obviously,
the minorities. Otherwise, it would be neither fair nor just.

It is therefore the Council's intention to monitor the
situation closely to ensure that there are no undue delays on
the practical level. In addition, however, the Secretariat is
expressly entrusted with supplementing as necessary the
actions of the Iraqi authorities in such a way as to ensure
efficiency in the implementation of the humanitarian
objective motivating the Council.

My delegation, like all delegations concerned at the
situation of the Iraqi people, has had the honour to be the
initiator of this resolution. In our work, we have had
invaluable contributions from all members of the Council
without exception, but we should like to make special
mention of the contributions we received from the
delegations of the United States, the United Kingdom,
Oman and Rwanda, with whom we have worked together
since the outset, and with whom we share absolutely
identical views.

In the final stage of the talks which culminated in the
text we have adopted today, we should like to express our
special recognition for the effective and open nature of the
efforts and understanding of the delegation of France,
which transcended the few differences between us. This, in
a particularly complex issue, is another result of the tireless
work of this body, which is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security, and of which the
Republic of Argentina once more forms a part.

