The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Cape Verde, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt, Germany, Iceland, India,
Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Maldives, the Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia, Namibia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Palau,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, the Republic of
Korea, Singapore, Solomon Islands, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Tuvalu, Ukraine and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/2007/186, which contains a letter dated 5 April 2007
from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

I should also like to draw attention to document
8/2007/203, which contains a letter dated 12 April
2007 from the Permanent Representative of Cuba, and
2

document S/2007/211, which contains a letter dated
16 April 2007 from the Permanent Representative of
Pakistan.

I should now like to make some brief
introductory remarks in my national capacity, before
giving the floor to other Council members.

I welcome this debate. There have been some
questions as to whether this is the right place to be
having this discussion, so let me set out why I believe
that it is.

Our responsibility in the Council is to maintain
international peace and security, including the
prevention of conflict. An unstable climate will
exacerbate some of the core drivers of conflict, such as
migratory pressures and competition for resources. The
recent Stern Review Report on the Economics of
Climate Change speaks of potential economic
disruption on the scale of the two world wars and of
the great depression. That alone will inevitably have an
impact on the security of all of us - developed and
developing countries alike.

So today is about the world recognizing that there
is a security imperative, as well as economic,
developmental and environmental ones, for tackling
climate change and for our beginning to build a shared
understanding of the relationship between energy,
climate and security.

We are not, in this debate, seeking to pre-empt
the authority of those institutions and processes where
action is being decided - the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies,
the United Nations agencies, and, of course, the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Having been the United Kingdom's lead negotiator for
five years in that body, I am the last person who would
wish to undermine its work, or that of any other. But
the decisions that we come to and the actions that we
take in all of those forums will be better, stronger and
more effective if they are informed by the fullest
possible understanding of all of the implications of
climate change. So I very much look forward to this
unprecedented debate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
07-30908
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing in the
Chamber and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking. The list of those who wish to speak having
been distributed, I think that colleagues will understand
why that discipline would be helpful.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. J an Kubis, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, to whom I give the floor.


