Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the new Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Permanent Representative of Colombia Nestor
Osorio, and assure him of our support and cooperation.
We are grateful to the Chair for his briefing on the
work of the Committee over the past three months.

In the reporting period, the Committee continued
to work actively while strictly abiding by its mandate.
That is how it should continue to work in the future,
including on those cases that were mentioned in the
briefing. We note that the Panel of Experts has
provided the Committee with professional assistance,
and we expect it to continue its practical work in
completing its tasks under the Committee's leadership.
Russia fully supports the ongoing implementation of
all elements of the sanctions regime on Iran. We
believe that if the regime is to be optimally effective,
all members of the international community should
strictly implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions and not go beyond their framework.

With respect to the current situation of the Iranian
nuclear programme, we have consistently advocated
addressing the problems related to the programme
through dialogue and engagement with Iran. The core
of Russia's policy remains based on negotiations and
the diplomatic track, working with Iran to seek a
settlement and with the full involvement of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That is
how our representative at the IAEA Board of Governors
session on 9 March presented our position, along with
the declaration of six States: Russia, the United
Kingdom, Germany and China, the United States and
France. The statement underscores that the E3+3 group,
with the participation of the High Representative of the
European Union, is fully resolved and committed to
seeking a comprehensive long-term negotiated
settlement that would enable the restoration of
international confidence in the genuinely peaceful
nature of the Iranian programme, while acknowledging
Iran's full right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. We believe that Iran will react
positively to the six States' proposal and will launch a
constructive dialogue with the E3+3 on the basis of
cooperation and a gradual approach.

