Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Togo for its initiative to hold
this debate of the Security Council on the challenges
in the fight against terrorism in Africa. We welcome
President Faure Essozimna Gnassingbe and his Foreign
Minister presiding over today's meeting. We also thank
Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon and the representatives
of other relevant agencies for their briefings.

Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind.
Over recent years, the international community has
made some positive progress, but is still faced with a
grim situation in the fight against terrorism. Frequent
terrorist acts have resulted in enormous civilian
casualties. It has become more apparent that terrorist
organizers are using younger people, using varied
means and developing networks to inflict terror.

International cooperation in the fight against
terrorism has a long way to go. At present, African
countries are faced with the increasingly menacing threat
of terrorism and are at the forefront of the international
fight against terrorism. Terrorist organizations take
advantage of the political and security turmoil in some
parts of Africa and incessantly infiltrate and extend
their activities to Africa in an attempt to establish new
safe havens on the continent. Terrorist activities and
ethnic and religious conflicts in Africa are interlinked.
They affect each other, further intensifying arms
proliferation and cross-border organized crime,
thereby damaging regional stability and economic and
social development and having a negative impact on
international peace and security.

The fight against terrorism in Africa should in no
way have to be fought by African countries alone, as
the international community has a shared responsibility
in the matter. The international community should,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the commonly
accepted norms governing international relations, adopt
swift, effective and coordinated actions and integrated
policies that resolve the problem itself and attack its
root causes, thereby assisting African countries in their
fight against terrorism and thoroughly eliminating the
breeding grounds of the scourge.

I would like to take this opportunity to state China's
perspective as follows.

First, the leadership of African countries in the
fight against terrorism should be fully respected. When
providing assistance, the international community
should respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned,
adequately listen to the opinions and ideas of Africa's
countries and regional organizations, and carry out
international counter-terrorism cooperation on the
basis of equality and mutual benefit. Efforts should be
made to assist African countries in the promotion of
dialogue and exchange among civilizations, religions
and ethnicities and avoid linking terrorism with a
particular religion or ethnicity. Double standards
should be avoided. No country should use its own
interests, whether threatened or not, as the standard in
the determination of what constitutes terrorist activity
or a terrorist organization.

Secondly, efforts should be made to assist Africa
in realizing regional peace and security. The security
turmoil in certain parts of Africa provides a hotbed
for terrorism. We urge the international community
to be objective and fair, support African countries and
regional organizations comprehensively and proactively
in their effort to maintain regional peace and security,
encourage the resolution of African issues by Africans
in the African way, and help African countries devise
their own development path consistent with their own
situations. The international community should also
pay due attention to economic and social development
in Africa, effectively honour its commitments and
actively provide assistance to African countries without
any political conditions attached.

Thirdly, efforts should be made to help African
countries build their capacity in the fight against
terrorism. Limited resources and capacities are the
biggest constraint for African countries in their fight
against terrorism. We urge the international community,
in particular developed countries, to redouble its
efforts in helping African countries promote capacity-
building in the justice and security sectors, strengthen
exchanges of experiences and information-sharing and
support the relevant efforts of regional and subregional
organizations. Helping the enhanced counter-terrorism
capacity of African countries should be made an
important priority for the United Nations in the context
of implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The United Nations should strengthen coordination and

cooperation with the relevant parties and provide more
effective assistance to Africa through the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

China is also a victim of terrorism. We feel
compassion for Africa in the light of the terrorist threat
it faces. China resolutely supports African countries
and its regional organizations in their unremitting
efforts to fight terrorism. We will continue to do what
we can to provide support and assistance to African
countries to jointly address the threat that terrorism has
brought to Africa and the world at large.

