The President: I thank President Farmajo for
his statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom.

I am grateful to President Farmajo for his first
address to the Security Council, and to Mr. Keating and
Mr. Madeira for their briefings.

Last week I was fortunate enough to visit Somalia
at a time that the Secretary-General has described as
both tragic and hopeful. Today President Farmajo had
an opportunity to describe how the Federal Government
plans to bring peace and stability to his country. I
hope the President will take the clear message from
this meeting that as long as he works for the benefit of
Somalia, the Security Council will stand with him.
We meet at a moment when Somalia faces the
daunting prospect of its third famine in 25 years.
We cannot forget that the last time that Somalia was
blighted by starvation in 2011, no fewer than 260,000
people died. Today more than 6 million Somalis need
help. The crisis also risks undermining the hard-won
political and security progress that has been made.
The good news is that if we learn the lessons of 2011
and act promptly and decisively, the famine can still
be prevented. Britain has contributed more than
$135 million in emergency aid to Somalia this year. That
United Kingdom aid will provide more than 1 million
people with food, water and emergency health care. I
urge all our partners to support the relief effort that is
now under way. And I urge the Somali Government
to deliver on the commitments it has made to improve
access and remove logistical blockages, as part of its
welcome focus on the issue.

In Mogadishu last week, I witnessed a military
training session for the Somali National Army and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) troops.
A heavy responsibility rests on these brave soldiers to
guarantee the security on which every other form of
progress depends. This is a critical time for security
in Somalia. We must work together to agree on a
clear, long-term plan for international security support
in Somalia. We hope to make progress on a security
pact during the forthcoming London conference on
Somalia. The most urgent requirement is for a political
agreement between the Federal Government and its
federal member states on the security architecture of
the Somali security forces. Once that has been agreed
on, the international community should outline its
comprehensive and coordinated support to Somalia
on security-sector reform. We also need to agree on
the shape of a conditions-based transition away from
AMISOM. to the Somali security forces. I cannot
commend highly enough the prowess and bravery of
AMISOM. soldiers and their Somali counterparts in the
struggle against Al-Shabaab. They have made a real
difference to Somalia and to the security of East Africa
as a whole, and we are all conscious oftheir sacrifice. It
is precisely because we must not allow their sacrifice to
be in vain that we must ensure a successful transition.

The African Union is a central partner, and the
forthcoming joint United Nations-African Union
review will be crucial to setting the future direction of
that partnership. I hope that all members of the Council
will be open-minded, particularly with regard to
funding, so that Somalia's progress is not jeopardized
by a hasty transition.

Security is one urgent aspect of the broader
constitutional settlement that a stable, federal Somalia
needs. The Federal Government and member states
will also have to agree on how to share power and
resources. Resolving those questions will be crucial to
the country's long-term stability. I look forward to a
one-person, one-vote election in four years' time. I also
welcome the focus of President Farmajo on promoting
economic recovery and creating jobs for a new
generation of young and ambitious Somalis. For that to
succeed, the Government will need to continue to make
progress on important economic reforms, comply with
the current International Monetary Fund programme
and improve the business environment. Those steps
will also be essential for Somalia to be able to make
progress towards its aims of accessing multilateral
finance and debt relief.

At this crucial time, Britain will join the United
Nations and the Federal Government to host a
conference on Somalia in London in May. The
conference will assess the response to the humanitarian
emergency, accelerate progress on security and adopt
a new partnership agreement that sets the terms of the
relationship between Somalia and the international
community for the coming years. A peaceful and
prosperous Somalia is the aim we all share, and let me
say to President Farmajo that the Security Council will
stand beside him as he strives to achieve that goal.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden.

