Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): The purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, our
commitments to humanity, are being tested repeatedly
today. It is our shared responsibility to work nationally,
regionally and internationally to uphold them. I wish to
thank Venezuela for providing us with this opportunity
to reflect on this very important issue.

Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly on behalf of the European Union.
Allow me to share with the Council some of my
country's priorities.

We cannot overemphasize the importance of conflict
prevention. The various ongoing review processes also
reaffirm that very important issue. Instead of being
stuck in a perpetual crisis-management mode, we should
further prioritize early warning, prevention and conflict
resolution. The Security Council, with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance ofinternational peace

and security, has a special responsibility in that regard.

We think it should use all of the elements in its toolbox,

including means related to the peaceful settlement of

disputes, cooperation with regional organizations, the
adoption of smart targeted sanctions and the referral of
situations to the International Criminal Court (ICC), if
circumstances so warrant.

We believe that preserving peace requires synergy
among the three pillars of the United Nations. We
cannot achieve peace and security without ensuring
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
human dignity and the equal rights of men and women.
The promotion of sustainable development is equally
important. We believe that it is the only way to ensure
long-lasting and more robust solutions, and therefore
the only way we can sustain peace and avoid relapses
into conflict.

The Charter of the United Nations embodies a
vision for a more peaceful, stable and prosperous world
for all. We must protect that for which it stands. We
must protect human dignity. Stopping the violent acts
committed by terrorists, putting an end to widespread
and gross human rights violations and eradicating
various forms of modern slavery all require our joint
and coordinated efforts.

In past years, the Security Council has frequently
referred to the principle of the responsibility to protect.
Hungary believes that, on the tenth anniversary of
that principle, it is high time for the international
community to renew and enhance its enduring
commitment to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
Hungary believes that ensuring accountability for
atrocity crimes is one of the best ways to prevent
their recurrence. States have the primary obligation to
repress violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, and we welcome all initiatives aimed
at enhancing domestic prosecution. At the same time,
we also acknowledge the crucial role played by the ICC
in the battle to end impunity when national criminal
accountability mechanisms are unavailable.

Finally, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, Hungary actively
participated in the elaboration of the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. So far,
110 Member States have signed the code of conduct.
I encourage those that have not yet done so to join
that important initiative, which represents a unique
opportunity to improve the Council's ability to prevent
and respond to atrocities in a timely and decisive
manner.

