Let me begin by reiterating South Africa's call for a cessation of all hostilities across Syria and for the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid throughout the country and assistance to all who require it, no matter where they are. My delegation also wishes to commend the United Nations agencies, the International Red Cross and other aid organizations, as well as the donors, for the important work and contributions in respect of the provision of the humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria. The prolonged conflict has left lasting effects throughout Syria and has left a permanent scar on its people. Children born in the last decade have known no peace. They have known only war and seen the devastation around them. As we have seen from the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/576), the humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire, with women and children bearing the worst of the conflict and deteriorating humanitarian circumstances. South Africa is deeply concerned that the number of people throughout Syria who are now food insecure has reached 9.3 million in the past six months, the highest number ever recorded in Syria. The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) virus also remains a threat in Syria, with a significant increase in positive cases in the past month and the potential for a further increase in the coming months. Preparedness and response planning are an essential component of any humanitarian response. This is even more critical in a situation where the health system is fragile and there are large groups of people staying in overcrowded spaces, such as refugees, internally displaced persons, the elderly and people with underlying health conditions, who are particularly vulnerable to COVID-19. We also furthermore note the dire economic situation in Syria resulting in rising food prices and increased food insecurity. This situation is further exacerbating the humanitarian situation in the country. In that regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate that the unilateral sanctions imposed on Syria have had a further deteriorating impact on the economic and humanitarian situation in the country. The impact of the conflict is exacerbated by these measures, which has led to a further deterioration of the economy, thus affecting the livelihoods and food security of ordinary Syrians throughout the country. The intended impact of these sanctions, which surely is not to resolve the conflict, must be questioned. Measures adopted by the international community and individual Member States should be to save lives and improve the humanitarian situation, not lead to further hardship. The Secretary-General has clearly stated in his report that "(t]he provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in need across the Syrian Arab Republic" (SS/2020/576, para. 28). South Africa fully supports the Secretary-General in his call and will continue to advocate for the provision of humanitarian assistance to all Syrians in need through all available and direct means and modalities, including through cross- border and cross-line deliveries. We commend the United Nations, the World Health Organization and other aid organizations working with the Syrian Government for the improvement in the facilitation of cross-line humanitarian assistance, while noting from the Secretary-General's report that cross-line assistance has to be bolstered by cross-border assistance. It is for this reason that South Africa voted in favour of the draft resolution before us. Finally, we wish to reiterate that the situation in Syria can be resolved only through negotiation and dialogue. We therefore call again on all parties to exert every effort towards the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) to further avoid the displacement of Syrians and loss of innocent lives.
