Mr. Oshima: I would like to express my deep
appreciation for the compliments extended to my
office, as well as to sister humanitarian agencies and
their partners. I would also like to thank Council
members for the many encouraging comments and
constructive suggestions received today from members
and non-members of the Council.

The Secretary-General, in his introductory
opening statement, emphasized that what we need most
of all is practical action and a clear path from policy to
implementation. The Council has clearly demonstrated
today its strong and energetic commitment to
strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and its resolve to see to it that the policy
recommendations we have made are implemented and
result in real improvement on the ground for the lives
of men, women and children caught up in war. We are
very encouraged and inspired by that.

In the light of that, I would like to express my
hope and belief that the Council's clear statement of its
position, arising from today's deliberations on the
protection of civilians, could be an important
development. This meeting underscores the importance
the Council attaches to this issue and the priority it
receives - and I am confident it will continue to
receive - on its agenda. It has emphasized today the
importance of treating this issue consistently, across
the board, for all countries that are of concern to the
Council.

I would like to state my commitment and that of
my office to working closely with the members of the
Council, Member States, departments and other
humanitarian agencies to ensure the most systematic
consideration of the protection of civilians. The
importance of the respect for and understanding of
Governments and all parties to conflict of their
obligations under international humanitarian law has
been emphasized throughout these discussions. Many
of the actions described in the Secretary-General's
report will seek to strengthen such understanding, and
we will also continue to work with national
Governments and relevant regional organizations to
reinforce commitments and actions for the protection
of civilians.
The roadmap that we are trying to develop has
been seen by the Council as a document of critical
importance. I believe that we now have the
mechanisms to make rapid progress in developing that
further, as the Council has requested. We will proceed,
in consultation with the members of the Council. The
establishment of an implementation group within the
Secretary-General's Executive Committee for
Humanitarian Affairs, along with the support group
that Norway has so kindly convened, will certainly
facilitate addressing the outstanding elements of the
roadmap.

In my next briefing to the Council, I intend to
submit a completed version of the roadmap. That will
clarify the status of the recommendations contained in
previous reports. It will identify responsibilities for
further action and establish a clear timetable for action
where appropriate. That, in essence, will constitute a
plan of action for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I am also heartened by the Council's
deliberations that it fully recognizes the value of the
Aide Memoire. It is, as the Council has stated, a living
document, and I note the areas where it feels that
revisions and additional input are required. As has also
been noted, Security Council resolutions and mandates
have progressively included more language on the
protection of civilians in recent years. An updated Aide
Memoire will clearly reflect that, as well as new
challenges, some of which are mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report. In this instance, I propose
that we work so as to be able to submit an updated
Aide Memoire within the next six months.

I recognize the importance that the Council has
attached to continued integration and collaboration in
our work with other departments and agencies.

The establishment of standard operating
procedures between my office and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is a first step in this regard.
There will be a need to underpin that with common
training and a systematic review of areas of joint
concern. I hope that you will see the fruits of our
collaboration in future briefings to you, as well as in
other aspects of our work. In particular, we hope to
extend such collaboration to peacekeeping training,
where the protection of civilians can provide a useful
common basis for support.

I have noted the interest of Council members in
more regular reviews of peace operation mandates and
other country-specific operations from the viewpoint of
the protection of civilians. My office certainly
welcomes such initiatives and stands ready to support
such review discussions or workshops alongside our
colleagues from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other relevant United Nations
departments and agencies.

Also, I would like to thank the Council for its
recognition of the value of regional workshops and to
encourage the Council to support my office logistically
and financially in facilitating additional such
workshops in different parts of the world.

Let me now address some of the specific
questions that have been raised. I welcome the
suggestion made by the representative of France on the
implications of the involvement of terrorists and
terrorist organizations on the protection of civilians.
The question of terrorism is not reflected in the
roadmap, and I believe that it would now be
appropriate to identify how it could be updated. The
Secretary-General's report committed to undertaking
further work on the impact of terrorism on the
protection of civilians, including formulating clear
guidelines for the future work of the United Nations,
which we will do in the coming months. I also wish to
acknowledge statements that this issue should be
addressed by the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the
Security Council. I believe that through joint action we
should be able to identify the key issues for future
inclusion.

I am grateful for the support expressed by the
United Kingdom for the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Specifically, in response to the question as to
whether, in addition to Operation Lifeline Sudan and
the Somalia Aid Coordination Body, which are
specifically mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report, structured framework agreements on
humanitarian access would provide a stronger basis for
the protection of civilians. A number of situations
immediately come to mind. In Burundi, for example,
there have been attempts at a structured framework, but
armed non-State actors there have not committed to
that framework. Their inclusion would considerably
strengthen progress towards an effective transition. A
similar situation exists in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where humanitarian access would be
strengthened by a framework shared by all parties to
the conflict. C6te d'Ivoire is an emerging situation
where there are serious problems for humanitarian
access. Here, too, a framework agreement between the
conflicting parties on cross-line operations to ensure
protection and humanitarian assistance would make a
difference. Clearly, there is a lot of work to be done in
this area.

With respect to the rule of law, I would like to
mention and emphasize the importance of the work that
is being done within the framework of the task force on
the rule of law established by the Secretary-General's
Executive Committee on Peace and Security, chaired
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It
comprises the practical experiences and expertise of
relevant United Nations departments and agencies,
including the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and OCHA. The creation
of the task force reflects the need to learn from lessons
and experiences in Bosnia, Kosovo, East Timor and
other conflicts.

I look forward to the next opportunity to brief the
Council on this issue in country-specific and thematic
briefings.

