Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this important briefing on
Afghanistan, which gives the Security Council an
opportunity to review the most recent developments in
the country.

In this regard, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tom
Koenigs, for his detailed briefing, as well as Mr.
Antonio Costa, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for his briefing.

We would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence in the Security Council of His
Excellency Mr. Massimo D'Alema, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy, and
we share his sense of relief regarding the release of
journalist Mr. Daniele Mastrogiacomo. That dramatic
episode only strengthens my delegation's resolve to
demand compliance with international conventions on
the protection of civilians in conflict. We firmly
condemn the practice of the Taliban and other terrorists
of using innocent victims as human shields or as
bargaining chips, as well as other prohibited practices.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
regret for the loss of life among civilians, United
Nations staff, international forces and the Afghan army
and police force. We commend the courage of those
men, women and children. Their sacrifice demonstrates
how difficult it is to stabilize, even to a limited degree,
a situation that is still haunted by the spectre of chaos.

However, if the efforts undertaken so far are not
to be in vain, the international community must more
than ever contribute to building a democratic and
prosperous nation in Afghanistan. Clearly, for a long
time to come we will need to avoid making the mistake
of underestimating an enemy that - like the Hydra -
always seems able to come back to life, despite the
blows inflicted on it. In a cynical gesture, that enemy
recently celebrated the fiftieth birthday of its leader,
while continuing to spread terror and chaos by means
of kidnappings, murder and other violent acts.

Given such developments, my delegation believes

that - without giving up the military option or
measures to strengthen security, which have
demonstrated their value - we should show greater

imagination in making every effort to achieve lasting
peace by all means possible, in particular by adopting
new strategies based on dialogue and cooperation
among the players within the country, as well as those
outside - at least at the regional level.

We therefore encourage the actions of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board established by the
Afghan Government and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We also welcome the
partnership established by the International Security
Assistance Force, the Afghan Government and the
international community which is firmly committed to
defending and ensuring the stability of Afghanistan in
the long term.

That alliance recently demonstrated its usefulness
on the ground, as shown by the success of Operation
Achilles and the increasingly effective presence of the
Afghan National Army. In this context, the recent
seizure by the Afghan police of a major shipment of
drugs is a clear sign that the activities of national
forces are achieving results in this area. The
international community has always stressed the
critical importance of this issue in expressing its
determination to stay the course and to persevere in its
work to build the institutional capacity of the country.

Eradicating the scourge of drug production
continues to be a major challenge. We believe that, for
its part, the Afghan Government is duty bound, in
supporting the efforts of its international partners and
strengthening hopes for peace, to continue to
demonstrate goodwill with respect, for example, to
restoring a climate of trust and cooperation in the
region. In this respect, we encourage the effective
holding of quarterly meetings, as agreed upon between
the Foreign Ministries of Afghanistan and Pakistan,
with a view to strengthening cooperation between
those two countries in the area of security. Such an
approach, which would be based on the monitoring of
the security situation by the Afghans themselves,
would facilitate the establishment of the authority of
the State in all of the provinces of the country so that
the military strategy could gradually yield to the
objectives of the Afghanistan Compact. This, in turn,
would promote the participation of all Afghans in the
process and would lead their country towards stability,
peace, democracy and progress.

Finally, my delegation thanks the delegation of
Italy for having prepared a draft resolution on UNAMA
in accordance with the Secretary-General's
recommendations, which we support - particularly the
recommendation to extend UNAMA's mandate.

