Mr. Akram (Pakistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Russian presidency for holding this
timely and very opportune public meeting on the eve of
the Security Council mission to the West African
subregion, which will have Guinea-Bissau as its
destination. I would like to thank Ambassador Aguilar
Zinser for agreeing to lead the mission to Guinea-
Bissau.

I would also like to join other speakers in the
pleasant duty of expressing our gratitude to Mr. David
Stephens, the Representative of the Secretary-General,
for presenting the Secretary-General's report on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Kumalo, whom we are pleased to have
with us again today for his comments as Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau of the
Economic and Social Council as well as Ambassador
Johnson for his remarks as Chairman of the Group of
Friends of Guinea-Bissau. We have also heard some
very pertinent comments here from the Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau, on which the Council
will need to reflect.

The importance of post-conflict peace-building
and social and economic rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development has been recognized as an essential
requirement for durable peace and security. At the
United Nations, Member States are trying evolve ways
and means to respond to the requirements of countries
like Guinea-Bissau. The coordinated efforts of the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
in the case of Guinea-Bissau have opened the window
for further strengthening and institutionalizing the
United Nations response at the intergovernmental level
to complex crises and situations that are characterized
by interlinkages among the security, political, cultural,
social, economic and developmental dimensions.

One way of developing a comprehensive
approach to such complex crises would be to build on
the existing cooperation between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council. As my
delegation suggested earlier, we could establish ad hoc
composite committees, with membership drawn from
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. Such composite
committees could generate a coherent and mutually
supportive response to complex conflicts and crises
that involve multifaceted challenges, such as those in
Guinea-Bissau.

If Guinea-Bissau is to be prevented from
relapsing into conflict, which is a real fear at this time,
we must act quickly and judiciously. The response of
the international community, spearheaded by the United
Nations, to the peace-building and developmental needs
of Guinea-Bissau should constitute a determined effort,
based on principles but displaying operational
flexibility.

Of course, the primary responsibility rests with
the Government of Guinea-Bissau. It must take steps to
address the multifarious challenges in all areas -
including those in the political, social, economic,
governance, human rights and other fields. The
partnership approach recommended by the Economic
and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Guinea-Bissau constitutes a well-considered strategy
that we fully support. We hope that the Government of
Guinea-Bissau will seize the opportunity that this
partnership approach offers. We also hope that it will
take the necessary steps to facilitate a constructive
dialogue with the international community.

In our view, progress could be made if both the
Government of Guinea-Bissau, on the one hand, and
the international donor community, on the other -

including the Bretton Woods institutions - were to
place the interests of the common people - the
citizens of Guinea-Bissau - above all other

considerations. Social and economic issues need to be
addressed simultaneously with political and security
matters. Some way ought to be found to provide
assistance to countries facing special circumstances,
such as Guinea-Bissau, despite their structural and
political problems. We must heed the advice coming
from sensible quarters that it is timely for the
international community to take the bold step to invest
a little now in the peace-building effort in Guinea-
Bissau rather than facing the prospect of spending
much more in peacekeeping and enforcement in
case - God forbid - that country were to relapse into
conflict.

The joint mission of the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council to Guinea-Bissau later
this month offers an opportunity to reassess our
approach to the situation. The presidential statement to
be adopted today contains a balanced message
addressed simultaneously to the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and to the international community.
That message will provide the mission with a good
basis to work to achieve common ground between the
concerns of the Government and the donor community.
In that way we hope that the Council will advance the
twin agendas of peacekeeping and development in
Guinea-Bissau.

