Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf ofthe Group ofFriends on the Protection
of Civilians in Armed Conflict, which is comprised of
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and Uruguay.

I would like to thank the Lithuanian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing today's important
debate.

The Group of Friends welcomes the latest report of
the Secretary-General under review today (S/2013/689).
In the past couple of months, crises have emerged,
re-emerged or have been amplified in many different
places, and it is with great concern that we observe that
the number of civilians affected by armed conflict has
significantly increased over the period covered by the
report in almost all of the countries reviewed. While all
civilians may be victims of conflict in various ways,
women and children are particularly exposed during all
stages of armed conflict. The full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions is crucial
in that regard.

The Group of Friends also welcomes the adoption
of today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3),
which endorses the revised aide-memoire, reflecting
important developments since the adoption of resolution

1894 (2009), whose implementation remains the overall
way forward for ensuring the effective protection of
civilians. In the same vein, the Group of Friends notes
with interest the Secretary-General's "Rights up front"
action plan, which places the imperative to protect
people and preventive efforts at the heart of United
Nations strategies and operational activities.

The Group of Friends also notes the Under-
Secretary-General's assessment in her briefing today
that

"Mandating peacekeeping missions to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence
remains among the most significant actions taken
by the Security Council to enhance protection".

Resolution 2086 (2013) recognized the importance
of that mandated task in the context of modern,
multidimensional peacekeeping missions.

The Group welcomes the normative progress that
has been made through the development of training,
guidance and policies, and acknowledges the need
to translate that into action. Mission assessment
and planning processes, where appropriate, should
prioritize the protection of civilians and the resources
and capabilities that are required to address them.

Member States and peacekeeping missions should
continue efforts to train and support peacekeepers so as
to address the challenges and scenarios they may face in
the field, drawing on materials that have been developed
by the United Nations. The Group also encourages the
Secretariat to continue its work in developing further
guidance for peacekeeping missions to work alongside
host Governments to build the long-term capacity to
protect civilians.

While the core challenges in the protection of
civilians identified in the previous reports of the
Secretary-General still need our sustained attention,
the latest report (S/2013/689) also identifies several
protection policy priorities that need to be explored. In
particular, the following emerging issues would benefit
from our attention, and the Group of Friends stands
ready to act as a platform to advance them.

First, we need to address the arbitrary withholding
of consent to relief operations. The Group recalls that
international humanitarian law obliges all parties to a
conflict to protect civilian populations from the effects
of such conflicts. One way that that can be achieved is by
allowing and facilitating access for humanitarian relief
operations, including by simplifying and expediting
procedures for the rapid and unhindered delivery of
life-saving assistance. The Group is concerned about
intimidation, threats, arrests, detentions, injuries and
killings of humanitarian workers.

In that regard, the Group notes the intention of the
Secretary-General to examine the issue of arbitrarily
withholding consent to relief operations. We note the
fact that several drafting seminars involving legal
experts from diverse backgrounds have taken place.
Responding to the Secretary-General's recommendation
in that regard, the Group expresses its readiness to
discuss their findings, among other inputs, with a view
to elaborating guidance on how to facilitate consent in
a peaceful manner. All parties to a conflict must abide
by international humanitarian principles and practices
to protect civilians; the international community needs
to take the initiative to guarantee that.

Secondly, we turn to the issue of casualty tracking
and recording. The Group of Friends notes that civilian
casualty tracking, where practicable, plays an important
role in efforts to reduce harm to civilians. The Group of
Friends calls on parties to a conflict, as well as United
Nations peacekeeping missions, to recognize the
potential value of such a role. With regard to casualty
recording and in the light of the recent presentation
of the "Rights up front" action plan, the Group notes
the continuation of efforts to ensure effective and
credible recording mechanisms, noting further that
the establishment of systematic and credible records
of civilian casualties in the right context could support
broader efforts to monitor and report on violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
while taking into account the practical challenges in
recording casualties, civilian or otherwise.

Finally, on the issue of lethal autonomous weapon
systems, the Group is ofthe View that further discussions
are needed and welcomes the fact that the issue will be
examined in Geneva in May 2014, in the framework of
the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. The
Group hopes that such discussions will also examine
the issue with due consideration to the protection
of civilians as part of a comprehensive debate that
includes legal, military, operational, technological and
ethical perspectives. In time, discussion should focus
on the relevance of such systems to the protection of
civilians, in particular, in the context of international
humanitarian law and with regard to the principles of
distinction, precaution and proportionality.

(spoke in French)

Allow me now to briefly touch on three points in
my national capacity.

First, Switzerland shares the Secretary-General's
concerns regarding humanitarian access, particularly
in Syria and the Sudan, where millions of people are
in great need of assistance. As other delegations have
already stated, States have the primary responsibility
to protect their civilian populations and must therefore
allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
humanitarian actors to civilians in need.

Secondly, we support direct interaction with
non- State armed groups to protect civilians in situations
ofconflict. The existence ofa dialogue in no case confers
legitimacy on any armed group nor on its methods. But
today it is not realistic to believe that civilians can be
protected in modern-day conflicts without the direct or
indirect involvement of armed groups. The Secretary-
General quite rightly identified that issue as being one
of the main challenges for the protection of civilians,
and a welcome step would consist in identifying the
best practices and experiences of the United Nations
and other actors in a future report by the Secretary-
General.

Thirdly and finally, my neighbour from the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has
already mentioned the joint initiative with Switzerland
to strengthen respect for international humanitarian
law. I will limit myself to calling on all States to
actively participate in the consultations that the ICRC
and Switzerland will continue to organize to that end.

