Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The Ivorian delegation thanks Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, and Ambassador Raymond
Serge Bale, Permanent Representative of the Republic
of the Congo, which chairs the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, for their updated briefings on the
implementation of the Framework agreement on peace,
security and cooperation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region.

Over the past three months, the Council has
discussed the situation in the Great Lakes region on
many occasions, addressing issues specific to certain
countries of the region. Today's briefing provides us
with a complete picture of the situation, in view of the
progress made in the implementation of the Framework
agreement on peace, security and cooperation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
Region and the region, signed in Addis Ababa on
24 February 2013.

Despite that progress, it is clear that the prospects
for lasting peace and security in the Great Lakes region
continue to face security, political and humanitarian
challenges. In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire commends
the combined actions of the signatory States to
the Framework agreement, as well international
organizations such as the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African
Development Community and the East African
Community, in synergy with the African Union and
the United Nations, to provide appropriate responses to
the security, political and humanitarian challenges in
the region.

My country also invites the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Djinnit, to pursue his efforts towards the effective
implementation of the Framework agreement, and
supports the priorities jointly defined by the leaders
of the signatory countries of the agreement and the
Secretary-General with a view to the implementation
of paragraph 24 of resolution 2389 (2017).

Given the persisting tensions in some countries of
the region, cote d'Ivoire encourages all stakeholders
in the political processes and dialogues to increase
their engagement in order to reach a definitive and
lasting resolution of current crises. My country calls
on all parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to implement the 31 December 2016 agreement, in an
atmosphere of calm, with a view to holding credible
elections on 23 December 2018.

Turning to Burundi, cote d'Ivoire commends
the efforts of the facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
to relaunch the inter-Burundian political dialogue
under the auspices of the East African Community.
My delegation further welcomes the decision taken
by the Heads of State of the East African Community
during the organization's summit, held on 23 February
in Uganda, to continue to support the Burundian
political process. We therefore invite all Burundian
stakeholders to participate in this process, which
should be both inclusive and aligned with the spirit of
the Arusha agreement.

The deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation is especially alarming, particularly in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is attributable to the attacks and violence by armed
groups against civilians and United Nations forces,
community-level conflicts and persistent clashes in
the Central African Republic and in South Sudan. The
consequences thereof include a mass exodus of people,
which is fuelling a large flow of refugees and displaced
persons, and the ensuing humanitarian crisis in those
countries, specifically in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Hence my delegation welcomes the renewed
willingness of the United Nations, during the
eighth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, to neutralize armed groups by stepping up
the means afforded to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Intervention Brigade, jointly with the
Congolese authorities. We further commend the
efforts undertaken by the international community,
humanitarian organizations, neighbouring States
and local non-governmental organizations to deliver
humanitarian assistance to people in need. We
encourage donors to contribute to the success of the
high-level international conference for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, scheduled to be held on 13 April
in Geneva.

The Addis Ababa Framework agreement sets
out the outlines for the main national, regional and
international measures that are necessary to end the
persistent violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the region. For the countries of the
Great Lakes region, regional organizations and the
international community, this remains the framework
for adequate cooperation to tackle in a concerted
manner the structural causes of the instability plaguing
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
To that end, cote d'Ivoire calls upon the United
Nations and the whole of the international community
to scale up their support to promote the more effective
implementation of the agreement, which is crucial to
peace and stability in this important area of Africa.

