Mr. Muita (Kenya): Mr. President, I thank you
for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this
important debate. I wish at the outset to associate
myself with the statements made by the representative
of Sierra Leone, who spoke on behalf of the African
Group, and by the Permanent Representative of Egypt,
who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Since the World Summit of 2005, momentum has
been building on the question of Security Council
reform. Member States have shown keen interest in the
process of reform, as is evidenced by their robust
engagement throughout the past year.

My delegation considers the subject of the
Security Council's working methods to be an extremely
important part of the wider debate on Security Council
reform. Indeed, we understand the reform of the
working methods to be an integral part of the
comprehensive discussions that we have been holding
during the course of the past year. We look forward to
actively participating in the forthcoming round of
intergovernmental negotiations.

In July 2006, the Security Council adopted the
presidential note contained in document S/2006/507,
which seeks to improve the working methods of the
Council. We acknowledge that the adoption of the note
was a significant step forward aimed at advancing the
call for meaningful reform of the Council's working
methods. That having been said, we, like many others,
are of the view that further measures, coupled with the
continued and systematic implementation of note
S/2006/507, are necessary to achieve credible reforms.
In that regard, my delegation urges the Council to
revisit the note, take stock of the measures that the
Council has taken decisions on and subsequently
address the shortcomings in their implementation.

In a continuing bid to improve the Council's
working methods, my delegation supports the idea of
the Council going a step further in such reform. In that
respect, it is important that the implementation of the
measures contained in note S/2006/507 be consistent
and predictable, rather than ad hoc.

The Council should also strive to improve
perceptions of accountability by improving its
reporting mechanism to the General Assembly. The
discussion of the annual Security Council report to the
Assembly should be conducted in an environment of
frankness and openness, which in turn allows for a
genuine exchange of views between the general
membership and the Council. The Council should also
improve its working methods by submitting special
reports to the General Assembly apart from its annual
report, as stipulated under paragraph 3 of Article 24 of
the United Nations Charter.

As a troop-contributing country (TCC), Kenya
appreciates the recent efforts that the Council has
undertaken to improve interaction with TCCs.
Strengthening cooperation between the Council, the
Secretariat and TCCs enhances the possibility for
success in peacekeeping operations. The importance of
the mutual undertaking between those who mandate
peacekeeping operations, those who plan and manage
them and those who implement the mandates cannot be
overemphasized. My delegation therefore welcomed
the presidential statement of August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24) that advocated for the forging of
stronger and more transparent cooperation between the
United Nations and TCCs through transparent
consultations at all stages of peacekeeping operations.

As for the improvement of working methods,
Kenya also suggests the following measures. The
Security Council should finalize its provisional rules of
procedure, including new methods of work and
practices that have already been agreed upon. The
Council should hold open public meetings at all stages
of the consideration of a subject. The Council should
endeavour to keep written records of formal meetings
of the Council for future reference. Non-members of
the Security Council should be accorded more and
more regular access to the work of the Council. The
Council should enhance measures to guarantee
transparency in decision-making, especially in
developing fairer procedures for sanctions regimes.
Regular and frequent consultations and exchanges of
views with other major organs of the United Nations,
especially the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, should be scheduled. Briefings by the
President of the Council to the General Assembly
should be regular, substantive and conducted promptly
after each informal consultation of the whole. Lastly,
members of the Security Council should be encouraged
to take a transparent approach in dealing with
non-members of the Council with respect to the
Council's work, with a view to deriving benefit from
different perspectives on a given subject.

Kenya reiterates that the democratization of the
United Nations can only occur if there is a holistic and
realistic reform of the Council that will make it more
transparent, accountable and legitimate. One way of
achieving that is by improving the working methods of
the Council and its relationship with the General
Assembly through genuine cooperation and
coordination between the two organs.

In conclusion, Mr. President, let me assure you of
my delegation's continued engagement in the process
of reforming the Security Council with a view to
achieving the objectives set forth in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (A/60/RES/1). I would also like to
thank the delegation of Japan for organizing this
debate.

