Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing in this periodic monthly meeting
regarding the ninth report of the Secretary-General onthe
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/251).
The State ofKuwait fully supports his efforts to diffuse
the situation and prevent further escalation. We thank
the Secretary-General for presenting his second written
report, in line with that resolution, note S/2017/507 and
according to the practice concerning similar issues on
the Council's agenda. We also look forward to receiving
at least two written annual reports.

We were not surprised that today Mr. Mladenov
repeated the same phrase for the ninth time in the
27 months since the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), namely, that Israel took no steps during the
reporting period to cease its settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories. In fact, the opposite is
happening. Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
expand its policies of annexing Palestinian territories
at a rapid pace and to undermine the two-State solution.

The latest reports of the United Nations highlight
the fact that the Israeli occupying Power is implementing
plans to build, expand, finance and authorize settlement
activities, including to build more than 6,000 residential
units in Area C and East Jerusalem. The international
community must therefore compel Israel to implement
resolution 2334 (2016), which states that Israeli
settlement activity is a flagrant violation ofinternational
law and an obstacle to peace, and calls on Israel, the
occupying Power, to immediately and completely cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. It also stresses
the need to implement all other relevant international
resolutions, including resolutions 465 (1980) and 497
(1981), that consider Israeli settlement activities to be
illegal and illegitimate.

Over nearly a month, we have called for numerous
meetings to discuss the illegal unilateral decisions taken
by the Israeli Government, first when Israel refused
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, and then when we requested,
in cooperation with Indonesia, the convening of a
meeting on 8 March in order to discuss the economic
repercussions of Israel's unilateral decision to retain
part of Palestinian tax revenue. As recalled by
Mr. Mladenov today, we may see another crisis across
the region in the coming weeks as a result of this
decision, which is contrary to the bilateral agreements,
including the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations,
and violates international law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention. In that regard, we stress the absolute right
of the Palestinian Authority to use its funds as it wishes,
including those related to social assistance for the most
vulnerable people and the martyrs' families, as well as
the families of thousands of political prisoners held in
the occupation prisons.

With regard to Israeli hate speech, Israeli political
and military leaders continue their provocative
statements, in clear violation of resolution 2334 (2016),
which calls for an end to all provocations, incitement
and inflammatory rhetoric, which lead to an increase
in settler crimes against Palestinian civilians and their
property, including their holy sites, which are under the
protection of the Israeli security forces, and demonstrate
no respect for the sanctity ofthose sites. A case in point
was the recent closure of the Bab Al-Rahmah gate at
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and the subsequent closure of the
entire Mosque, preventing worshippers from reaching
the Mosque squares. In addition, Israeli forces detained
a number of senior employees of the Islamic Waqf in
Jerusalem, preventing the head of the Council, who
is 80 years old, from entering the Mosque for a week.
We condemn once again all those violations by Israel,
the occupying Power, of the Islamic and Christian holy
sites, in particular its attempts to change the historic
and legal status of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, and to
divide it in time and place.

We will soon mark the first anniversary ofthe Great
March of Return in the Gaza Strip, which will coincide
with the issuance of the report by the independent
international commission of inquiry on the violations
concerning the Palestinian occupied territories. The
report concludes that Israeli soldiers have committed
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law during the protests. The
report also stresses that the protests were civilian in
nature and with clear political objectives, and that some
of the violations committed amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

Beginning with the first March of Return, we have
warned at each meeting since 30 March 2018 against
what I have just said, and against the inability of the
Security Council to end those crimes and the persistence
of Israel, the occupying Power, in implementing its
policies and illegal practices. We have stressed the
need to enforce General Assembly resolution ES-10/20,
on the protection of Palestinian civilians, as long as
the illegal occupation and siege persist. That could
be done through the options of protecting Palestinian
civilians that are detailed in the most recent report
of the Secretary-General, as well as by urging the
international community to participate in protecting
those civilians and creating a practical and effective
mechanism to implement the General Assembly
resolution and the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report.

Turning now to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), it is difficult for the international
community to continue to call for stability in the entire
Middle East region, and in the occupied Palestinian
territories in particular, without recognizing the vital
role that UNRWA plays in providing basic services to
almost 5 million Palestinian refugees. In that regard,
we commend the adoption by the Foreign Ministers of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation at its forty-
sixth session of a decision to create a fund to ensure
sustainable funding for UNRWA, in order to support
Palestinian refugees as part of the Islamic Bank for
Development. The fund will mobilize resources from
different counties and institutions in order to support
UNRWA's humanitarian relief, health and education
services for Palestinian refugees.

With respect to the decision of the United States
to recognize Israel's annexation of the Syrian Golan
and keep it under its sovereignty, we have followed
international reactions condemning any annexation of
territory by force, and rejecting any illegal measure to
further tensions in the region. We regret the decision
taken by the United States to recognize Israel's
annexation and sovereignty of the Golan. We stress
Syria's right to recover the entire Syrian Arab Golan,
in line with legitimate international resolutions. We
reject any decision that would perpetuate Israel's
occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan or any other Arab
occupied territory.

Over the past five decades, Israel, the occupying
Power, has taken decisions to change the legal,
natural and demographic situation in the Golan.
Those attempts are illegal, null and void. They are a
violation of international conventions, the Charter
of the United Nations and relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1975) and 497 (1981), whereby the Security Council
rejects any annexation of territory by force. Israel has
described the United States decision as historic, while
it is the only State to ignore and violate international
legitimate resolutions.

In closing, we call on the international community
once again to fulfil its commitments and take the
measures necessary to revive the peace process in
order to reach a two-State solution and put an end to the
Israeli occupation since 1967, with a view to achieving
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace, based on
relevant United Nations resolutions, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map.

