Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation wishes to welcome
your presence at this meeting, which highlights
the importance of the situation in the Sudan and
the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). It congratulates the briefers, Mr. Mamabolo
and Ms. Mueller, and would like, in the light of their
detailed reports, to make the following comments on
the political situation in the Sudan and its impact on the
peace process in Darfur.

Cote d'Ivoire has been closely following the
recent developments in the political situation in the
Sudan, which has been marked by the deposition of
President Omer Al-Bashir and the establishment by the
Sudanese army of a Transitional Military Council for
a two-year period. The situation opens up an alarming
period of uncertainty given the potential risks of the
deterioration of the sociopolitical and security climate
and the possible repercussions on the region.

In that connection, my country urges the military
authorities to spare no effort to preserve peace and
stability in the Sudan. We therefore call on them to
engage as soon as possible in inclusive consultations
with all the country's stakeholders with a view to
arriving at consensus solutions that respond to the deep
desires of the people of the Sudan, echoing the 15 April
communique of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on the situation in the Sudan, which
urges the Transitional Military Council to transfer
power to the competent civilian and political figures as
soon as possible. We note the willingness expressed by
the military authorities to work with the opposition to
establish a civilian Government and respect the Sudan's
international obligations. We encourage them to
conduct that process in accordance with the guidelines
and due diligence of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union in order to restore constitutional
order and hold democratic elections, which would
ensure peace and stability.

With regard to Darfur, my delegation supports
the conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/305), which notes the relative stability in the
region as a whole, with the exception of the Jebel
Marra area. We also welcome the fact that people are
gradually returning to their areas of origin and that
UNAMID is assisting local authorities in managing
intercommunal tensions and ensuring access to land
and resources. However, those achievements should
not make us lose sight of the many challenges related
to finding viable solutions to the root causes of the
conflict, the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur and the persistent sexual and gender-
based violence.

My country believes that resolving the crisis in
Darfur depends on the implementation of an inclusive
political process, involving all stakeholders, including
the movements that have not signed the Doha Document.
We therefore remain concerned about the withdrawal
of some of the non-signatory movements from peace
negotiations and of the Sudan Call alliance from the
2016 Roadmap Agreement of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, following decisions taken
by the Sudanese Government in response to popular
protests in the country. We therefore urge the armed
groups to work together with the Sudanese authorities
to ensure that the hostilities are truly at an end. We also
urge all the stakeholders working to resolve the crisis
in Darfur who have influence on the parties to redouble
their efforts and ensure that the Sudan Call alliance
rejoins the peace talks.

My delegation calls on the new authorities to work
to safeguard the achievements of the peace process
in Darfur. We continue to believe that a successful
transition will be an unquestionable advantage in solving
the problems encountered in mobilizing resources to
implement the peace agreements. It is also essential to
ensure that the international community, along with
regional and subregional stakeholders, supports the
authorities in their quest for viable solutions to the root
causes of the conflicts with the aim of guaranteeing
resilience in Darfur.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the
international community, the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to remain committed to providing
assistance to the Sudan, which is at a crucial stage in
its history, in order to preserve the achievements of the
political process under way in Darfur and to respond to
the Sudanese people's deep desire for peace, democracy
and development.

