Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Zarif for presenting the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/275) on the work of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the participation in
this meeting of the Minister of Foreign Affairs for
Serbia, Mr. Jeremie. We share his assessments. We
listened carefully to Mr. Hoxhaj's statement.

The position of Russia in not recognizing the
Kosovo declaration of independence remains
unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains in full
force and binding on all parties as the international
legal basis for a settlement in Kosovo and for ensuring
security in the district. International entities in the
district must act on the basis of status neutrality. Any
question concerning stability and security in Kosovo
must be addressed in accordance with the norms of
international law and the fundamental decisions of the
United Nations.

It is important to prevent any type of forcible
attempt by the Kosovo authorities to gain control of
Serbian municipalities in northern Kosovo. As
demonstrated by events from July to November 2011,
such attempts can seriously destabilize the situation.
The referendum on the question of the legitimacy of
the Kosovar Albanian authorities, held in the Serbian
municipalities of the district on 14 and 15 February,
was an expression of the despair of the Serbian
authorities at the lack of support from the international
agencies in Kosovo.

We still believe that UNMIK, on the basis of the
mandate received from the Security Council, must play

a maximally active role in facilitating the process
leading to a settlement in Kosovo. In this context, we
welcome the UNMIK-sponsored coordination meetings
on questions of security, as well as the direct outreach
by the head of UNMIK, aimed at keeping local
channels open for dialogue. We call on UNMIK to
fulfil its obligations regarding the external
representation of Kosovo in international organizations
and mechanisms.

We note signs of desire on the part of some
countries and organizations, as well as the Kosovar
Albanians, to make broad use of the understanding
reached in the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue mediated by
the European Union regarding the representation of
Kosovo in regional Balkan organizations. In particular,
we are seeing the increasing use of the name "Kosovo"
in the documents of the European Union, in the spirit
of the agreements of 24 February. There is also talk of
Pristina's plans to open a mission to NATO in Brussels,
under the banner of "Kosovo". We believe that, in
order to ensure stability, it is essential to adhere strictly
to the parties' agreed parameters, without arbitrary
interpretation.

In equal measure, we call for a full and objective
investigation of crimes in Kosovo, including evidence
of illegal trade in human organs disclosed by the
Special Rapporteur of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe, Mr. Dick Marty. We are
concerned about the slow pace of the investigation
being conducted by the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo into Mr. Marty's findings of illicit
trading in human organs in Kosovo. These findings
point directly to the involvement of the current leaders
of Kosovo in these crimes. The investigation must be
impartial. All perpetrators must be held responsible. On
the basis of these concerns, we have endorsed the
Serbian proposal that the investigation be handed over
to the United Nations.

The security situation in the district remains
tense. There is still a high level of crime against
national minorities, including instances of vandalism of
Orthodox sanctuaries and the burglarizing of Kosovar
Serbs' homes. The realities of illicit trade in weapons
and in human beings, as well as drug smuggling,
remain a serious problem for Kosovo. The status of
internally displaced persons returning to Kosovo,
including Serbs, is still unsatisfactory. There are many
reasons for that, including the fact that the returnees
are unsure of their personal safety.

Recently, we have seen disturbing reports in
various media that the Kosovar authorities are
establishing contacts with representatives of the Syrian
opposition in order, inter alia, to train insurgents in the
district. That would run afoul of the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, supported by the entire international
community. Moreover, turning Kosovo into an
international training centre for insurgents of various
armed groups could be a serious destabilizing factor
beyond the Balkan region. We call on the international
entities operating in the district to curb such
backsliding.

International entities must also focus their
attention on protecting Orthodox sanctuaries and
people of the Orthodox faith. We share the concerns of
the Serbian authorities and the Serbian Orthodox
Church that the Kosovo Force has turned over to the
Kosovo Police the responsibility for ensuring the
security of the most significant Serbian cultural and
religious heritage sites in the district, despite the fact
that, as indicated in the Secretary-General's report, the
Kosovo Albanian population is unfavourably disposed
to the adoption and implementation of legislation to
protect Serbian cultural and religious artifacts. There is
an obvious divide between the obligations of the
Kosovo authorities and their implementation. Such acts
could give rise to additional security tensions in
Kosovo.

