Mr. Apakan: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the security
situation in eastern Ukraine. I will provide members
with an update on the challenges in the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, in particular the package of
measures as we a mark a year since its signing.

The latest recommitment to the ceasefire began on
29 December. That resulted in a significant decrease in
the number of ceasefire violations - a demonstration
that, if there is will, violence can be stopped. However,
the numbers have again rapidly increased. Violence
continues to fluctuate. On 5 February, for instance, the
Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) recorded almost
2,000 ceasefire violations, while yesterday we recorded
approximately 1,300. Areas where violence has been
most intense, as before, remain concentrated around
the Avdiivka-Yasynuvata-Donetsk airport area, the
Popasna-Pervomaisk-Zolote area, areas east and north-
east of Mariupol and areas south of Svitlodarsk. Heavy
weapons have not been fully withdrawn; they continue
to be used.

We are in Minsk, where tomorrow there will be a
meeting of the Trilateral Contact Group. I will again
emphasize the need for a comprehensive ceasefire at
the Working Group on Security Issues. There must
be progress in identifying measures to strengthen the
ceasefire. The disengagement of forces and hardware,
agreed in the framework decision of September
2016, has not occurred. On the contrary, we have
observed a re-engagement in the Petrivske and Zolote
disengagement areas. Particularly in Zolote, violence
is spilling over to nearby villages on both sides of the
contact line, resulting in civilian casualties and damage
to civilian infrastructure.

Civilians must be protected. Measures that can
improve conditions for those living in or close to
conflict-affected areas are urgently needed. In 2018
the SMM. reported on the circumstances in which
43 civilians were killed and 194 were injured. In the
first few weeks of 2019 we recorded four civilian
casualties. All measures must be undertaken to prevent
further casualties. The full withdrawal of heavy
weapons, beginning with populated areas, should be a
priority. That would reduce the impact of the conflict
on civilians. Concrete, positive steps in the field of
humanitarian mine action, particularly around schools,
kindergartens and entry-exit checkpoints, are needed.
That could help prevent further civilian casualties from
mines and unexploded ordnance. Raising awareness of
those dangers is important, especially among children.

Civilian infrastructure must be protected.
Regrettably, incidents affecting sites of critical
infrastructure, such as the Donetsk filtration station and,
more recently, the pumping station in Vasylivka, have
continued to occur. They cause damage and endanger
the lives of the brave men and women who work in those
sites for the benefit of their communities. The SMM
continues to facilitate dialogue to enable the repair and
maintenance of critical civilian infrastructure. It is for
the sides to take appropriate action to protect those
sites. They must honour the agreed local ceasefires and
arrangements. A failure to do so poses a threat to repair
crews and SMM. monitors.

To carry on with their lives, thousands of people
undertake long journeys every day. They are forced
to use the few entry-exit checkpoints to access basic
services, receive pensions and visit family members
separated by the conflict. We observe the consequences
of the enduring hardships, particularly for the elderly,
of the long queues in sub-zero temperatures. Since
December, the SMM. has recorded 14 cases ofpeople who
died from natural causes while waiting at checkpoints.
Steps must be taken to facilitate access for medical staff
to the grey zone between these checkpoints to provide
assistance for civilians. Crossing conditions must be
improved and more such checkpoints should be opened,
in particular in the Luhansk region. In his recent visit
to eastern Ukraine, the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Slovak Foreign Minister Lajcak, highlighted
the precarious conditions of civilians crossing the
damaged bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska. Action is
needed to ensure that the necessary repairs to the bridge
become possible.

The Mission continues to monitor and report
on developments taking place in a complex security
environment. SMM. unarmed aerial vehicles continue
to be targeted and signal interference with their flights
persists. More recently, on 4 February an explosion
occurred about 100 metres from an SMM. patrol.
Challenges to our freedom of movement remain, in
particular in areas outside Government control in the
southern Donetsk region.

It is the responsibility of the sides to make good
on their commitments and ensure effective monitoring
and verification by the OSCE - a commitment they
made in the package of measures. The Mission will
continue to support and facilitate the implementation
of the Minsk agreements. The SMM. will also continue,
according to its mandate, to monitor and report on
the security situation, facilitate dialogue to reduce
tensions and promote stabilization and normalization
throughout the country. In that context, we have
enhanced our patrolling activities to monitor on land
the possible effects on the socioeconomic situation and
potential implications related to developments in the
Sea of Azov.

I wish to thank the Council once again for the
opportunity to share the observations of the OSCE
SMM. I also wish to express my gratitude for the close
cooperation with United Nations agencies in Ukraine,
both in Kyiv and in the field. In closing, I would like
to acknowledge the work of my colleagues, the SMM
members, and the dedicated men and women with
whom I have the honour to work. I also wish to thank
my colleague and friend, Ambassador Sajdik, for his
close cooperation.

