The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

Recently, there has been an escalation of tension
between Israel and Palestine, with incessant incidents
of violence causing heavy casualties on both sides,
especially among civilians. China is seriously
concerned by this situation. We strongly call on both
parties to exercise maximum restraint and take the
necessary measures to keep the Middle East from once
again falling into the vicious cycle of violence in
response to violence.

It has been the consistent view of China that
peace in the Middle East can be realized only through
peaceful negotiations, not through violence and force.
The road map for peace in the Middle East, endorsed
by the Security Council, remains the most realistic and
practicable programme for the settlement of the
conflict between Israel and Palestine.
Currently, the crux of the matter is the lack of
mutual trust and the deepening of differences between
the two sides. The leaders of both sides must show
political decisiveness, resume dialogue as soon as
possible, reduce and eliminate mutual hostility and, at
the same time, fulfil their respective obligations under
the road map with a view to finally realizing the vision
of two independent States living side by side in peace.

Not long ago, the Palestinian people and the
Israeli people used their ballots to make their
respective choices on their political future. That was
the outcome of democratic processes, and the
international community should respect that outcome
unreservedly and engage and cooperate with both sides
in the light of the new political reality. The
international community should not punish Palestinian
civilians by stopping humanitarian assistance simply
because of differences in political views. The
international community bears a moral responsibility to
ensure that the daily life of Palestinian civilians not be
affected.

China firmly supports the Middle East peace
process and resolutely opposes all forms of terrorist
activity. The prolonged existence of the Middle East
problem is not only unfavourable to the lasting peace
and development of that region but also detrimental to
the peace and stability of the whole world. The
international community should take practical action
and adopt a constructive approach to help Israel and
Palestine out of the current deadlock. In this respect,
the Security Council bears a special responsibility.
China supports the draft presidential statement
proposed by Qatar. We find it regrettable that the
Council failed to reach consensus on the text, in spite
of several days of arduous consultations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time, in order to allow as many delegations to take the
floor as possible, I will not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the table and invite them to resume
their seats at the side of the Chamber. When a speaker
is taking a floor, the conference officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table. I thank participants
for their understanding and cooperation.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Bahrain.

