Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): The
Tunisian delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for
planning and presided over this formal meeting of the
Security Council devoted to Africa.

I also wish to congratulate Ambassador Koonjul,
Chairman of the ad hoc Working Group on conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa, for his
commitment to Africa. We are convinced that, thanks
to his professional and human qualities, the work of
this Group will be crowned with success.

My delegation supports the mandate of the ad hoc
Working Group on conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa. Of course, the statement of the President of
the Security Council of 31 January 2002 contains very
interesting recommendations and suggestions that pave
the way for the future action of the Working Group. We
also believe that the activities of the Group should be
part of the implementation of the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report on the
causes of conflicts and the promotion of sustainable
peace and development in Africa. The analysis and the
recommendations in that report are still very relevant
four years later.

While expressing our gratitude for the document
that was prepared in order to facilitate this discussion,
allow me to stress the following points.

We attach great importance to cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. Their participation in the Security
Council meeting held on 29 January 2002 on the
situation in Africa shows how beneficial the interaction
between these two main organs of the United Nations
is when we are talking about the maintenance of
international peace and security in their political,
economic and social dimensions, which themselves
generate development within a context of stability.
Cooperation and interaction between these two organs
can fit perfectly into efforts to prevent armed conflicts
and to build peace before and after conflicts.

In the course of its presidency of the Council in
February 2001, Tunisia suggested for the Council a
discussion on peace-building, being convinced that
peace is not simply the absence of armed conflicts or
declared hostility. Peace is rather something that has to
be built, with the combined efforts of all United
Nations bodies, in order to establish with foresight the
foundations for peace or to build peace following a
conflict.

I would like to express our support for the
establishment of an Economic and Social Council
advisory group on African countries emerging from
conflict and express the hope that the Security Council
ad hoc Working Group will cooperate closely with the
Economic and Social Council advisory group.

The Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General play a very important role when it comes to
preventing conflicts and also in the field of peace-
building. Often placed at the head of support offices of
the United Nations for peace-building, the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General already have
a certain number of achievements to their credit. These
include support given to Governments to build peace,
fostering national reconciliation, strengthening
democratic institutions, providing a framework to
harmonize the United Nations peace-building activities
in the field and facilitating the mobilization of
international political support. There is also the
collection of arms and assistance for their destruction,
and facilitating communication between Governments,
neighbouring States, regional organizations and
bilateral donors. Within this context, my delegation
supports the adoption of new institutional
arrangements, with a View to making the role of the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in
Africa more effective.

Regional and subregional organizations have an
important role to play in the area of conflict prevention
and peace-building after conflicts. Chapter VIII of the
Charter provides an ideal framework for cooperation
and coordination between the regional organizations
and the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council and the Secretary-General. Because of their
geographic proximity and their better knowledge of the
unique situations that they cover, regional
organizations could be a rapid early warning centre for
the United Nations. They are sometimes better
equipped in order to determine the right time for the
Council to act. Most of the conflicts that take place in
Africa in this post-cold-war period are domestic
conflicts; and thus we feel that it is crucial to
strengthen the institutional abilities of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), support its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution and
help the OAU in the area of training, increasing its
participation in United Nations activities and initiatives
and promoting joint United Nations-OAU initiatives.
Modalities for this cooperation have to be strengthened
through the implementation of appropriate strategies in
the area of cooperation and permanent mechanisms,
including early warning, conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building. It is also important
to include the subregional organizations, such as the
Community of Sahel-Saharan States (CENSAD), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). It is undeniable that these
subregional organizations constantly contribute directly
to resolving internal conflicts and inter-State conflicts
in Africa; and therefore they must be heeded by the
Security Council whenever dealing with a conflict or
tension in the regions that they represent.

The efforts and initiatives of ECOWAS in the
Sierra Leone conflict and in Liberia are well known.
The CENSAD has also contributed greatly to resolving
the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea and the
internal conflict in the Central African Republic. This
regional organization has also undertaken mediation
between the Central African Republic and Chad, as
well as among the different Somali factions. This
experience needs to be acknowledged by the Security
Council, as these are mechanisms able to contribute to
conflict resolution.

Lastly, we must point out in this context the
matter of the lack of resources within the OAU and
subregional organizations ~ namely, when it comes to
being able to play their role in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building. The role of regional
organizations can be crucial, especially when it comes
to designing exit strategies after peacekeeping
operations. Once the conflict is resolved, the long-term
plan and peace-building could be entrusted in the field
to subregional mechanisms that the United Nations
must assist politically and financially.

Peace depends on economic and social
development. Despite the unquestionable progress that
we have seen in recent years, the situation in many
regions in Africa remains alarming. Africa has not been
able to radically break with all matter of ills that still
plague it. The continent has the largest number of least
developed countries: 34 out of 49. This critical
situation is worsened by the burden of a severe debt,
low levels of savings and investment, the depreciation
of the prices of commodities, reductions in official
development aid, as well as insufficient levels of
foreign direct investment.

The New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) reflects the Africans' desire to take the future
of their continent in hand. NEPAD clearly expresses
how Africa, in association with the rest of the world,
could finally begin to tackle the enormous challenges
that face it. The implementation of NEPAD is of great
importance, and we are convinced that, if we want to
put an end to the vicious circle of conflicts, violence
and instability in Africa, the Working Group must seek
to make itself aware of the economic and social causes
of conflict whenever it looks at a given situation on the
African continent.

It is this relationship between peace, security,
stability and development that should, in our opinion,
always be at the very basis of every treatment of a
conflict in developing countries, and in Africa in
particular, where it has been amply shown that every
intra-State or inter-State conflict also has economic and
social causes and implications. This is a reality with
which we have to contend from now on.

Now I would like to quote a wonderful statement
by Mohatma Gandhi, who said that "Poverty is the
worst form of Violence and insecurity". The Security
Council has the right and the duty to recall this to the
international community.

