Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I am
pleased to report to the Security Council on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I). I warmly
welcome Iraq's Foreign Minister, Mr. Zebari, and am
pleased that he could be here with us today. I also want
to thank Special Representative Ashraf Qazi for his
work and for his report on the important efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

It is clear that the Iraqi Government confronts
significant security challenges as it strives to promote
stability and consolidate Iraq's young democracy.
Success will depend not only on progress in the
security sector, where MNF-I plays an important
supporting role, but also on advances in the economic
field and, most important, movement in the political
arena. We welcome the efforts expended over the last
three months, while noting that much work remains to
be done.

With your permission, Mr. President, I will now
provide an update on those efforts, which include
activities in Iraq's political, economic and security
sectors, as well as in the region and with the
international community.

In the political arena, progress on national
reconciliation is essential to ensure that security efforts
under way will result in long-term stability in the
country and in the region. To that end, we welcome
efforts by Iraqi leaders who are engaged in activities
designed to promote national reconciliation. For
example, as Mr. Qazi mentioned, the Constitutional
Review Committee continues its work to address
outstanding constitutional matters. Last month, the
Committee announced that it had prepared a draft plan
to reform the constitution. The Committee's work will
provide a solid foundation for a successful Iraq, and we
look forward to its sustained effort on this fundamental
matter.

We also welcome the selection of the new
Commissioners for the Independent High Electoral
Commission and the work under way to prepare for
provincial elections. Additional legislation is being
formulated that will outline the powers of provincial
councils and their relationship to national Government
institutions. We welcome those efforts, as well as the
work of the newly created Demobilization,
Disarmament and Reintegration Committee, dealing
with militias and other unauthorized military
formations, and we look forward to the achievement of
other benchmarks on reconciliation, such as the
passage of a law to reform the de-Baathification
process.

I now turn to the economic front. We welcome
the launch of the International Compact with Iraq, on 3
May, and appreciate the support of Secretary-General
Ban. The emphasis now is on implementing the
economic initiatives that the Government of Iraq has
committed to undertake. The support of the
international community for Iraq will be important for
the Compact's success. The cooperation between Iraq
and the United Nations has been key to the successful
launch of that initiative and will remain critical during
the implementation phase. Further advances in Iraq's
economic reform, however, will require the passage of
legislation on the hydrocarbons sector with regulations

governing oil revenue-sharing. Iraq must also press
ahead with its efforts to improve budget execution,
particularly for reconstruction projects initiated by key
ministries and the provincial governments and for
essential support in service delivery.

On the security front, insurgents, militias,
terrorists and criminals continue their destabilizing
actions. We strongly condemn this morning's vicious
attack on the holy shrines of Imam Ali al-Hadi and
Imam Hassan al-Askari in Samarra, and we share the
outrage of the Iraqi people at that crime. It is another
deliberate attempt by terrorists to sow dissent and
inflame sectarian strife among the people of Iraq. We
call on all Iraqis to reject that provocation.

Most of the attacks in Iraq have occurred in
Baghdad, Anbar, Salah al Din and Diyala provinces,
and the majority of the victims are Iraqi civilians. We
regret the suffering of the Iraqi people and the many
innocent lives lost. Those seeking to undermine Iraq
continue to use a variety of methods to kill and maim,
as witnessed by the use of lethal vehicle-borne
improvised explosive bombings in the Baghdad area in
April. Also in April, a suicide bomber blew himself up
in the building housing the Iraqi Council of
Representatives, killing one Council member and
wounding several other people. In a demonstration of
resolve to stand up to terrorists, the Council met the
following day. We applaud that courageous act and
commitment to serving the interests of the Iraqi people.

Operation Fardh al-Qanun - "imposing the
law" - continues to work to improve security in the
Baghdad area in order to provide the time and space for
political and economic progress. The Operation is
entering its fifth month, and although it is still too
early to project results, there have been signs of a
significant shift in the distribution of the Violence.
While high-profile terrorist attacks and attacks against
coalition forces are still frequent, sectarian murders
and attacks against civilians in Baghdad have
decreased from the levels seen in January. We are also
seeing significant increases in the number of weapons
caches found. Iraqi and multinational forces continue
to establish joint security stations and combat outposts
in the city and in surrounding areas. The performance
of the Iraqi Security Forces is critical to the success of
those efforts.
There are other developments in Iraq's stand
against the insurgency. Opposition to Al-Qaida in
Anbar province is growing, aided by combined
operations in Ramadi with Iraqi security and
multinational forces that include the establishment of
Iraqi police stations and joint security stations
throughout the city. Iraqi security forces are recruiting
in greater numbers in Anbar province, demonstrating
the determination of the people to participate in the
fight against insurgents and Al-Qaida and to assist with
the security of the country. We see considerable
interest and activity in other provinces with regard to
extending the success of the popular resistance to Al-
Qaida that has been demonstrated in Anbar province.

Iraqi security forces are undertaking a greater
role in Iraq's security, taking the lead in raids and other
operations to combat insurgents, militias, terrorists and
criminals. In the month of May, the Iraqi Special
Operations Forces Brigade alone conducted more than
48 operations targeting terrorists, regardless of their
sect. Iraqi forces continue to conduct operations
throughout the country.

As part of the continuing process of handing over
the security lead to Iraqi security forces, multinational
forces transferred security responsibility for the
southern Iraq province of Maysan in April and for the
northern provinces of Sulaimaniya, Erbil and Dohuk on
30 May. Iraqi security forces have now assumed the
security lead in seven provinces. We are working
steadily to achieve further transfers as the Iraqi
security forces and Iraqi provincial governments build
their capacity to take on that responsibility.

On 4 May, the Egyptian Government hosted an
expanded neighbours' meeting in Sharm el-Sheikh to
facilitate greater regional dialogue and support for
Iraqi efforts to rebuild the country. Follow-up,
particularly by the working groups established in
Sharm, is needed to continue the momentum begun by
that initiative. Iraqi leaders also continue their bilateral
outreach to strengthen relations with Iraq's neighbours,
and we encourage all parties to expand those efforts.
We welcome Turkey's offer to host the next expanded
neighbours' meeting later this year.

Securing Iraq's borders is vital. Iraq is not able to
accomplish that task on its own; it requires the
goodwill and efforts of Iraq's neighbours as well. Not
all of Iraq's neighbours have been helpful. We remain
concerned that certain countries continue to support
violent extremists who seek to undermine Iraq's
political progress. The flow of foreign terrorists and

weapons into Iraq is particularly destabilizing. We call
upon all Member States to repudiate that behaviour and
to endorse Prime Minister Al-Maliki's repeated
requests for an end to foreign interference in Iraq's
political process.

We laud the role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which remains firm in its
ongoing commitment to help the Iraqi people despite
the difficult security environment. The specialized
assistance of the United Nations will be critical to
Iraq's long-term development and stability. We look
forward to the upcoming discussions on how to revise
UNAMI's mandate so as to encourage a robust
presence to assist Iraq's political and economic
progress and to provide humanitarian assistance to
refugees and internally displaced people.

We welcome the contributions made in support of
United Nations security efforts in Iraq. Georgia, South
Korea and Romania have provided security forces for
UNAMI that have been essential to the United Nations
operations in Iraq. Fiji continues to provide United
Nations guard protection. Sustained international
support in Iraq - including through contributions to
the fund for security expenses, as well as the provision
of forces for United Nations security - will enable the
United Nations to remain focused on its core assistance
objectives in Iraq. MNF-I is ready to assist with United
Nations security as necessary.

We extend our sincere appreciation to Special
Representative Qazi for his efforts over the past three
years to assist the Iraqi Government and people in their
rebuilding efforts. Special Representative Qazi has
worked closely with the Government of Iraq, the Iraqi
people, the multinational forces and regional
governments in support of Iraq, and we thank him for
his dedication and service.

In closing, let me confirm that the multinational
forces remain dedicated to helping the Iraqi security
forces build their capabilities so that they may assume
full responsibility for securing and defending their
country. The international community shares a
common interest in ensuring the success of the Iraqi
efforts to create a peaceful, stable and prosperous
country, which is important not only for the people of
Iraq, but also for the region and the entire world.
