Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
open debate. We also thank the briefers for their
important contributions.

The Netherlands aligns itself fully with the statement
that was just made on behalf of the European Union.

In my national capacity, I would like to highlight
three issues: research and information-sharing, local
engagement and international cooperation.

First, the need for more research on the nexus
between terrorism and organized crime has already
been highlighted. Whether it is about the environments
where terrorists and criminals meet, their recruitment
strategies or the link with human trafficking, we simply
do not know enough yet. But we should not only do
more research; we should also do better research
through enhanced information-sharing. That requires
identifying the right stakeholders from Government,
civil society and academia to facilitate their interaction.
It requires developing legislation to stimulate
inter-agency and public-private information-sharing, in
line with human rights obligations, and it requires the
training of officials to use new sources of data and new
methods of data collection and analysis. The Security
Council can encourage Member States to engage in
such actions to enhance our understanding, because
only by understanding the nexus better can we better
address it.
Secondly, on local engagement, it is clear that one
nexus does not exist. In different regions and countries,
the relationship between terrorists and criminals takes
different shapes. However, it is at the local level where
the nexus manifests itself most clearly and where
actions to address the nexus have the most direct
effect. Building trust between national and local actors
strengthens dialogue and cooperation. Such dialogue
and cooperation help Governments address drivers of
terrorism and organized crime at the local level, like
unemployment and a lack of access to basic services.
The United Nations continues to play a key role in
assisting Member States, especially those with limited
resources, in capacity-building at the local level to
tackle the nexus.

Thirdly, with respect to international cooperation,
in 2018 the Kingdom of the Netherlands presented a
set of good practices on the nexus between terrorism
and organized crime to the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum (GCTF). In March of this year, we launched a
policy toolkit to operationalize those good practices,
and I am glad that they have been mentioned by many
before me in their statements. Both the good practices
and the toolkit were developed in close cooperation
with the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute and are publicly available on
the GCTF website. International cooperation between
the United Nations and organizations like the GCTF is
crucial for the United Nations and its Member States
to stay ahead of the curve of international terrorism
and organized crime. The United Nations cannot and
should not go at it alone.

In conclusion, sometimes people with the worst
pasts create the best future. The Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant recruited criminals for its caliphate
with that slogan. The caliphate may have fallen, but
our debate today shows us that the nexus between
terrorism and organized crime is more alive than ever.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains committed to
supporting the United Nations and its Member States
in countering the scourge of terrorism and organized
crime, as well as in overcoming the worst pasts and
creating the truly best future for all.

