Mr. Salame: Let me start by wishing Ramadan
Kareem to our Muslim colleagues on the occasion of
the holy month of Ramadan.

Allow also me to congratulate the Republic of
Indonesia on its presidency of the Security Council this
month. I am grateful for this opportunity to brief the
Council in person on our work in Libya.

This is the report that I have spent nearly all of the
past two years trying to avoid delivering. Forty-eight
days into the attack on Tripoli by General Haftar's
forces, there has already been too much death and
destruction. Libya is on the verge of descending into a
civil war, which could lead to the permanent division of
the country. The damage already done will take years
to mend, and that is only if the war is ended now.

The consequences and the risks of the conflict
are already painfully clear, especially for the Libyan
people: more than 460 dead, 29 of them civilians; more
than 2,400 injured, the majority of them civilians; and
more than 75,000 people forced from their homes, all
of them civilians. More than half of the displaced are
women and children. Humanitarian actors estimate that
more than 100,000 men, women and children remain
trapped in immediate frontline areas, with over 400,000
more in areas directly impacted by the clashes.

While the conditions for migrants and refugees
in Libya were already dire prior to the conflict, those
conditions have now gone from bad to worse. Nearly
3,400 refugees and migrants are trapped in detention
centres exposed to, or in close proximity to, the
fighting. United Nations humanitarian agencies have
been working around the clock to transfer the most
vulnerable from the conflict-affected areas to safer
locations, and I am very, very proud of their work.

When the Secretary-General visited Libya on
3 April, his visit was intended to show the full support
of the international community for the peaceful
resolution of Libya's long period of upheaval. The
capital was enjoying a measure of increased security
and the population a much more stable currency and an
improved economic outlook, and the political process,
despite many obstacles, was moving forward.

Indeed, we were on the eve of hosting the national
conference in the Libyan city of Ghadames, an event
that would have brought together more than 150
Libyans from across the country. There was great
public excitement about what the conference could
yield in terms of a way forward to end Libya's eight-
year-long period of transition and usher in a new period
of stability and security through the ballot box. To see
those who had enthusiastically accepted our invitation
to Ghadames suddenly take up arms against one another,
to attack the capital or to defend it, has plunged me into
the deepest level of sadness for the opportunity lost and
for a hope killed exactly 10 days before its realization.

The attack on Tripoli also imperilled the potential
of the talks that had been held on 27 February in Abu
Dhabi between Prime Minister Serraj and General
Haftar, the sixth of its kind between them. At those
talks there had been a real opportunity to replace the
Government of National Accord in Tripoli, dissolve
the parallel Government in Al-Bayda and create an
inclusive, unified national Government that would have
shepherded the country through the election process to
the end of the transitional period. The understandings
reached in Abu Dhabi had also placed the military under
civilian control, a key demand of the vast majority of
Libyans and many in the international community.

I am no Cassandra, but the violence on the outskirts
of Tripoli is just the start of a long and bloody war on
the southern shores of the Mediterranean, imperilling
the security of Libya's immediate neighbours and the
wider Mediterranean region. The security vacuum
created by the withdrawal of many of General Haftar's
troops from the south, coupled with the focus of the
western forces on the defence of the capital, is already
being exploited by Da'esh and Al-Qaida. In the south of
Libya, the black flags of Da'esh are appearing, and I am
dismayed to report that since April 4, there have been
four separate Da'esh attacks in the south of Libya: two
attacks in Ghodwa, one in Sebha and one just a few days
ago in Zella. The cumulative toll of the attacks has been
17 killed, more than 10 wounded and eight kidnapped.
Libyan forces that had in the past courageously
defended their country against these terrorist groups
are now busy fighting one another. In addition to the
innocent Libyans being ruthlessly subjected to the
increasing terror of Da'esh, there will be a spillover of
this violence to Libya's immediate neighbours.

There are numerous reports of extremists, persons
under international sanctions and individuals wanted
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) appearing
on the battlefield on all sides. All parties must publicly
disassociate themselves from such elements without
delay and refer to the ICC those for whom arrest
warrants have been issued. I recommend that the
Council support the formation of a commission of
inquiry to determine who has taken up arms and that it
also support the establishment of mechanisms to ensure
the exclusion of unwanted elements.

No less worrying is the fact that arms are pouring
in again to all sides. The blatant and televised breach
of the arms embargo by the apparent delivery of a
large quantity of weapons and armoured vehicles to
Government of National Accord forces in Tripoli a few
days ago comes on the heels of earlier and ongoing
deliveries of banned modern weaponry to the Libyan
National Army. Many countries are providing weapons
to all parties in the conflict without exception. The
amount and sophistication of such weapons are already
causing greater numbers of casualties. Without a robust
enforcement mechanism, the arms embargo on Libya
will become a cynical joke. Some nations are fuelling
this bloody conflict; the United Nations should put an
end to it.

The conflict has been characterized by the use
of airstrikes, heavy artillery and the indiscriminate
shelling of residential areas. Ramadan nights, normally
convivially spent in the company of one's neighbours
and family, have become periods of sheer terror for
the residents of the capital, waiting in fear for the
next attack. Since mid-April there has been a rising
number of night-time precision strikes on Government
of National Accord positions in and around Tripoli by
unknown aircraft, averaging five a night. On May 8
an ammunition depot belonging to the Government of
National Accord-aligned Janzour Knights was hit in
an airstrike that was within a kilometre of the United
Nations compound where we work and live.

The large number of casualties has overburdened
the already weakened health facilities struggling with
shortages of medical personnel and supplies. Eleven
ambulances were directly hit by airstrikes, rockets
and shelling while on duty. I am appalled by the
apparent disregard for the due protection of personnel
engaging in vital medical tasks and recall that attacks
against health workers constitute a serious violation of
international humanitarian law.

We are also deeply concerned about the sharp
increase in abductions, disappearances and arbitrary
arrests since the start of the current conflict. At least
seven officials and employees have been arbitrarily
detained or kidnapped in eastern and western Libya.
The fate of all those individuals remains unknown,
and there may be others who have disappeared under
similar circumstances. Journalists also face increasing
threats, intimidation and violence, often in connection
with reporting on the conflict. I therefore call for
the Council's unequivocal support in insisting on the
application of international humanitarian law for all
parties to the conflict. We need to demonstrate to those
who commit violations that impunity will not prevail.
We need to sanction those who use the fog of war to
violently settle personal or political scores.

As the conflict rolls on, Libya's social fabric
is unravelling at an alarming rate. Calls for a halt to
the fighting and reconciliation amongst the warring
parties are being drowned out by internal and regional
parties that have weaponized social media to drive
fake news, false narratives and expressions of hatred
that more deeply divide the population. The Mission
has established a mechanism to monitor hate speech
online and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights has already referred a number of cases
of incitement to Facebook.

The United Nations maintains an active presence
on the ground in Libya, in Tripoli and through our
hub in Benghazi. Naturally, given the situation, we
have scaled down our non-essential personnel, but we
remain in Libya, alongside the Libyan people, to deliver
as best we can. Over 42,000 people have received some
form of assistance through United Nations programmes
since the start of the conflict.

Food prices are rising across the country as shortages
start to occur. Insecurity and the resource demands of the
parties to the conflict are exacerbating those shortages,
particularly with regard to fuel. Another casualty of the
conflict is Libya's infrastructure, including electricity
and water. Already unable to meet demand, the water
supply to the capital and the whole of north-west Libya
has been weaponized as armed groups have cut off the
Great Man-Made River to extract concessions. That act
put tens of thousands of people in immediate danger
and may constitute a war crime. Such acts must be
condemned in the strongest terms.

The only positive economic indicator is that all
parties have so far acted in the national interest by not
impeding the oil supply. However, there are indications
that the eastern branch of the National Oil Corporation
is again attempting to export oil, in violation of the
sanctions regime. This illegal attempt risks dividing the
National Oil Corporation, which remains the primary
source of revenue for the country and the national
social safety net.

We should not discount Libyan resilience in the
face of this tragic turn of events. Since 30 March,
Libyan citizens have shown admirable resolve in
democratically electing new municipal councils in 22
municipalities in western and southern Libya. Eighteen
of these councils have already sworn in their mayors.
It is unfortunate that some elections have had to be
postponed for security reasons. In that regard, I note
that efforts of the parallel Government in the east to
appoint mayors or block municipal elections from being
held are a denial ofthe rights of all Libyans to elect their
local representatives. It is vital to keep the pilot light of
democracy alive in Libya, and I appeal to the Council
to lend its unqualified support to the continuation of the
municipal election process.

There is no military solution to Libya. This is
not a cliche', it is a fact, and it is high time for those
who have harboured that illusion to open their eyes
and adjust themselves to the reality. Libya's mosaic of
communities cannot be governed without alliances and
relationships stretching across the country. It was to be
through the national conference bringing those myriad
communities together that hope for an inclusive,
peaceful and prosperous future existed.

I hear many Libyans telling us that the political
process cannot ignore the present war as if it were not
taking place. They are right; there is a before and after
4 April, and we, as impartial mediators, need to adjust
that process in order to bridge the deep gap of mistrust
that has prevailed since that date. Our consultations
with the parties, as well as with men and women of
influence, have not ceased and we struggle to maintain
a minimum of political fluidity among the various
groups, which, sooner rather than later, will need to
come back and devise together a better future for their
children and a more peaceful formula for sharing power
and resources.

To that end, Libyans need the international
community to work in unison to mitigate and alleviate
their divisions, instead of amplifying them. A better
future is still possible, but we all must be seized with
the fierce urgency of now while the front lines remain
on the outskirts of Tripoli and before the battle moves,
God forbid, to the capital's more densely populated
neighbourhoods. That will require the concerted and
immediate action of the international community.

Without the international and regional stakeholders
recognizing that Libya is not a prize for the strongest,
but a country of 6.5 million people who deserve peace
and the right to collectively determine their own path
forward, the future of Libya will be bleak. I fear that
without immediate action to stop the flow of arms and
pressure on the Libyan parties to the conflict to enable
a return to serious dialogue, Libya will descend into
civil war, which could potentially lead to a Hobbesian
all-against-all state of chaos or partition of the country.

Full civil war in Libya is not inevitable, but it may
occur by the will of some parties and the inaction of
others. I hear Libyans resigning themselves to a conflict
of many months or even many years. My duty, and that
of this family of nations, is to tell them: "No. You need
to stop the fighting and stop it now, for the sake of your
loved ones, for the sake of your country and for the sake
of international peace and security."

I therefore request this organ to take up its
responsibility, urge the silencing of the guns and call
on the warring parties to engage with the Mission to
ensure a full and comprehensive cessation of hostilities
and a return to an inclusive, United Nations-led
political process.

