Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We warmly welcome you,
Sir, to the Council. I also wish to thank the Korean
delegation for convening this debate on a matter of
profound importance to international peace and security
and for the excellent concept note (S/2014/313, annex)
that has provided a good guide for our discussions
today. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
for his very succinct statement.

Ten years after the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1540 (2004), it is appropriate that we
take stock of the journey so far in its implementation,
and indeed the way forward in terms of what remains
to be done. The tenth anniversary should also serve as a
reminder of the key security challenges of our time and
the need to strengthen the use of this binding instrument
to address the potential threat to international peace
and security if terrorists and other non-State actors
were to acquire weapons of mass destruction.

As the second Council resolution to invoke Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations outside a
country-specific context, resolution 1540 (2004) has
been aptly described as filling a gap in international
law by addressing the risk that terrorists might obtain
and use weapons of mass destruction. Indeed, while
the three main treaties pertaining to weapons of mass
destruction - the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) and the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC) - address non-proliferation, they
do not take into account the possibility of such weapons
falling into the hands of non-State actors, especially
terrorists. Therein lies the significance of resolution
1540 (2004), which can be said to complement the three
global treaties.

The resolution obliges all States to do three key
things: to put in place internal controls to prevent
the proliferation of biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons, their means of delivery and related materiel; to
refrain from providing any form of support to non-State
actors attempting to develop or possess weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery; and to
adopt effective laws prohibiting non-State actors from
possessing weapons of mass destruction, in particular
for terrorist activities.
In furtherance of these objectives, it is pertinent
to say that resolution 1540 (2004) should not be seen
as a stand-alone instrument. The increasing threat
to global peace and security compels us to act in
unison, including through the consolidation of existing
non-proliferation mechanisms. We should strive to
develop assets and resources at the national, regional
and international levels to sustain the long-term
vision of the resolution. As demonstrated through its
extension in the adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), we
should incrementally build on what has already been
achieved while remaining adaptive to developing new
strategies and a dynamic global security architecture,
to meet new proliferation challenges. Resolution 1977
(2011), for example, emphasized cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Such cooperation, we believe, presents an avenue for
enhancing global engagement on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

The link between resolution 1540 (2004) and
compliance with regimes such as those of the CWC, the
BWC and the NPT, and in particular the contents of
articles 1 and 2 of the NPT, cannot be overemphasized.
It becomes compelling to forestall abuses in the
exercise of article 4 ofthe NPT by calling on States that
operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities to accede to
the Treaty and bring such facilities under the full-scope
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
across all remaining regions of the world is, we believe,
important to preventing the vertical and horizontal
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Success
in that direction would provide crucial components
of transparency in the overall goal of achieving the
objectives of the second pillar of the NPT, in pursuance
of non-proliferation obligations. The ongoing third
session of the Preparatory Committee for the ninth
Review Conference, to take place in 2015, provides
another opportunity to stridently deepen our resolve to
extend the establishment of similar zones in parts of the
world where they currently do not exist.

Africa became a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 2009
when the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty,
better known as the Treaty of Pelindaba, entered into
force. Among its other aims, the Treaty of Pelindaba
seeks to prohibit the development, production,
stationing and testing of nuclear explosive devices in
Africa. It thus represents a significant step towards
strengthening nuclear non-proliferation.

As of today, all 53 members of the African
Union (AU) have signed the Treaty. Morocco, which
is not a member of the AU, signed the Treaty in
April 1996. This implies that the Treaty of Pelindaba
enjoys universal membership in Africa. The African
Commission on Nuclear Energy is the body mandated
to monitor compliance by States parties, and has worked
assiduously to transform the compliance architecture of
the Treaty of Pelindaba.

In July 2002, at its thirty-eighth ordinary session,
the Assembly of the Organization of African Unity
took a decisive step in support of the global chemical
weapons disarmament and non-proliferation regime
by encouraging the universalization of the Chemical
Weapons Convention in Africa. That position
was reaffirmed in 2006 when the African Union
Commission signed a memorandum of understanding
with the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons so as to ensure
the full and effective implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention in Africa. As of today, 51 African
countries have signed and ratified the Convention.

Similarly, in collaboration with South Africa as
the then-Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), the African Union, assisted
by the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
in 2012 organized a workshop for African States on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
workshop discussed how best to meet the obligations
of African States to implement the resolution, given the
constraints they faced, linked to their limited capacities
and resources. Following the workshop, the African
Union, at the twentieth ordinary session of its Assembly
in January 2013, underlined the relevance of resolution
1540 (2004) and highlighted the challenges to its full
and effective implementation in Africa.

In December 2013, the AU held another workshop
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). One
of the objectives of the event was to discuss challenges
and identify opportunities to address practical issues
relating to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), with the aim of equipping African States with
the practical tools to enable them to achieve concrete
progress in meeting their obligations. All these efforts
demonstrate the genuine desire of the African Union to
play a leading role in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

While we note the encouraging figures reflected
in the voluntary submission of national reports by 172
Member States, we still see aneedto consolidate the gains
of the first decade by developing a viable Government
and civil society partnership to aid various national
action plans. An appraisal of the implementation of the
mandate of resolution 1540 (2004) shows a measure of
commitment on the part of Member States. It is worthy
of note that numerous countries have adopted laws and
regulations that comply with a substantial number of
obligations contained in the resolution. These measures
provide reference points and useful mechanisms for
confidence-building measures.

As we respond to the challenges of today, we must
bear in mind that a proactive approach is needed if
we are to develop a long-term strategy to deal with
potential avenues for the illicit acquisition and use of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons by terrorists
and other non-State actors. We must be particularly
vigilant with dual-use technologies that can be readily
applied in ways that may threaten international peace
and security. To ensure this, Member States must be
kept abreast of emerging issues and maintain their
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

Nigeria welcomes the adoption today ofpresidential
statement S/PRST/2014/7. It is indeed a suitable outcome
of this important debate. It sends a strong message of
commitment on the part of the Security Council to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We owe a
great debt to the delegation of the Republic of Korea
for its leadership of the 1540 (2004) Committee, and
pledge our continued support to the Committee.

