The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in the course of its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
Parliamentary and Presidential elections held in Sierra
Leone on 26 and 27 February 1996 and the second
round of Presidential elections held on 15 March. It
congratulates the people of Sierra Leone on the
courage and determination they have shown in
proceeding with the elections despite difficulties and
disruptions, and pays tribute to all those involved in
the success of the elections, in particular the Interim
National Electoral Commission and its Chairman. The
Council stresses the importance it attaches to a
peaceful transition to civilian rule. It welcomes the
commitment by the Chairman of the National
Provisional Ruling Council to hand over authority by
31 March 1996 and calls upon all concerned to
cooperate fully with the newly elected President and
Parliament.

"The Security Council notes that the Joint
International Observer Group, which monitored the
first round of elections, was impressed by 'the
overwhelming desire on the part of the people of
Sierra Leone to exercise their democratic right in
casting a ballot for the parties and candidates of
their choice'. They have now done so, and it is
incumbent on all concerned to help them to
consolidate the gains that have been made. The
Council is of the view that the circumstances created
by the successful conclusion of the elections in
Sierra Leone require redoubled efforts to end the
fighting in that country. It commends the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
others, in particular the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire, to that end. It reiterates its call to all
parties to end the violence. It calls upon the
Revolutionary United Front to accept the outcome of
the election, maintain the cease-fire and enter into a
full dialogue for peace, without any conditions.

"The Security Council calls upon the
international community to provide generous
assistance to help in resolving the humanitarian
problems caused by the conflict in Sierra Leone, and
to assist the Government and people of that country
in the task of reconstruction that now faces them.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to continue to monitor the situation in Sierra
Leone and to keep the Council informed of
significant developments."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l996/12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.
