Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely open debate. I also take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for an
excellent presentation. I welcome Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste Mr. Jose' Luis Guterres, and
congratulate him on the important strides that his
country has made in recent years. We very much
appreciate his thoughtful comments on State-building,
based on Timor-Leste's own very successful
experience. I also thank Ambassador Peter Wittig for
his important remarks on peacebuilding.
Brazil aligns itself with the statement to be made
by Ambassador Jan Grauls on behalf of the five Chairs
of the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configurations. I will now make brief remarks in my
national capacity.

The strengthening of Government institutions is
key to achieving sustainable peace in post-conflict
countries. In several parts of the world, the fragility or
the lack of institutions makes it difficult to solve or
mitigate serious political, social or economic problems,
thus increasing the risk of relapse into conflict. We are
encouraged to note that a consensus has evolved on the
need for a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding
and institution-building.

The efforts of the international community should
be focused not only on supporting institutions in the
field of justice and security, as it is also important to
enhance the capacity of the institutions in charge of
economic revitalization, public administration and the
provision of basic services. Those institutions are
indispensable to promoting poverty reduction, which is
a powerful tool for addressing some of the root causes
of social strife and building long-lasting peace.
Likewise, social policies have a positive impact on the
political process, since they empower groups that were
once excluded from making decisions to do so at both
the local and the national levels. The contribution of
women must be continuously emphasized, taking into
account two dimensions: on the one hand, their
presence in Government institutions and, on the other,
the existence of institutions and governmental bodies
capable of ensuring their fundamental rights and needs.

That is one reason why institution-building must
start at the earliest stage of the post-conflict period.
There are a number of ways in which the United
Nations system can and does assist societies emerging
from conflict in that regard. The development arm of
the Organization, the centrepiece of which is the
United Nations Development Programme, is indeed
expected to have assistance in institution-building as
one of its main tasks.

Nevertheless, that endeavour is to be undertaken
by all parts of the United Nations system, according to
their respective responsibilities. In that regard, it is
encouraging to see the growing recognition of the need
to resort to peacekeepers as early peacebuilders. We
seem to be finally discarding the traditional approach,
by which peacekeeping and peacebuilding were
sequential and unrelated stages in the path towards
peace.

Assistance in institution-building is also a task to
be undertaken in coordination with international
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, whose valuable experience and expertise
can provide assistance tailored to the specific needs of
post-conflict countries.

1l-21268

As has been stressed by previous speakers,
national ownership is vital to peacebuilding processes.
International support to building and strengthening
institutions must be fully aligned with the interests of
the countries concerned. That is particularly relevant to
the United Nations in those places where United
Nations missions are deployed.

That is why one guiding principle for proper
assistance with regard to civilian capacities should be
to tap into and help build national capacities, thus
avoiding the damaging consequences of brain drain and
dependency on foreign expertise. Partnerships with
Member States, in particular South-South cooperation,
are particularly important to achieving that goal. We
are confident that the current review of international
civilian capacities will submit concrete
recommendations to ensure that that principle is
translated into practical arrangements.

Finally, as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil
is committed to promoting national ownership,
nurturing national capacities, and assisting in the
consolidation of national institutions as we move
forward in helping Guinea-Bissau to consolidate peace
and promote its development.

