Mr. Wang Guangya (China) ( spoke in Chinese):
First, I would like to thank the President of Nigeria and
Chairman of the African Union, Mr. Obasanjo, for his
briefing. China greatly appreciates Mr. Obasanjo's
tireless efforts to find a solution to the Darfur problem.

The Chinese Government is very concerned about
the situation in Darfur. We hope that the humanitarian
and security situation will soon improve, and we firmly
support the leading role played there by the African
Union.

For us, the top priority now is to achieve, as soon
as possible, expanded deployment by the African
Union. China hopes that the African Union and the
Government of the Sudan will achieve consensus on
relevant details as soon as possible, in order to achieve
that expansion at an early date. At the same time, the
international community is called upon to provide all
possible assistance to the African Union in that
deployment. The Chinese Government is also actively
considering providing such support, within its capacity.

The genesis of the Darfur problem is very
complicated. At the core of the problem is the need to
achieve peace and alleviate the humanitarian crisis.
Only through a negotiated political settlement will it be
possible to achieve durable peace and tranquillity in
the Darfur area. We support the African Union in its
continued push for political negotiations and we call
upon all parties, especially the rebel groups, to
demonstrate more flexibility so that a comprehensive
agreement can be achieved as soon as possible.

I would also like to thank the President for
calling upon the five permanent members to take a
unified stand. As one of the permanent members of the
Council, China is willing to adopt an objective and fair
stand on solving problems in Africa, including that of
Darfur.

Finally, I have two questions for Mr. Obasanjo.
First, what is the current state of consultations between
the African Union and the Government of the Sudan
concerning expanded deployment, and what kind of
concrete assistance do they ask of the international
community? Secondly, does the African Union have a
timetable for its efforts to promote negotiations, and
what kind of coordination do they expect from the
Security Council?

