Mr. Staehelin (Permanent Observer of Switzerland): First, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the Council presidency and I wish
to thank you for convening today's meeting and giving
me the floor.

Over the past decade, sanctions have become an
important tool in the hands of the United Nations
Security Council and the number of sanctions regimes
has increased significantly. Switzerland, as a non-
Member State of the United Nations, applies United
Nations sanctions on an autonomous basis. It thus
underlines its commitment to the promotion of
international peace and security and its solidarity with
the international community.

My Government shares the concern that sanctions
should be made more effective while minimizing the
negative humanitarian impact on civilian populations,
as well as the adverse economic effects on third States,
that comprehensive sanctions regimes have. The
concept of targeted sanctions addresses this concern.
They are designed to focus on the individuals and
groups responsible for the policies condemned by the
international community, while ideally leaving other
parts of the population and international trade relations
unaffected.

In this context, targeted financial sanctions are
one of the issues that have received particular attention.
As a major financial centre, Switzerland has significant
expertise and know-how regarding financial
transactions. In cooperation with the United Nations
Secretariat, my Government organized a series of
international expert meetings in Interlaken and New
York to examine in an informal and technical setting
the feasibility of targeted financial sanctions. This so-
called Interlaken Process provided a forum for dialogue
among representatives from national Governments and
regional bodies, central bank authorities, the United
Nations Secretariat, the private banking sector and
academia. I wish to thank all those States and
individual experts who participated actively in this
process. Let me also express my thanks to the
Secretary-General, who has encouraged this process,
and to the members of the Secretariat, for both their
participation and valuable support.

The Interlaken process focused on the practical
and technical aspects involved in designing effective
financial sanctions and ensuring their successful
implementation. The key results so far have been as
follows:

First, a better understanding of the specific
technical requirements of targeted financial sanctions
and the preconditions necessary for them to be
effective.

Secondly, language modules and definitions that
can serve as building blocks for future Security
Council resolutions. Such standardized language
elements would enhance a more uniform drafting and
implementation of resolutions in this area, as well as
unambiguous interpretation.

Thirdly, the identification of the basic legal and
administrative requirements for national
implementation of financial sanctions. This includes
the development of elements for a national legal
framework.

Finally, discussions also addressed the need for
the United Nations to develop greater capabilities for
administering and monitoring financial sanctions,
including the provision of guidance and technical
assistance to help States implement sanctions on a
consistent basis.

With the aim of further developing and
operationalizing the substantive work accomplished in
the Interlaken process, the Swiss Government
mandated a university institute, the Watson Institute for
International Studies at Brown University, to undertake
additional research. The outcome, which we are
presenting to the Security Council today, and which
will be distributed to all Missions, is a handbook that
reflects the results of the Interlaken process and the
valuable contributions made by the participants. We
hope it will prove useful to those responsible for
drafting future resolutions imposing targeted financial
sanctions and for implementing them here and in
capitals.
Let me add that, of course, one of the essential
preconditions to making targeted financial sanctions
more effective is to be able to define the target clearly.
And that also implies the effective identification of the
actual economic beneficiary of assets. This is a key
element also for the fight against money laundering
and for tracking and blocking more effectively
financial flows used for terrorist acts, as demanded by
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

Switzerland, which has strict procedures for
identifying not only bank customers, but also the actual
economic beneficiaries of funds, has recently made
concrete proposals in this regard in the Financial
Action Task Force Against Money Laundering, a body
established by the G-7. These proposals would leader
to higher international standards by improving the
effectiveness of know-your-customer rules.

(Spoke in French)

Targeted financial sanctions are likely to be most
effective when they are considered as part of a broader
coordinated political and diplomatic strategy. Strategic
choices regarding the types of sanctions to be imposed
and their modalities depend on a thorough analysis of
the vulnerabilities of the targeted country or actors, as
well as on the political will necessary to enforce such
measures and assess their effects.

Targeted sanctions focusing on financial
measures are not sufficient alone to force Governments
or other actors to alter their behaviour and comply with
their obligations, but they represent an important tool
that can be used in combination with other measures.
In this respect, we were glad to see the German
Government continue these reflections with the Bonn-
Berlin process, which explored other forms of targeted
sanctions, and we welcome of the Swedish
Government's intention to cover new sanctions issues.

In conclusion, the Interlaken process has shown
that the conceptual, technical and practical elements
required to make targeted financial sanctions effective
are available. It is now primarily a matter of mustering
the necessary political will at the international and
national levels to translate this into reality.

