Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): I thank the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France for highlighting
the urgent need to prevent the recruitment and use of
children by non-State actors. We are very grateful to
Secretary-General Guterres and Special Representative
Gamba for their insightful briefings. We commend the
UNICEF and Department of Peacekeeping Operations

teams for their coordinated and relentless efforts
to put an end to this scourge. We would also like to
thank Mr. Mubin Shaikh, representing civil society,
for his guidance on how to counter the radicalization
of children.

The Secretary-General's road map and the change
in format of his report (S/2017/82l) will help to
enhance United Nations engagement with the parties to
conflicts and give the report a more preventive thrust.
We are nonetheless deeply worried by the worsening
crises around the world, including the threats posed
by terrorists and violent extremist groups. In the
understanding that urgent action should be taken,
Kazakhstan would like to propose the following
recommendations for addressing the complexity,
severity and scale of violations against children.

First, we encourage all Member States to universally
ratify and implement the relevant international treaties
and to enact related national legislation, as well as to
endorse international tools designed to promtoe the
protection of children in armed conflict. I am pleased
to be able to inform the Council that Kazakhstan has
ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, enacted a national law on children's
rights and amended its criminal code to prohibit the
recruitment of persons under the age of 18. We have not
only endorsed the Paris Principles and Commitments,
as well as the Safe Schools Declaration, we are also
working actively to implement them effectively.

Secondly, we must improve the coordination of
all our efforts with all the relevant parties, including
Government authorities, United Nations country
teams, regional and subregional organizations and
non-governmental organizations. In that regard, we
would like to commend the efforts of Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict, Save the Children
and Child Soldiers International, which are making
sterling contributions in defending children's rights and
monitoring violations against them.

Thirdly, we must maintain the ability of the United
Nations to protect children on the ground and the
capacity of its missions to monitor and report grave
violations of children's rights. We also need criteria
related to child protection when we establish and renew
the mandates of the relevant Security Council sanctions
committees. The importance of protecting children
should be included in peace and negotiation processes,
especially with non-State armed groups.
Fourthly, we urge Member States to ensure that all
measures on combating terrorism and violent extremism
are implemented in full compliance with international
law, that children associated with non-State armed
groups are treated primarily as victims and that
detention is used only as a measure of last resort.

Fifthly, protocols must be adopted for handing
children over as quickly as possible to civilian
child protection actors in order to prioritize their
reintegration and rehabilitation. Adequate resources
must be allocated to ensure children's safe access to
education and training, health care, basic services and
trauma counselling. In order to achieve that we should
also establish a mechanism for creating systematized,
long-term viable solutions.

Sixthly, every effort should be made to prevent
children's recruitment or large-scale radicalization
and the widespread dissemination of terrorist ideology
among children and young people, including through
increased Internet use. At the same time, however,
given the lack of a unified approach to controlling the
Internet and countering terrorist propaganda, measures
to identify and block extremism on Internet sites have
proved ineffective. It will therefore be important to
provide interreligious and inter-ethnic education with
a view to creating a national identity based on shared
human values and tolerance in a global civilization.
Investing in development, providing better living
conditions and meeting social and economic needs are
equally important in bringing stability and progress to
troubled societies.

We endorse today's adoption of a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/21), which covers a range of
key issues related to the children and armed conflict
agenda, and drafted by Sweden, which chairs the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

In conclusion, in Kazakhstan's view, children are
our countries' most precious resource. We are therefore
ready to support all collective and comprehensive
measures aimed at ensuring the safety and welfare of
children, who become the most vulnerable group in
times of armed conflict.

