Mr. Meece (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to once again address the members of the Security
Council in connection with the recent report of the
Secretary-General (8/2012/355) on the current situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the
work of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO).

Since my last briefing, at the beginning of this
year (see S/PV.6712), considerable progress has been
made, especially on the issue of the security challenges
posed by the Rwandan group Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) in North and South Kivu
provinces. However, that progress has been stalled by the
recent mutiny of some soldiers, led by Bosco Ntaganda
and Sultani Makenga. That mutiny has made for a
serious downturn in security for the civilian population
of that area, especially in North Kivu, thereby leading
to a reduction in pressure on the other armed groups
operating in the region.
(spoke in English)

The mutiny was initiated largely by soldiers
integrated in the national Congolese army - the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) - essentially under terms of agreements
reached in 2009. That integration was never complete,
however, and I have spoken in past presentations to the
Council of the challenge to State authorities posed by
General Ntaganda and those allied to him, who exercised
quasi-autonomous authority without accountability
to central command or Government authority. While
Ntaganda, Makenga and others have asserted that the
terms of the 2009 agreements central to their interests
were not implemented, their recourse to an armed mutiny
is not an acceptable means to address their grievances.
It now threatens a general destabilization of the Kivus
and the region and dramatically increases the general
threat to millions of civilians.

Ntaganda did not receive as broad support for
the mutiny as he anticipated, and the response of the
Congolese Government has been effective, including
facilitating the continued presence in loyal military units
of large numbers of troops loyal to the Congres national
pour la defense du peuple and successfully persuading
many other deserting troops to resume their posts
without negative consequences. That has substantially
reduced the numbers available to Ntaganda's mutiny
and to the parallel M-23 movement, started by Makenga
shortly afterwards.

The relationship between Ntaganda and Makenga
is not clear, and the M-23 movement strongly denies
association with Ntaganda, possibly because of the
outstanding International Criminal Court arrest warrant
against him. However, Ntaganda and Makenga clearly
share fundamental positions, interests and objectives.

We have been working in close collaboration
with the Congolese Government, and specifically the
FARDC, since the beginning of these events in early
April, to seek to limit to the extent possible injuries to
the civilian population, as much as feasible to provide
aid to victims and displaced populations, to contain the
area of active fighting and to restore order as quickly
and effectively as possible. The mutinous forces were
successfully driven out of their base areas relatively
quickly, eventually establishing themselves in a small
pocket of less than 100 square kilometres near the town
of Bunagana, in the eastern part of Virunga National
Park adjacent to the Ugandan and Rwandan borders.

Major arms caches, apparently belonging to
Ntanganda's and Makenga's forces, respectively
including roughly 25 tons and 32 tons of arms and
ammunition, were seized in May by FARDC forces.
Estimates of the size of the mutinous forces vary, but
generally indicate several hundred combatants since
the fighting became concentrated in the Bunagana area.
Almost all civilians have fled the immediate area.

The FARDC have concentrated substantial forces
and arms around this pocket to gain control of the
mutinous force positions. We have established jointly
manned defensive positions with the FARDC in key
strategic locations adjacent to the area of fighting,
for example, around the town of Bunagana, aimed at
ensuring that potential offensive actions of the mutinous
forces can not successfully extend to threaten those
areas.

The fighting has produced major displacements of
civilians, including many who have fled across adjacent
borders. In addition, the FDLR and numerous Congolese
groups, including at least some previously working with
Bosco Ntaganda, have sought to profit from the general
increase in instability by stepping up their own activity,
compounding the damaging effects on the civilian
population.

We have, for example, credible information
regarding large-scale killings and other serious crimes
committed in North and South Kivu. Those include
the apparent deliberate targeting by the FDLR and
a network of xenophobic domestic armed groups,
generally identified as Raiya Mutomboki, of each other's
dependents, primarily unarmed women and children.
Most often, those attacks occur sufficiently far from
any FARDC or MONUSCO presence to minimize the
prospects of intervention until after the killing is done.

All of that activity has exacerbated, as well, the
ongoing serious problem of rape and other forms of
sexual violence. It has also greatly limited humanitarian
access throughout the region, imposing further hardships
on the population.

We have deployed MONUSCO forces and stepped
up our operations significantly throughout the affected
area, and the recent addition of attack and other
military helicopters has been invaluable to our response
capability. Our resources have, however, been stretched
to the limits attempting to cover developing hot spots,
and the overall situation in North Kivu has been
deteriorating.
That is in dramatic contrast to the situation prior
to the start of the mutiny. MONUSCO and FARDC had
worked together closely early this year to plan a series
of joint operations in North and South Kivu to target
the FDLR and other armed groups, which included
unprecedented steps to minimize the impact of those
operations on civilians, establish monitoring centres
and provide for humanitarian access, as well as include
a stabilization operational phase, or a holding of cleared
areas to prevent the return of armed groups, an action
previously lacking usually.

Those jointly planned operations had been under
way in South Kivu in March and were showing very
promising results. For example, the highest number of
FDLR combatant and dependant repatriations over the
last 18 months had been recorded in March, a result
certainly arising from the South Kivu operations. They
built on a generally increasing trend of FDLR repatriation
achieved in recent months, further weakening the FDLR
as a part of the overall strategy to put an end to that
long-standing threat.

Related North Kivu joint operations were to get
under way in April with the aim of further increasing
that pressure and trend. Unfortunately, both the South
and the North Kivu operations were suspended as a
result of the mutiny. Not surprisingly, we have seen,
since the suspension, a dramatic reduction in FDLR
repatriations, with further damage arising from the
Ntaganda and Makenga actions.

As is clear, it is important to put an end to the mutiny
as soon as possible for multiple reasons. In addition to
permitting the return home of large numbers of displaced
civilians, that would also permit a timely resumption
of coordinated efforts to target armed groups in the
Kivus and southern Ituri District, including military
operations. Furthermore, a variety of other related
actions, including stabilization, conflict resolution and
economic development programmes, all threatened by
the renewed instability, should resume.

All, of course, should be considered in the context
of the reinforcement and augmentation of State authority
throughout the region, an essential condition for basic
order, security and economic and social development
for the region.

Prime Minister Augustin Matata Ponyo Mapon has
underscored to me his concern about the threat that the
mutiny and its pernicious effects pose to his agenda
of economic reform and development, as well as the
obvious direct terrible effects on the civilian population.
I am encouraged by the important senior-level delegation
that the Prime Minister led last week to the region
accompanied by a number of senior-level ministers and
other officials to see for themselves what is happening
and gain a better understanding of the current situation,
the serious problems being faced, and the short- and
longer-term options available to deal with them.

I must also note, as members of the Council are
aware, that there have been recent reports of support
being provided to the mutinous forces from across the
Rwandan border. Within MONUSCO, we have no means
of independently confirming or verifying allegations
of actions outside of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

I will state that for obvious reasons it is very
important for all actions possible to be taken to put
an end to any or all external support that the mutinous
forces may receive. I appeal to all Member States in
the region and beyond to investigate such information
as may be available to the extent possible, to make
that information available to the relevant national and
international bodies and to take all actions necessary to
ensure that any external support is stopped.

The people of eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo have already suffered too much and for too long,
and any actions that prolong violence and armed conflict
in the region must stop. In that regard, I applaud the
recent establishment of the Joint Intelligence Fusion
Centre in Goma under the auspices of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), as
well as actions by the ICGLR to monitor and control
illegal regional trade in conflict minerals, and activities
to promote cross-border contacts, such as the regional
Governors meeting in Burundi organized by the
Economic Community of the Great Lake Countries.

As a final note on security threats, I will also report
that the activities of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
continue to represent a threat not only to northeastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but to other
countries in the region as well. The overall activity of
the Lord's Resistance Army in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has shown little change in recent months,
with LRA attacks tending to follow small individual
unit requirements, which often include kidnapping
and violent attacks in addition to the looting of target
villages.

Regardless of trends, however, the brutal LRA
actions continue to provoke enormous fear throughout
the region where they operate. We have continued to
work closely with the FARDC in proactive operations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo designed
to forestall larger-scale LRA attacks, to track and
respond to LRA activity through the Joint Information
and Operations Centre in Dungu, and to do all that
is possible to facilitate regional coordination and
information-sharing, including increasing the
effectiveness of targeted programmes to promote
repatriation. We have supported, and will continue to
support, regional initiatives promoted by the Africa
Union and supported by the United Nations Office
for Central Africa to address this threat and increase
coordination and information-sharing among all forces
in the region as much as possible.

I should also note that MONUSCO has now
established a resident military presence in Bas-Uele
district, an initiative long advocated by many
humanitarian agencies and shared by MONUSCO.

Much of the reporting and analysis work done most
recently by the joint assessment process established
in 2010 under Council resolution 1925 (2010) was
performed prior to the outbreak of the mutiny in the
Kivus in early April. I will state, however, that in
my view the process conducted by the Congolese
Government and MONUSCO provides an excellent
vehicle for the analysis of overall threat conditions,
provides useful mechanisms for the discussion of
fast-breaking developments, such as the mutiny, and
furnishes an invaluable basis for decisions regarding
overall deployments and other actions.

Pursuant to the latest assessments, for example,
we are now examining the need for a continued
MONUSCO military presence in Equateur province,
albeit already at modest levels, a legacy of the 2009
problems in that region. We are in frequent contact at
multiple levels regarding a number of other issues and
developments based on the joint assessment process,
and I would strongly encourage the Council to continue
authorization and support for that facility.

The new institutions of Government arising from
the problematic 2011 national elections have, frankly,
taken longer to be established than I would have hoped.
Nonetheless, the new National Assembly has now put
in place new internal procedures, Assembly officers and
standing committees. The officers include two members
of the opposition party, the Union pour la democratie et
la progres social, including the newly elected Assembly
Second Vice-President Timothee Nkisi Kombo, and all
committees include opposition representation and some
presiding officers. I look forward to building MONUSCO
relationships with the new National Assembly to support
and facilitate their work and their understanding of
MONUSCO and general United Nations programme
activities.

In the executive branch, the new Government,
under the leadership of Prime Minister Augustin Matata
Ponyo Mapon, recently assumed office and includes
two members drawn from opposition parties. I, the two
Deputy Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
and other MONUSCO officials have had initial
introductory meetings with a number of ministers. I look
forward to continuing those contacts and relationships
when I return to Kinshasa. I strongly believe that it is
in the interests of all parties for MONUSCO to have a
strong and ongoing dialogue with regard to programme
implementation and constructive collaborative
relationships, as well as good collaborative relationships
with relevant Government agencies and officials. I am
firmly committed to doing everything possible to ensure
that is the case. While I have been here in New York,
I am very pleased that Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, was able
to accompany Prime Minister Matata Ponyo Mapon and
his delegation on last week's very important trip to the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I hope that trip will make an important contribution
towards a continuing strong and effective partnership.

The establishment of those bodies, however,
underscores the fact that there are many challenges ahead
for ensuring the successful conduct of the upcoming
provincial and local elections. Provincial elections are
needed to elect new provincial legislative bodies, which
in turn are responsible for electing national senators and
provincial governors. Local elections, which were never
held in the initial 2006 electoral cycle, are also very
important. It is clear, however, that steps are required
to ensure that the problems of the 2011 exercise are not
repeated. In that regard, I anticipate that a report soon
expected to be presented by the Independent National
Electoral Commission to the National Assembly will
provide a basis for a national discussion of the past and
future election process. That, in turn, could have an
important impact on how things are to go forward to
complete the election cycle.

Major donors, other partners and the United
Nations have expressed concerns about the 2011
election irregularities. The Independent National
Electoral Commission itself has completed a review
that includes extensive recommendations for changes to
be adopted for future elections. It is entirely possible
that the anticipated National Assembly debate will
propose other significant recommendations. All ofthose
recommendations will likely be critical to an assessment
by donors, the Council and other partners in terms of
engagement with, and support for, the provincial and
local elections. It is clearly of paramount importance to
have conditions in place that are conducive to credible,
transparent and democratic elections. For the most
part, those include actions and management by the
Commission to ensure effective and timely organizational
preparations, adequate checks and other procedures to
prevent fraud, abuses or other irregularities, and full
and complete implementation plans in place, including
critical compilation and verification procedures.

The Government as well will need to do everything
possible to ensure free conditions for all to participate.
The Conseil superieur de l'audiovisuel et de la
communication also needs strong and appropriate actions
to facilitate full and free media access and coverage. In
that regard, I salute the recent decision of Government
authorities to investigate reports of serious human rights
violations and other violence committed during the 2011
election process. I reiterate that we will do everything
possible to facilitate and advance those investigations
and associated appropriate judicial actions. Also, under
the guidance of the Security Council, we will actively
assess progress towards the organization of provincial
and local elections to determine the appropriate and
needed levels of support to achieve free and fair,
credible elections. I know that major donors are also
conducting their own similar assessments to determine
potential future financial support. Obviously, I very
much hope that the process can move forward in a timely
and productive manner to achieve free and democratic
elections at the earliest time practical, as such elections
are clearly important for the Congolese people, for the
continued consolidation of a democratic process as well
as for further progress towards the achievement of the
decentralization goals that the Congolese people have
set for themselves.

The security situation in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is sobering,
especially in North Kivu province. It is important not
to forget, however, the very important and considerable
progress that has been achieved in a broad variety of
areas since the transition marking the formal end of
war, in particular in recent years. Clearly, it is of vital
importance to recover from the security setbacks in the
Kivus as soon as possible. It is also important, however,
to move forward on a broader agenda aimed at addressing
the key underlying causes of conflict in the eastern of the
country and at ensuring much needed durable security
and development throughout the country.

The stabilization and general development agenda in
eastern Congo has accomplished much under the general
framework of the Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan
for Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the International Security and Stabilization Support
programmes. Many roads have been opened, and court
facilities, police stations and other facilities have been
built. But it is also important to ensure that personnel
are deployed to work in those facilities, to identify and
solve problems, and generally to extend and strengthen
the reach of State authority and institutions.

In my view, more focus needs to be placed on how
fundamental land disputes and other issues underlying
inter-community tensions can be resolved. As we move
into a new phase of the Stabilization and Reconstruction
Plan and, it is to be hoped, establish a parallel
framework for efforts in other parts of the country under
the prospective peace consolidation programme, it is
right and proper that all parties review and revise as
appropriate the priorities, operations and programmes
being implemented. That process is already under way,
and its importance is obviously complemented by the
establishment of a new national Government. I look
forward to the results of those reviews and to seeing
how we in MONUSCO and the United Nations agencies
may be more effective in realizing the mutually set goals
for those programmes.

I also look forward to working with the members
of the new Government to look at how security
sector issues can be most effectively addressed, and
institutions strengthened as well. I am pleased with
results from police training and related programmes,
which I believe have been effective in helping expand
the capacity of the Congolese National Police. In that
regard, I would again appeal to all donors for additional
resources that would permit us to expand and augment
those programmes. Likewise, I am optimistic that the
United Nations and donors can do even more to support
Government programmes and priorities to build on the
very encouraging progress already achieved in civilian
and military justice systems.

In the military area, I look forward to viewing
anew with the new Government how we can even more
effectively utilize our operational partnership to end
security threats by armed groups as quickly as possible
and to explore options for doing more to bolster and
support FARDC capabilities. In that regard, I would
reiterate calls on all partners to review what resources
may be available to support Congolese military training,
professionalism and reform programmes.

Those are not small challenges. I am convinced,
however, that beyond the current turmoil we see in the
present security situation, there exist major opportunities
and prospects for significant progress in all of those
areas. I can assure the Council that I, MONUSCO and the
United Nations agencies, constituting the United Nations
country team presence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, are committed to doing everything possible
towards those ends in the most effective and timely way
possible.

(spoke in French)

Finally, I again wish to convey my sincere gratitude
to the members of the Security Council and to the
international community for the support that has been
given to the Mission and the implementation of its
mandate. The Mission and the Congolese people, which
still need that support, have benefited considerably, in
particular in the context of the recent worrying events
that took place in the Kivus. Without that support, it
would not be possible to consolidate the significant
progress that has been made in recent years on the route
to lasting peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

I therefore count on that sustained support as well
as on the support of MONUSCO personnel and of the
United Nations agencies, upon which I rely greatly
and whose commitment and constant efforts merit due
recognition.

(spoke in English)

I give my thanks to them, as well as to the Security
Council for its support.

