Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2371
(2017), which reinforces the sanctions imposed by the
United Nations on North Korea as a result of the ballistic
missile launches that took place on 3 and 28 July.
We thank the United States for its leadership in the
negotiations, as well as for its unwavering commitment
to this issue, which today is more important than ever
for international peace and security.

For years, North Korea has pursued the forced
development of its nuclear and ballistic programmes,
initiated at the highest level of the regime. It seeks
methodically to acquire an operational nuclear arsenal,
at the cost of the sacrifice of its own population. The
launches of the past few weeks have taken us a step
further towards the threat posed by North Korean
programmes, clearly demonstrating Pyongyang's
determination to bring the entire international
community within the reach of its missiles. This is an
unacceptable situation, which directly challenges the
security of us all.

Let us not deceive ourselves - the threat is global,
and even beyond this grave and direct threat, it is the
entire non-proliferation regime that is in danger, even
though it is one of the pillars of our system of collective
security. That is why weakness is not an option, and
why France has been convinced from the outset that
only a position of great firmness can open the way to
the political and diplomatic strategy that is itself the
only possible outcome to this crisis.

In that context, it is more urgent than ever to put an
end to North Korea's nuclear and ballistic programmes
and bring Pyongyang back to the negotiating table. In
recent months, however, despite repeated warnings,
North Korea has persistently ignored every injunction
by the Council and has defied the international
community as a whole. Considering the seriousness
of the threat that is currently hanging over all of us,
stamping our authority on the situation is a matter of
urgency. Bringing to bear the greatest diplomatic and
economic pressure possible is the only way to put a stop
to these programmes, bring North Korea back to the
negotiating table and promote a peaceful solution to the
current crisis.

Through today's resolution, and beyond its
unambiguous condemnation of North Korea's
unjustifiable actions, the Council is articulating two
complementary actions - punishing a new group of
individuals and entities that are central to the functioning
of the regime and its programmes, and imposing an
embargo on several key sectors of activity, including
the capacity to provide the liquidity that Pyongyang
needs to finance its illegal programmes. Clearly, these
measures, which will probably cut the regime's income
by an amount estimated to be more than $1 billion a
year, are likely to change the situation. They emphasize
the scope of the tools available to the Council, whose
effectiveness is increased tenfold when it takes action
and does so unanimously, as it has today. Of course, they
are accompanied by humanitarian exemption clauses
aimed at minimizing the consequences for the people of
North Korea, who are not targeted by these measures.

The new resolution's determined response is also a
new warning. This dangerous and irresponsible leap on
the part of the regime, whose irrationality is equalled
only by its methodical pursuit of its goal, must stop.
North Korea must understand that if it continues to
choose the road of escalation and provocation, we will
have no choice but to ramp up the pressure. And one of
the messages that we have unanimously sent today is
that we are ready to do that. As we have said a number
of times, sanctions are not an end in themselves but
a means of forcing Pyongyang to return to a serious
dialogue. In the face of the regime's irresponsible,
unjustifiable stubbornness, today we have no alternative
to firmness if we are to bring North Korea back to the
path of reason and thereby pave the way for a political
and diplomatic outcome of this crisis.

