Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Mr. Ramiz
Bakhtiar, the Afghanistan youth representative, for
their comprehensive briefings today. I would also like
to take this opportunity to renew the support of the
State of Kuwait for all the sincere efforts exerted by
Mr. Yamamoto and the members of UNAMA under the
difficult circumstances they face there. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his quarterly report (S/2018/824),
which sheds light on the situation in Afghanistan over
the past three months

This meeting is being convened only one month
prior to the holding of the parliamentary elections in
Afghanistan. Therefore, I will focus in my statement on
two main issues linked to the items we are discussing
today, namely, political developments and the
security situation.

First, with regard to the political developments, the
phase in which Afghanistan is currently passing is a
very critical and delicate one. It is a phase in which
we are witnessing intensified consultations among the
political parties. We are also witnessing the continued
preparations by the electoral management bodies to
hold parliamentary elections on 20 October. In that
regard, we would like first to commend the vital role
of UNAMA and the electoral management bodies in
finalizing the lists of voters and candidates and setting
up voting centres. We also welcome the signing by the
United Nations and the electoral management bodies on
25 July ofa revised Electoral Support Project document,
with the donors pledging an additional $57 million in
financial support.

The overall number of 9 million registered men
and women voters is a clear demonstration of the desire
of the Afghan people to opt for the path of democracy
despite the security threats to their lives. We salute the
courage of the Afghan people, who emphasize once
again that the political solution in Afghanistan must be
Afghan-led and determined by the Afghan people.

As we discuss political developments, we should
underscore the importance of national reconciliation
and the peace process in Afghanistan. We follow
closely the ongoing political action in the various
Afghan provinces, and the political alliances that have
been formed in order to prepare for the upcoming
elections. We hope that such action, which involves all
political parties, will contribute to reducing tensions
and giving priority to national interests above partisan
ones. Strengthening national interests has been and
continues to be essential. It is of the utmost importance
for the Government and all parties to prioritize long-
term interests in order to put an end to the Afghan
conflict and achieve sustainable peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

Likewise, the international community must
continue to encourage and support these goals in
order to reach a comprehensive political settlement in
Afghanistan. We welcome the assistance provided by
the countries of the region and the relevant regional
mechanisms, especially the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, which has convened a special meeting
on Afghanistan during the past week to reiterate its
support to the Afghani Government to bring peace,
security and harmony among all the segments of
the Afghani people, including its call to the Taliban
movement to get involved in a direct, peaceful and
unconditional dialogue.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
the latest report of the Secretary-General underlines
the continued instability of the security situation in
Afghanistan. Over the past period, we all witnessed
the significant increase in terrorist operations due to
the proximity of the parliamentary elections. It is with
concern that we have followed the continuing clashes
between Afghan forces and armed groups, such as
the Taliban movement and the terrorist group Da'esh,
the latest of which was an attempt by the Taliban to
overrun the city of Ghazni on 10 August. That attempt
caused numerous casualties among unarmed civilians,
including many women and children.

We are fully aware that increased acts of violence
and threats are nothing but desperate attempts by
elements that do not believe in democracy or human
rights, and do not even wish to see stability and security
in the country. They think that through those terrorist
acts, which target educational and sports centres as well
as gathering places, they will be able to terrorize voters
and delay the electoral process next October. We hope
that the Afghan authorities will redouble their efforts
to protect public utilities and fight those stray groups.
At the same time, we welcome the commitment of our
NATO allies to support the non-combatant mission and
provide financial support to the Afghan forces until the
year 2024.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait renews its
support to Afghanistan to achieve lasting peace and
stability through a diplomatic negotiated settlement.
We stand with Afghanistan in its war against terrorism
and support its unrelenting efforts to spread its
authority and sovereignty over its entire territory. We
also emphasize that confronting the threat of terrorism
lies in the collective commitment to fight and combat
this scourge within the framework of the international
strategy to combat terrorism.

