Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to align myself with the remarks to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

Tony Blair said recently that Africa is a scar on
the conscience of the world. Its poverty and stagnation
represent one of the greatest tragedies of our time. In
the view of the United Kingdom, they demand a
response not just by the Council, but by the United
Nations as a whole, by Africa and, essentially, by all of
us.

The good news is that Africa itself is creating a
stronger foundation for tackling its own problems;
recent improvements in economic growth and
governance reflect that. We can only welcome and
salute the efforts of the African Union on concepts like
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) and the work of the subregional
organizations in Africa.

But I believe that the prescription for tackling the
myriad problems in Africa includes the following.
There should be governance-building and capacity-
building, but there should also be peace and security so
that we can tackle all aspects of the conflict spectrum.
Crucially, there must be sufficient investment in
people, health, education and sanitation. We must
tackle the whole question of disease, including HIV/
AIDS and simpler illnesses such as measles, which will
kill 300,000 children this year. We must ensure that we
provide the wherewithal for growth and for poverty
reduction and that trade liberalization takes place. The
Secretary-General's report (A/59/2005) has challenged
us all to produce quota-free access, for example, for all
the least developed countries, which has already been
done by the European Union. Trade liberalization and
fairer trade are at the heart of it. And we must provide
the investment - again, the wherewithal - to ensure
that Africa's resources can be used by Africans for the
benefit of Africans. That prescription is set out much
more eloquently in the report of the Commission for
Africa, entitled Our Common Interest, than I have
stated it. It is a frank assessment of where we are, of
how we got there and especially of what is possible.

The good news for Africa is that 2005 is the
crucial year. The rendezvous that we all have - the
high-level meeting in September - probably offers
more possible gain to Africa than to any other
continent, and it is right that it should. Of course, our
hope is that the package set out by the Secretary-
General will offer gains and advantages to all of us and
that it will be very much to the benefit of the United
Nations as a whole to put that package in place. But
Africa's interest in the summit and in seeing a very
successful Group of Seven/Group of Eight (G-7/G-8)
process this year - for which the United Kingdom, as
Chair of the G-7, has made Africa one of its two
priority areas - emphasizes why, this year, we have to
make a real difference in Africa.

I should like to set out my conditions for
successful intervention in Africa. First, there should be
coherence of policy: we should tackle the whole range
of aspects, whether it be the various aspects of conflict,
economic development, institution-building,
democracy, the whole essence of peacebuilding or
sustainable economic development and progress. That
is what we need to have. The peacebuilding
commission is a welcome addition to our armoury to
move forward, but it is quite clear that we need
coherent policy.

Secondly, we need coherence of intervention by
the entire United Nations family. As we deliver United
Nations services on the ground, it has to be done
without duplication and in a way that is mutually
reinforcing of the aggregate United Nations effort.

Thirdly, that effort must be coherent with the
other efforts being made by Africans, the African
Union, regional organizations and all the other
international players, be they the international financial
institutions, bilateral donors or anyone else. We need a
far greater coherence between us and, as we all muster
that intervention, we need to take account of regional
aspects within Africa so that we do not unwittingly, in
doing one thing in one country, create consequences
that may not have been foreseen, to the disadvantage of
another country. So what we need to do is harness
synergies on a regional basis and make sure that there
are no disadvantages to other countries.

In all that, it seems to me that, of course, the
drive has to come from Africans and be led by
Africans, that the lead in an individual country
situation should be taken by the country concerned,
and that the rest of us must play our part. The
discussion we had yesterday on Guinea-Bissau just
demonstrates why we need to do that, but we need to
do it in a joined-up fashion that takes advantage of the
good things happening in Africa and of this year's
opportunities. We also need to make sure that it is a
responsibility not just of this Council - and that is
why I deliberately broadened my intervention - but of
all of us to do this collectively. The Security Council
has a pivotal role, but it has no exclusivity. We all have
to play our part.

