Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report, to Deputy Secretary-General Louise
Frechette for introducing it and to High Commissioner
Mrs. Robinson for her participation in this meeting.

In the Millennium Declaration, the heads of State
undertook to

"expand and strengthen the protection of civilians
in complex emergencies, in conformity with
international humanitarian law". (resolution 55/2, para. 26)

Thus, it is not by chance that we are discussing these
issues today.

Over the past 50 years, a great number of
international instruments have been adopted on human
rights and international humanitarian law, and yet
entirely innocent civilians, including children, women,
the elderly, refugees and humanitarian personnel,
continue to suffer in the course of armed conflict. It is
clear that, in this situation, additional emergency
measures are needed at the national, regional and
international levels, primarily in the context of
coordinating efforts. This is a point that you, Sir, and
Mrs. Robinson have addressed, as have my colleagues.

We welcome the Secretary-General's two reports,
in which he has sought to analyse the reasons for the
violation of the norms of international humanitarian
law in armed conflict and to offer recommendations on
strengthening the protection of civilians. Many of his
proposals are in line with our position, such as those on
additional protection for specific sectors of civilians,
primarily children, and on the importance of national
and, where necessary, international criminal
prosecution of those who have committed crimes under
international law, inter alia, through the future
International Criminal Court. I would recall that Russia
signed the Statute of that Court during the Millennium
Assembly.

At the same time, as many of my colleagues have
said, we believe that the one fundamental way to
protect the civilian population would be simply to
eliminate war from society - to prevent and halt
conflict. That is the thrust of the concept of strategic
stability proposed by the Russian Federation during the
Millennium Assembly. Nobody questions the fact that
an effective and appropriate international response to
any crisis, including a humanitarian crisis, is essential.
Such a reaction must be based on respect for the norms
of international law and the provisions of the Charter.
It also presupposes - this is a point that that has
already been made today - the primary responsibility
of the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace, the full implementation by States
of the rules of international comity and respect by all
the parties to a conflict of the norms and principles of
international law, including humanitarian law.

Indeed, it is precisely the States and parties
involved in an armed conflict that bear the primary
responsibility for providing civilians with protection.
International efforts by the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
other bodies within the United Nations system can have
an additional positive impact in this respect. But it is
important for all efforts to be properly coordinated so
that, in the area of protecting civilians, as in other
matters, there is full respect for the division of labour,
pursuant to the Charter and other international legal
instruments.

In order to enhance the effectiveness of the
Security Council's work in this area, and bearing in
mind the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General, we consider it important for the particular
features of each specific armed conflict to be taken into
account to a greater extent and, on that basis, for
measures to be taken to protect civilians. The
mechanism for the Council's interaction with
representatives of regional and subregional
organizations must be improved on the basis of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly those set out in Chapter VIII. I should also
like to point out that that principle is already being
applied in the area of peacekeeping interaction between
the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States.

Considerably more could be done by States to
improve their national legislation and to publicize
information about international humanitarian law and
the need for full respect for the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, Security Council
decisions, human rights standards and the norms and
principles of international law. Member States and the
Secretary-General might perhaps report more quickly
to the Council any information that they have about
situations that could create a threat to international
peace and security, including cases of deliberate refusal
to provide safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
personnel to civilians in need and gross violations of
human rights, where they may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.

We hope that today's discussion will help to
improve the work of the Security Council and that of
other agencies and structures in protecting civilians and
that it will provide an impetus for further positive
progress in this area.

With regard to the question about how the
Security Council might specifically contribute to this
matter, we believe that there are three ways in which
we could move forward. The first could be to continue
discussing the general principles, seeking, in this
context, a mechanism for improving coordination with
other United Nations bodies, while, of course,
respecting the individual competency and terms of
reference of each. That would be useful, though not
enough in itself.

The second path could be to make use of
discussions such as today's debate so as to consider the
various individual situations in any given country. That
would make our discussions more specific, but they
would still not be sufficiently focused. Since certain
specific issues would be raised within the context of a
general debate, we would not really move towards
resolving individual questions.

The third path would be to take it as a rule that
the principles and ideas that nobody disputes should be
applied at the practical level every single time we
discussed a specific item on the agenda of the Security
Council on the situation in any given country. Of
course, we are far from being able to achieve this every
time. Examples have been provided today, by the
Permanent Representative of China and other
colleagues, and this third path is much more difficult to
follow. But if we do not try to follow it, the Security
Council will hardly be able to discharge its
responsibilities under the Charter.

