The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his robust
support for the agenda of today's meeting.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of Kazakhstan.

(spoke in Kazakh; English interpretation provided by the delegation)

I am glad to welcome everyone to this thematic
briefing. We consider Kazakhstan's election as a
non-permanent member and accession to the presidency
of the Security Council to be signs of the international
community's trust in our country and our peaceful
policy, in particular members that have supported our
position. As the first State of Central Asia to undertake
this noble mission, we have become the voice of the
countries of our region in this important organ of the
global Organization.

A year has passed since Kazakhstan started its
term in the Security Council. We have strived to be
proactive, constructive and objective in addressing
the pressing issues on the Council's agenda. While
chairing the committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; and the committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, we have made our contribution
to their productive proceedings. I am grateful to all
Council members for their continued cooperation.

(spoke in Russian)

Today's meeting is the flagship event of
Kazakhstan's presidency of the Security Council,
and is specifically dedicated to one of the most
pressing topics on the contemporary global agenda.
Confidence-building measures aimed at achieving the
goals of peace and security play a key role in conflict
prevention and the resolution of pressing global issues.
At the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
I proposed the establishment of a regional structure for
security and confidence-building measures in Asia.
That mechanism was created as a result of thorough
diplomatic action. The Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia is now
successfully functioning, bringing together 26 States
of the region.

A quarter of a century later, I again address
the United Nations on behalf of Kazakhstan, now
a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
However, I cannot help but say that question of
increasing mutual confidence among some countries
and at the global level remains urgent and is becoming
ever more relevant. Confidence-building measures
should remain on the agenda as the most important
element in the maintenance of the global security
architecture and the strengthening of peace at the
global level. Why is that so?

First, confidence-building measures justified
themselves in the process of preventing the threat of
total destruction in the second half of the twentieth
century, when humankind stood at the brink of a
large-scale war. The Charter of the United Nations
states that our main goal is to save the succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. Over a quarter of
a century in the United Nations system, my country has
made a sweeping transition from being an owner of the
world's fourth-largest nuclear arsenal to being a leader
of global non-proliferation, having closed the largest
nuclear test site, Semipalatinsk. The renunciation of
nuclear weapons and the status of a nuclear Power
was our deliberate and sincere choice - a voluntary
initiative supported by all the people of Kazakhstan and
duly appreciated by the international community. Today
our country is a party to all fundamental international
treaties in the area of nuclear security and has legally
enshrined its nuclear-free status.
Secondly, the atmosphere of mutual trust may
facilitate the creation of a new model of international
cooperation. A shining example and a practical
embodiment of such cooperation was the opening last
year of the International Atomic Energy Agency Low-
Enriched Uranium Bank. With this, Kazakhstan has
made yet another contribution to strengthening the
non-proliferation regime and the safe use of uranium
for peace purposes.

Thirdly, Kazakhstan's nuclear-free status may
serve as an example and practical guidance to other
countries. I say this on the basis of our own experience.
We have built and strengthened our independent country
and secured its high international standing specifically
by renouncing nuclear weapons and obtaining
non-aggression safeguards from nuclear Powers. We
call on all other States to follow our example. We have
called on Iran to do so, and now call on North Korea
to follow suit. The way to counter the threat of nuclear
weapons throughout the world is through trust.

Fourthly, the contemporary potential of progress in
science and technology and the realities of globalization
make the task of ensuring the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) a matter of
humankind's survival. The increase in the number of
countries possessing WMDs poses the risk of nuclear,
chemical, biological and radiological weapons falling
into the hands of destructive forces. The current legal
framework for nuclear security failed to prevent the
expansion of the nuclear Powers club in the late twentieth
century. I believe that the much-needed strengthening
of the non-proliferation regime, based on the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), will
require deep shifts in thinking and new multilateral
political solutions. I suggest the following measures to
build confidence in the field of non-proliferation.

First. I believe that we should make withdrawal from
the NPT more difficult. The example of North Korea
may prompt similar action on the part of other countries
with ambitions to possess nuclear weapons. Without
casting doubt on the NPT, I propose that we consider
the possibility of crafting a special Security Council
draft resolution that clearly spells out the consequences
for those countries that violate the Treaty, including
sanctions measures and other coercive measures. We
have seen the necessity of that. The NPT did not stop
certain countries, such as India and Pakistan, in their
aspiration to possess nuclear weapons.

Secondly, we must develop a truly effective
mechanism for implementing tough measures to prevent
the acquisition and proliferation of WMDs. Such
multilateral agreements should be adopted through
separate Security Council resolutions. As a primary
measure to eliminate incentives to possess WMDs, I
believe that it its necessary to develop a legally binding
system of safeguards by nuclear Powers for those States
that would voluntarily abandon possessing nuclear
weapons, as well as non-nuclear-weapon States. That is
fair and can be accomplished without great effort.

Thirdly, the success or failure of the process
of modernizing the global security system directly
depends on the international community's ability to
overcome outdated militaristic mindsets. We should
relegate to the past dividing countries into military
blocs or alliances, a concept that has become both
provocative and meaningless in the twenty-first
century. In that specific regard, we require mutual
trust among States, which is waning with every passing
year. I have set out my Vision for global anti-military
measures in my "Manifesto: the world, the twenty-
first century", which proposes initiatives facilitating
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world by
the United Nations centenary. If that goal enjoys the
support of the international community, I believe that it
will be attainable.

Fourthly, we must revive political trust and
systematic dialogue. A good illustration of that can
be seen in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) - the agreement concerning Iran's nuclear
programme - which has demonstrated the success
attainable through multilateral diplomacy in the area
of non-proliferation. That has become a practical
example of resolving the most complicated issues
through negotiations. That agreement was made
possible thanks to an atmosphere of building trust to
which Kazakhstan contributed by example, and showed
what we have achieved, while earning the trust of the
international community. I hope for the continued and
successful implementation of the JCPOA despite recent
complications vis-a-vis some parties to the agreement's
failure to fulfil their obligations.

As the Council is aware, two days ago I met with
the President of the United States, Mr. Trump. We
discussed that issue, and I have an impression that,
in principle, we can resolve it. In our view, a similar
constructive approach could be used to settle the nuclear
issue involving North Korea. As we all know, current
developments on the Korean peninsula are illustrative
of profound contradictions. The world is deeply
concerned. That problem can be resolved by restoring
trust among the United States, the Russian Federation
and the People's Republic of China, which we also
recently discussed at the White House. In that regard
our positions converged. Without the participation
of the United States, Russia and China, it would be
difficult for us to resolve that issue. Accordingly, we
call on stakeholders to reach a solution to the North
Korean issue as expeditiously and constructively as
possible. We advocate that the five nuclear-weapon
States grant security assurances to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea as a key prerequisite for
establishing an atmosphere of trust for Pyongyang
to return to the negotiating table. Kazakhstan stands
ready to engage in mediation and provide a platform for
negotiations should the need arise among stakeholders.

Confidence-building measures are more relevant
than ever for the Middle East, where tragic events are
currently unfolding. The conflict in Syria is having
negative repercussions extending far beyond the region.
In that regard, it is important to note that mutual trust
became the basis for the Astana talks, which, in so
much as is possible, is contributing to the Syrian peace
settlement process, while reinforcing the Geneva
talks. Seven such meetings were held in Astana, and,
as participants stated, those were all successful and
helped to address issues.

Fifthly, in our View, one of the most effective
measures in combating the proliferation of WMDs
involves the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones. That also constitutes the materialization of a form
of collective trust. That was accomplished in Central
Asia, and I hope that the nuclear Powers will recognize
that step and ensure our protection. It is important to
pursue efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East. I call on stakeholders to resume their
work, and hope that persistent disagreements remaining
among certain countries will soon be overcome

Sixthly, there is now the risk of a new arms race
involving scientific achievements. In that regard,
the international community should strengthen
control over the creation and proliferation of new
military and information technologies. I believe that
confidence-building measures are also necessary for
forging common approaches aimed at preventing the
militarization of outer space.

I believe that all the issues that I have just
mentioned merit a stand-alone meeting of the United
Nations to discuss everything that they entail, achieve
a convergence of views among States and restore trust
among them.

Today's realities are such that many conflicts can
be prevented and effectively settled provided that there
be mutual understanding and trust among the world's
nuclear Powers. They bear the greatest responsibility
before humankind to prevent a nuclear catastrophe. The
largest nuclear Powers should constitute the vanguard
in the struggle for a nuclear-weapon-free world and
lead by an example in WMD reduction. That, however,
does not mean that other countries should stand aside as
if little depended upon them. On the other hand, if the
great nuclear Powers state that they intend to maintain
and strengthen their nuclear capacities and prevent
others from acquiring the same, I believe that that will
backfire. We must therefore work together.

The international community is strengthened by its
diversity and pluralism, and can survive and flourish
when there is balance and harmony among the nations
and peoples living on our planet. For that very reason,
we must strive together to achieve a safer world and
a more equitable world order based upon the rule of
international law. Undoubtedly, in that regard a special
role and historic mission falls to the Security Council.
I am convinced that in the twenty-first century
humankind will be able to forge a dignified way
towards a world free from the threat posed by WMDs.
I believe that the trust, will power and intelligence of
the international community amplified by the energy of
collective action will prevent our planet from plunging
into the abyss ofa global catastrophe.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now call on the President of Poland.

