Mr. Nkosi (South Africa): At the outset, allow me
to convey the apologies of our dear sister Ms. Lindiwe
Sisulu who, due to other pressing commitments,
unfortunately could not join today's special discussion.
My delegation wishes to join previous speakers in
expressing its profound appreciation to the rotating
presidency of the fraternal Republic of Equatorial
Guinea for convening this important open debate on
silencing the guns in Africa.

We wish to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; our
dear Ambassador Ramtane Lamamra, African Union
(AU) High Representative for Silencing the Guns in
Africa; and our compatriot Mr. Gounden, Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes, for their extremely insightful
briefings this morning.

This debate is timely, as it follows immediately
upon the successful conclusion of the thirty-second
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union held in Addis Ababa,
where the AU considered issues of utmost importance
to the continent, including progress with regards to
AU aspirations outlined in Agenda 2063: The Africa
We Want.

Since its creation, the United Nations has
consistently recognized the valuable contributions of
regional and subregional organizations to peace and
security. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations underscores the need to enhance the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations has over the
years produced tangible results, as has been seen for
example on the African continent with the deployment
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.

South Africa welcomes the progress that has been
made over the years in strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU, including the
adoption of the landmark resolutions 1809 (2008) and
2033 (2012), among others. Indeed, this cooperation
is strategic for promoting the principle of comparative
advantage, complementarity and burden-sharing. It is
therefore imperative that the United Nations continue
to work closely with the AU and regional organizations
to achieve sustainable peace on the African continent.

South Africa has consistently underscored the view
that the use of United Nations assessed contributions
provides the most reliable, sustainable and predictable
means for United Nations-mandated AU peace
operations. It was indeed heartening to sit here and
listen to the representative of the French Republic
indicating that France subscribes to the notion that AU
peace operations need to be supported from the regular
contributions of the United Nations. We shall work with
the French Republic and other delegations to ensure
that we fulfil that objective.

Reliable and sustainable funding for the AU has
been a persistent challenge for the African Union
over the past two decades, with an overreliance on
funding from international donors. That has resulted
in a subordinate role for Africa in decision-making,
particularly in the area of peace and security. In
order to address that historical problem, and as part
of the recently approved AU institutional reforms
aimed at ensuring that the continent achieves greater
autonomy, ownership and self-reliance in addressing
its peace, security and development challenges, the
AU has established the Peace Fund. The Peace Fund
is structured around three thematic areas that cover
mediation and preventative diplomacy, institutional
capacity and peace support operations.

At the recent thirty-second Assembly of the AU
Heads of State and Government, it was noted that
since 2017, 50 AU member States have contributed to
the Peace Fund on the basis of the existing scale of
assessments, and that a total amount of $89 million
has been contributed. That indeed demonstrates the
high-level commitment by the AU membership to fully
operationalizing the Peace Fund.

Overall, significant progress has been made in
recent years to establish peace, security and stability
on the African continent, resulting in positive peace
dividends and strong and sustainable economic
growth and positive development outcomes for many
African countries. As has been said and noted by many
representatives who spoke before me, we have witnessed
a tremendous peaceful transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We recently also witnessed
peaceful elections in Madagascar. Furthermore, we
have witnessed a very historic breakthrough in the Horn
of Africa with the rapprochement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea and now between Eritrea and Djibouti. We
also witnessed the peaceful conclusion of agreements
in the Central African Republic and in South Sudan.
However, pockets of conflict and instability in a number
of countries run the risk of eroding the positive gains
made, and in so doing, risking a relapse into conflict in
countries that have emerged from conflict.

Through the 2013 solemn declaration marking the
fiftieth anniversary of the Organization of African
Unity/AU, African leaders renewed their resolve
and commitment to tackling the peace and security
challenges confronting the continent by adopting the
AU Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020, as part of the flagship
projects and programmes of Agenda 2063. Since the
adoption of the AU Master Roadmap, the continent
has made significant strides to reduce violent and
armed conflict, as has already been mentioned. South
Africa's approach to peace, security and sustainable
development resonates strongly with the aspirational
goals adopted by the AU Assembly.

The AU Master Roadmap is indicative of the
strong resolve of African leaders to ensure continental
ownership and sustainable solutions for Africa's
challenges. South Africa believes that it is imperative,
therefore, that we accelerate efforts to strengthen and
capacitate the African Peace and Security Architecture.
My delegation is of the view that the African Peace and
Security Architecture should be the central framework
through which Chapter VIII engagement with the AU
on peace and security matters should take place. All
of us, including the Security Council, must gear our
efforts towards the effective operationalization of the
pillars dealing with conflict prevention, crises and
conflict management, post-conflict reconstruction and
development and strategic security issues.

My delegation is confident that the Master Roadmap,
as well as its monitoring and evaluation mechanism,
will greatly assist us in achieving our goal ofa conflict-
free Africa. A multidimensional approach that helps
to take Africa to an era of peace should be adopted.
That approach should include, among other things,
promoting inclusive socioeconomic development and
resilience, promoting access to resources and economic
opportunity, and promoting and entrenching democracy
and good governance.

The scale and magnitude of the challenges
involved and their intersectionality require not only the
availability and allocation of significant resources, but
also the establishment of strong, sustainable and vibrant
partnerships at the national, regional, continental and
international levels. The effective implementation of
the Roadmap requires strong regional and continental
architecture in which regional economic communities
and regional mechanisms will be instrumental to
advancing our quest for a united, prosperous and
integrated African continent that is free of conflict and
underdevelopment. South Africa supports ever-closer
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations in
that area through the efforts of the AU Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework and the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission.

In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its belief that
an Africa free of war and conflicts and at peace with
itself is critical to continental efforts to advance the
achievement of both the United Nations 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union
Agenda 2063. We therefore encourage the Security
Council and the broader international community
to support our continent to achieve those vital
development objectives.

My delegation expresses its utmost appreciation to
the delegation of Equatorial Guinea for its inspirational
leadership, which has resulted in the unanimous
adoption ofresolution 2457 (2019) on silencing the guns
in Africa. We believe that the adoption by the Council
of this resolution is yet another step forward that should
move us closer towards ensuring that Africa is at peace
with itself. The momentum towards silencing the guns
is indeed unstoppable.

