Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Yamamoto
for his briefing and for his work, and Mr. Fedotov for
his briefing. Our thanks also go to Ambassador Van
Bohemen of New Zealand for his work at the healm of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011).

As this is our last participation in the Council
dealing with the issue of Afghanistan, we would
like to express our support for the Government of
Afghanistan in its quest for unity, peace and prosperity
in the country given the difficult ongoing political and
security situation. The revival of peace talks with the
Taliban insurgents were affected because of the violent
actions against the Government and against civilians.
Furthermore, we welcome the 29 September peace
agreement between the Government of Afghanistan
and Hizb-i Islami, which has now joined the national
reconciliation process. We hope that important step will
encourage other political forces to join efforts towards
reconciliation and unity.

In that regard, the 1988 Sanctions Committee, on
the Taliban and associated entities, should look into
possible delisting of Hizb-i Islami, since its main leader
has fully rejected any terrorist links and decided to
collaborate with the Government, so as to move forward
in building peace in the context of the agreements
reached between the Afghan Government and that
group. We hope that consensus can emerge among
members of the Committee to proceed in that direction.

Furthermore, in the context of the international
community's efforts to back peace and reconciliation
efforts in Afghanistan, we welcome the outcome
of the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan and
its reaffirmation to assist that country in terms of
development and financial assistance.
The security situation in Afghanistan continues
to be volatile because of armed clashes between the
Taliban and other violent non-State actors against the
Afghan security forces. That has had an adverse impact
on the civilian population, who flee for their lives from
regions of armed conflict. We are concerned about the
22 per cent increase in armed clashes as compared to
last year. That is the highest rate of recent years. We
are also concerned about the civilian casualties caused
by aerial bombardment by the international coalition.
The security situation in the country has worsened
because of the offensive carried out by the Taligan
since September, which is a big challenge to the Afghan
armed forces.

Therefore, the spiral in violence has made civilians
the main victims of those armed clashes. That is borne
out by statistics of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which state
that 8,000 persons were affected, a figure that includes
dead and wounded, as well as Afghan girls and boys,
who have suffered traumas as a result of being military
targets. There are some 700 dead. which represents a
15 per cent increase as compared to last year, not to
mention the more serious fact that many of those children
continue to be recruited as soldiers by non-State actors,
in flagrant violation of international treaties, including
those concerning the promotion and protection of the
fundamental rights of children. Despite that terrible
reality, we pay tribute to the work carried out by the
Afghan Government aimed at increasing the number of
child-protection units.

In the context of regional cooperation, we
encourage Afghan authorities to continue their talks
with the Government of Pakistan to enhance trust for
the benefit of both peoples and to create a common
front to contribute to stability in the region. Likewise,
we welcome the strengthening of bilateral relations
among Afghanistan, India, Iran and China, among other
countries. That process is key in supporting Afghanistan
in solving its complex political, security, humanitarian
and economic challenges. We harbour hope that
Afghanistan very soon will become a full-fledged
member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
a step that will favour efforts in effectively fighting
terrorism and other security threats to the countries of
the region.

In terms of empowering women in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), we would like
to welcome highlight the work of Afghan authorities to
reinforce the legal framework against the harassment
of women in the workplace and the ongoing progress
in women's participation in the establishment of peace
and security. Despite all of those advances in promoting
women's rights, we still see violent acts against this
vulnerable group, such as the one at Kandahar airport
on 17 December when armed men killed five women
employed in the terminal after they had previously
received death threats because they wanted to exercise
their right to work. That is an event that we roundly
condemn and that we believe should be punished.

Drug smuggling continues to be a serious threat
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. The Taliban
insurgency is using illegal drug trafficking to finance
its terrorist activities. As we see in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/1049), there has been an
increase in poppy production and there is a low rate
of crop eradication. That is very worrisome because of
the intense fighting, especially in Helmand province.
In that regard, we would like to acknowledge the joint
efforts by Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, as well as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, with the aim of forming a
common front against that challenge within a regional
cooperation framework. We reiterate that an effective
fight against drugs requires international cooperation,
including from neighbouring countries and destination
countries, as part of a joint responsibility to prevent,
combat and eradicate that scourge.

As our term on the Security Council will come to
an end in just a few days, we would like to acknowledge
the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan in building peace and stability in the
country. Without a doubt, the Mission plays a crucial
role in supporting initiatives by the Afghan authorities
to face the challenges confronting the country and to
shore up the State and its political institutions.

In conclusion, we would encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to step up its efforts, along with the
constructive support of the international community, to
bring about a broad and inclusive political process that
will lead to enduring peace and to ensure that the State
has more control over all its territory and exercises
greater sovereignty over its resources for the benefit of
its people.

