Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Terrorism is
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security. International cooperation and concerted
action against terrorists and their sponsors, including
the complete dismantling of terrorist safe havens,
sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures, are the critical
imperatives to defeat this scourge.

India has confronted terrorism for over three
decades and continues to face the challenge of the
rising forces of extremism and radicalism in our
immediate neighbourhood and beyond. We have the
strongest possible and unequivocal commitment to
11-37735

combating terrorism. We are fully supportive of all
efforts, bilateral as well as multilateral, that strengthen
the international community's resolve in countering
terrorism.

The syndicate of terrorism, with intricate
interconnections comprising Al-Qaida, elements of the
Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist groups that
operate from within and outside Afghan borders, are
among the biggest threats from terrorism worldwide.
These bonds have strengthened over the years.

We have joined the consensus in favour of the
resolution adopted today to convey an unequivocal and
resolute message from the Council of its steadfast
determination in countering terrorism. India fully
supports an Afghan-led, inclusive and transparent
process of reconciliation, adhering to the red lines as
enunciated by the Afghan Government and in the
London and Kabul communiques.

We respect the right of the Afghan people to
decide their own destiny. The capacity of the Afghan
Government and people to fight and overcome
terrorism must be strengthened. We also support the
views and decisions of the Government and people of
Afghanistan as they seek to build a more secure, stable
and prosperous future and a strong democracy in their
country.

We earnestly hope that the new sanctions regime
on Afghanistan will continue towards meeting these
goals of political stability and economic reconstruction
in a credible, inclusive and transparent manner. It is
our expectation that this will enable the Afghan
Government to have a greater say in confronting the
challenges emanating from those constituting a threat
to the peace, security and stability of Afghanistan.

It is critical that all sanctions regimes established
by the Security Council be fair and transparent in their
functioning. They must ensure due process in their
working procedures and decision-making. The
enhancement of the powers of the Ombudsperson and
reforms in de-listing procedures are important steps in
that direction. We must ensure that these function in a
manner that strengthens our counter-terrorism
capacities and that they do not have implications for
the functioning of other sanctions regimes.

We have repeatedly expressed our concern in the
Council that the functioning of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) has
3
been subject to political pulls and pressures. This is a
scenario that we can ill afford in our fight against
terrorism.

Given the enormity and seriousness of the threat
of terrorism, the international community should
ensure that it does not in any way dilute or weaken the
global legal regime to combat it. There is in fact a
continuing urgency to strengthen it and make it more
comprehensive and effective.

The process of listing as well as de-listing needs
to be guided by the same set of principles: fairness,
credibility and transparency. Only then would it be
ensured that the sanctions lists are really effective. We
hope that, as we move forward, we keep this critical
requirement uppermost in our minds.

The work of the monitoring team has documented
the fact that there are linkages between Al-Qaida and
the Taliban. This is a serious matter and needs to be
handled with the utmost vigilance. Taliban groups
connected with Al-Qaida pose a continuous threat to
peace and security in our region.

Before I conclude, I should like to join another of
my colleagues who earlier, in preparing for this
afternoon's meeting, referred to the haste in which we
have had to move and to difficulties in translation. Just
before I took the floor, my attention was drawn to what
could be only a small typographical issue but that will
nevertheless need to be corrected. I find a difference
between the final text that was agreed to when the
negotiations ended and what was put in blue. I refer
here to the language in the nineteenth preambular
paragraph of document S/2011/368, which refers to
entities that meet the criteria for listing set forth in the
draft resolution. In the blue version, the references to
paragraphs 4 and 3 have been reversed. I believe that
this can be fixed in a correction. I have been assured
that this is not a reopening; it is just something that
was done in a hurry. I just wanted to state that for the
record.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's steadfast
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. To that end, it will be our endeavour
to work for the effective implementation of these two
regimes and their enhanced efficacy.

