Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): First,
I wish to extend warm thanks to Angola for having
taken the initiative to organize this high-level meeting
on the situation in the Great Lakes region, and for the
quality and timeliness of the concept note before us
(S/2016,223, annex). I also thank the ministers here
for their presence, which reflects their interest in the
region, and commend the briefers for their rich and
informative statements.

For two decades now, the majority of the countries
of the Great Lakes region have been prey to political
instability, lengthy wars and recurring conflict. The
succession of crises has had disastrous consequences,
resulting in loss of life, population displacement, the
destruction of basic infrastructure and the disruption of
economic channels. Despite regional initiatives to help
resolve these multifaceted crises, populations continue
to live in inhuman conditions that are often perceived as
a curse to be borne rather than a problem to be solved.
This disastrous situation is at odds with the immense
riches that abound in the region.

The existence of historically close ethnic,
cultural, social and political ties among the peoples
of the region, as well as the porosity or proximity
of borders, further complicate and exacerbate the
situation. Forced population movements, economic
malaise and widespread violence, as well as their
fallout across borders, exacerbate tensions between
States considerably. In the region, borders have become
veritable sieves that contribute increasingly to the
spread of conflict, as opposed to geographical barriers
that act as obstacles to threats to the stability of States.

The commitment of the international community in
the region, demonstrated in particular by the Council
and by the deployment of the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation, should have made it possible
to halt the spiral of violence in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but the country remains the
theatre of clashes among dozens of Congolese and
foreign armed groups for reasons based on ethnicity,
land or control over significant mineral resources. Here,
I would like to mention a worrying trend illustrated
by the growing interconnection between the criminal
activities of armed groups operating in the Great
Lakes region, such as the Lord's Resistance Army,
and terrorist groups operating in the Sahel and, more
recently, in West Africa. This phenomenon is a threat
to the security of the entire continent, for which there is
growing evidence.

It is therefore our collective duty to do our utmost
to evaluate and analyse the root causes of the tragedy
suffered by the region for over 20 years. In our View,
with regard to the complex dynamics of the conflict
in the Great Lakes region, it is essential to adopt and
implement multidimensional approaches centred on the
definitive neutralization of negative forces in the region,
the effective implementation of regional agreements,
the strengthening ofpolitical dialogue, the continuation
of and emphasis on peacebuilding efforts in the region,
the promotion of economic interdependence among
the various countries and strengthened coordination of
external actors.

The armed groups that remain active in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo are the greatest
threat to peace and stability in the region. Lasting
peace cannot be restored so long as insecurity persists
in the east. Only the timely disarmament of those armed
groups will reduce tensions and restore confidence to
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region. To that end, a message of unity and firmness
from the international community would help support
the efforts of actors who are sincerely committed to the
cause of lasting peace in the Great Lakes region.

In that respect, we welcome the recent signing ofthe
agreement between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations for the
resumption of military cooperation between the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the fight
against armed groups.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region has entered its third year but its implementation
remains limited, although we note the existence of
several encouraging signals. It is up to the signatories
to the agreement to honour their commitments to
revitalizing the political momentum created by vthe
Framework agreement. It is only through cooperation
among stakeholders from across the region that the
Framework agreement will pave the way for a concrete
improvement in the security situation and living
conditions in the Great Lakes region. Moreover, it
remains crucial that the signatories of the Framework
agreement establish the most appropriate enforcement
mechanisms to prevent conflicts, restore peace and
enforce agreements.

The implementation of the Framework agreement
must be promoted and supervized by the highest organs
of the Regional Follow-up Mechanism at the level of
Heads of State and Government. Only the involvement
of the latter will be able to ensure the necessary
political will and sustained commitment of all Member
States. I commend the significant progress made by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the implementation
of its commitments under the Framework agreement.

Conflict resolution in the Great Lakes region
requires not only resolving security challenges but
also addressing their root causes by giving priority
to the promotion of good governance and the rule of
law. Peacebuilding is the indispensable foundation of
political stability and economic development in the
subregion, and the role played by the international
community is crucial in that respect. It is therefore
always necessary for development partners to support
and pursue recent initiatives towards democratization
by enhancing their intervention strategies. The
good functioning of electoral processes is also a
key aspect for peace and stability. We must work to
ensure a transparent and credible electoral process
in countries that organize elections, while respecting
the Constitution and the electoral calendar. While
the Government is responsible for ensuring that the
elections are credible and transparent, the support of
the international community remains crucial.

It is important for countries of the region to
cooperate in the restoration of peaceful dialogue and
cordial relations among States. Any reconciliation
and reconstruction initiative in the region requires the
stimulation of positive developments to reassure the
affected countries that their security and economic
interests have more to gain through support for
stability and improved relations with neighbours. In
this regard, it would be useful for the region to continue
regional cooperation in the four key areas of peace and
security, democracy and good governance, economic
development, and humanitarian and social protection.

If all the region's peoples are to enjoy the dividends
ofpeace, it is essential to promote economic integration
as a means to strengthen the links among the countries
of the region and to benefit the common interest through
the promotion of peace, stability and cooperation.
One way to do this is to streamline and strengthen
the capacity of existing economic blocs in the region,
such as the Economic Community of the Great Lakes
Countries, and to intensify economic integration not
only in terms of reduced tariff barriers, but also in
such areas as migration and population flows, trade
facilitation and investment. Economic integration could
also be achieved by promoting cross-border community
cooperation initiatives that strengthen the links among
local communities in border regions, and allowing
them to face challenges and seize opportunities of
mutual interest.

Although the Great Lakes region enjoys the
sustained commitment of the international community,
the latter remains fragmented. Most peace initiatives in
the region have not taken account of the complexity of
the conflict and its consequences, not only nationally,
but also at the regional and international levels. We
must therefore continue to exploit synergies and to
coordinate initiatives to maximize the contribution of
international partners to the implementation of various
peace and development initiatives in the region.

We welcome the launch today of the new United
Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework
2016-2017, which offers great hope for a better future
of prosperity and development in the Great Lakes
region, and we call on all stakeholders to contribute
to the realization of this ambitious programme
of transformation.

