Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing, as
well as the representatives of Serbia and Kosovo for
their statements.

At the outset, I would like to reiterate, once again,
and as others before me have done, our wish that the
Security Council review how frequently it considers
the situation in Kosovo. With the Council facing
an ever-increasing workload, there is no longer any
justification for maintaining quarterly briefings on the
Kosovo issue, which is not comparable to that of crises
for which the Council's robust engagement is essential.

We believe that the positive developments in
Kosovo in recent years in terms of institution-building
also justify efforts to refocus the actions of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) as well as their coordination with other
international actors in Kosovo. We once again call
on the Secretary-General to make recommendations
on this issue in his next report. The current standstill
is unacceptable given that it is our responsibility as
members of the Security Council to ensure that the
measures taken by the United Nations are fully adapted
to the situation on the ground. Unfortunately, that is no
longer the case at present.

France is convinced that the future of Kosovo is no
longer an urgent Council matter; rather, it falls within
the context ofthe European-Union-led political dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, it is
important that the parties demonstrate the highest level
of proactive commitment. Beyond mere declarations
of intent, we expect that all of the agreements reached
will be effectively implemented as soon as possible,
including the agreement on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, which is a key aspect of the dialogue. We
therefore call on the Kosovo and Serbian authorities to
intensify their efforts, particularly on that last point, in
order to produce more concrete results in the months
to come. That is a subject that we will continue to
follow closely.

The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina remains, in general, a prerequisite for their
respective progress on the path to European integration,
which was again encouraged at the European Council
on 9 and 10 March.

After the episodes of unrest in recent months, we
expect more than ever that all actors show responsibility
and restraint, a point that is all the more important in
view of the upcoming elections in Kosovo. France is
convinced that the resurgence of nationalist discourse,
sometimes tinged with community-based references,
poses a threat to the stability of the region, to which the
peoples of Kosovo and Serbia both aspire.

In that regard, the agreement recently reached at
the local level as to the demolition of the Mitrovica
wall is a positive example, showing that concrete
solutions can be found to foster coexistence between
communities, free from political provocation and any
divisive rhetoric. The fact that the recent involvement
of Serbian citizens living in Kosovo in the Serbian
presidential election was not accompanied by any
serious incidents, thanks to the work of the Kosovo
and Serbian electoral institutions and the support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
is another encouraging development that we welcome.
Lastly, President Thaci's choice to favour an inclusive
approach with regard to a possible transformation of the
status of the Kosovo security forces is also one likely
to avoid an escalation of tensions, which would be as
unnecessary as it would be dangerous.

Continued efforts by Kosovo to consolidate the
rule of law must also remain a priority. That includes
the fight against radicalization in all of its forms. We
welcome the unconditional commitment of Kosovo in
that regard, both locally and within the global coalition
against Da'esh.

Finally, I conclude my remarks by recalling
France's commitment to the relationship of trust that
we have traditionally maintained with Serbia and
Kosovo, as well as our support for reconciliation in the
region and the implementation of the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, allow me to point
out that the French judiciary independently rendered
a decision in the Haradinaj case. French authorities
cannot comment on that judicial decision, but it should
in no way be interpreted politically.

