Mr. Celem (Turkey): We are dismayed by the turn
of events in the Middle East and the lack of progress in
the peace process. Turkey has been an ardent supporter of
the Middle East peace process from its very beginning.
We deem it a unique opportunity that can bring about
long-awaited peace and prosperity to the whole region.
Much ground has been covered in this direction. The
announcement by the new Israeli Government that it was
committing itself to the peace process and to continuing
to fulfil its pledges according to the Interim Agreement
was welcomed by the entire international community.
Moreover, the first meeting between Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Arafat, on 4 September 1996,
was an encouraging sign for the invigorating of the peace
process.

However, the recent impasse in the Middle East
peace process has led to the deep concern that the whole
process may be interrupted. The momentum must not be
lost. Therefore, any action that may hamper or slow down
this process has to be carefully avoided.

In the light of the already charged atmosphere,
decisions regarding holy sites and places of worship are
particularly susceptible to having wide-reaching
implications and creating strong public sensitivities. The
decision to open the tunnel under the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in
our view, is of that nature. It can obviously have
repercussions far beyond the Middle East. Al-Quds Al-
Sharif is an equally sacred city for all three monotheistic
religions. All interested parties should meticulously

 

respect the delicate harmony and balance that for centuries
has permitted the peaceful coexistence in this city of the
followers of these three faiths.
It is difficult to understand the reasoning behind the
decision of the Israeli Government to abandon today the
cautious approach it has displayed in this regard since 1988.
We deplore the fact that Israel, instead of adopting a
conciliatory attitude, has opted to use force against the
Palestinian people protesting this decision. It has been
perceived by the Palestinians as a provocation and as a
desecration. We do not see any grounds to suspect the
sincerity of the reaction of the Palestinians to the decision
to open the tunnel at a time when sensitivities were already
heightened because of the stagnation of the peace process.
This spontaneous reaction has to be taken into
consideration. We cannot afford to see the further spread of
demonstrations, further bloodshed and further human
suffering. We cannot afford to see the Middle East peace
process thrown into total disarray.

Information obtained this morning indicates that the
situation is even more tense. We call on both sides to
exercise restraint and to refrain from actions that may be
exploited by parties that are against the peace process. We
think that it is vitally important at this juncture that Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat meet immediately
to find a way out of this crisis. We call upon the Israeli
Government to review its decision concerning the tunnel
and to refrain from resorting to the use of force or from
any action that can be construed as provocation.

