Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his briefing. I also wabt to thank Ambassador Citaku
and Minister Daeic' for their participation.

We congratulate Kosovo on formulating a
new Government following free, fair and peaceful
democratic elections in June, which clearly
demonstrates Kosovo's democratic maturity. We also
welcome the successful local elections that Kosovo held
on 22 October, which is further evidence of Kosovo's
continuing progress. We urge Kosovo's newly elected
leaders to use their mandates wisely to advance the
welfare of all of Kosovo's communities and to maintain
progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We also
welcome recent advancements in the Kosovo-Serbia
dialogue with a successful integration of Kosovo Serb
judges, prosecutors and administrative staff into the
Kosovo judiciary.

We greatly appreciate the European Union's
contributions as facilitator of the Brussels dialogue.
We reiterate our support for the dialogue and encourage
leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina to continue efforts
to reach agreement on normalization.

As we have repeatedly said in this Chamber, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has long ago fulfilled its mandate in
Kosovo. There is no doubt that over the years the Mission
has successfully helped Kosovo build multi-ethnic
democratic institutions that uphold the rule of law and
respect human rights. The United Nations should be
proud of these accomplishments and this success story.

But it is now time for the Mission to make a
transition. United Nations resources must be directed
towards more critical issues. In that regard, we firmly
believe that the Security Council should consider
UNMIK in a format that will allow us to discuss in
detail proposals to improve the Mission and to bring
its resources in line with any needs on the ground.
The current format has not allowed us as a Council to
seriously evaluate and assess the Mission and its future.
We also reiterate our call on the Council to adjust
the reporting and briefing period for UNMIK. The
Mission's reporting and briefing period should change
from three months to six months or even longer.

During the last briefing, in August (see S/PV.8025),
we recommended that, in his next report, the Secretary-
General provide an assessment of possible budget and
staff reductions with a focus on reducing redundancy
(see S/PV.8025). We reiterate our recommendation for
such a report.

Finally, we continue to strongly support full
international recognition of Kosovo and Kosovo's
membership in all relevant international organizations,
including the United Nations and INTERPOL. We
encourage States Members of the United Nations that
have not yet done so to join the more than 110 United
Nations Members that have already recognized Kosovo
as an independent State.

