Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of May. I wish you success in your
endeavours. I thank Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt, for
presiding over this open debate. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his statement
this morning.

The lessons learned from growing terrorism have
proved that it did not start in a vacuum. It started and
developed in a fragile environment fuelled by policies
that neither assigned importance to social, economic
and political problems nor dealt realistically with their
root causes. Therefore, the successful eradication of
terrorist groups depends on addressing the root causes
that provide a fertile terrain for the increase in those
groups. That was proved by the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Terrorism, adopted by the General
Assembly in 2006, which was based on the root causes
of terrorism.

Terrorism spares no one. It is a threat to international
peace and security. Therefore the solution must be a
comprehensive one, involving the joint efforts on the
international community. It must end the root causes of
that phenomenon. It must reject any use of terrorism to
achieve certain political goals. We must also stress that
the fight against terrorism must be in conformity with
international law, the rule of law and the protection of
human rights.

In the State of Qatar, when we call for the adoption
of a broad-scale approach to address the root causes
of terrorism, such a demand never undermines the
importance of the need for an urgent military response
to the imminent threats of terrorist groups. However,
we believe that the military response must not come at
the expense of addressing the root causes of terrorism
and its causes. Military solutions alone are unable to
solve all the problems. We must find comprehensive
solutions that provide a better future for societies, ones
that ensure stability and promote international peace
and security.
The growing terrorism in our region is fuelled
by the policies of a regime that has an interest in
its presence to promote itself as a partner in the
international campaign for fighting terrorism so as to
ensure its own endurance, after its peoples and the world
have rejected it because of its criminal policies and its
blatant violations of international humanitarian law.
In fact, the Syrian regime has used chemical weapons,
starvation and indiscriminate bombing of civilians, and
the destruction of infrastructures and capacities of the
Syrian people. That has proved that that regime is the
very embodiment of terrorism. It continues to target
medical and civilians facilities, thwarting the delivery
of aid to those in need. It continues to violate legal and
moral instruments. It is a grave threat to international
peace and security. This requires a strong, urgent
stance from the Security Council to protect the Syrian
people against the atrocities of the regime and not to
allow impunity.

The State of Qatar has stressed on all occasions
when we discuss this theme that terrorism must not
be linked to any religion, ethnicity or culture. We
must address its root causes, including the illicit use
of force, aggression, foreign occupation, the denial
of the right to self-determination of those under
occupation, the absence of political and social justice
and marginalization. That must come in line with a
comprehensive treaty that includes a definition of
terrorism. Therefore we stress that any attempt to
link terrorism to any culture, religion, civilization,
nationality or group will give a pretext to terrorists to
justify their terrorist acts, to recruit young people.

Terrorism knows no religion, nationality or
ethnicity. It is a criminal phenomenon that sows the
seeds of chaos and undermines international peace
and security. We stress the need to respect religions
and promote tolerance. Religions do not call for
terrorism; they call for tolerance, cooperation and
solidarity. Therefore, an interpretation that is far from
the preaching of tolerant Islam, which basically calls
for peace, tolerance and coexistence, is rejected. Such
an interpretation is an attempt to distort Islam for
specific purposes. It provides pretexts for extremists
and terrorists.

Based on our policy that attaches great importance
to fighting violent extremism that leads to terrorism.
we have taken an initiative, with other countries, to
hold on 3 June a high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on youth and children affected by violent
extremism, in line with the international efforts to fight
terrorism. Moreover, given the great role of education
in protecting children and youth against extremism and
terrorism, we have adopted various programmes for
the education and rehabilitation for Syrian refugees to
ensure that they enjoy their rights.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that Qatar
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Despite its many resources and perpetrators, we are
committed to drying up the resources of terrorist
groups and the tools they use to propagate criminal
ideologies, including through the Internet. In line
with the counter-terrorism mechanisms adopted by the
international community, we will continue to promote
our partnership with United Nations agencies in this
regard to promote peace and security.

