Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand is
bitterly disappointed that the Security Council was not
able to come together today to adopt the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/1026.
The draft resolution, put forward by Egypt, Spain
and New Zealand, represented only a small step. In our
view, it was the minimum required for a credible response
from the Security Council to address the situation in
Aleppo and in the rest of Syria. It was a humanitarian
draft resolution designed to reduce fighting and get aid
to those civilians who most desperately need it. As is
well known, New Zealand has been working towards
such an outcome for many months. The Council's
failure to act in spite of the graphic monthly briefings
and increasingly urgent pleas from Staffan de Mistura,
Stephen O'Brien and others is deeply damaging to the
Council's reputation, and catastrophic for the people
of Syria.

As I said last week (see S/PV.7822), our objectives
in presenting this draft resolution are those that have
guided our engagement on Syria since joining the
Council, and that led my Prime Minister to convene
a high-level meeting in September (see S/PV.7775).
Those objectives were and are to reduce the violence, to
restore the ceasefire, to allow humanitarian assistance
to reach those in need and to create space for the
resumption of political talks.

Egypt, Spain and New Zealand had been working
on this draft resolution for over a month. We consulted
extensively and took on board as many views as would
allow us, or so we understood, to achieve consensus
while still making a practical difference for Syrian
civilians on the ground. I would note that the delegation
with which we engaged most intensively and from
which we took the greatest number of changes was the
delegation of the Russian Federation. We circulated
the latest draft text to all Council members and
requested the Secretariat to put it in blue at 8 pm. on
Friday, 2 December. That request was circulated to
all Council members. It is deeply disappointing that a
trivial procedural point should be advanced as a serious
argument for delaying such a draft resolution as this,
against that practical background.

Today's veto is another indictment on Russia,
on those that supported Russia and on the Council.
Today's veto demonstrates to the world that for Moscow
and Damascus our common refrain - that there is no
military solution to this conflict - is a hollow fiction.
For those countries it is clear that a military victory
is precisely what they want and are actively pursuing,
even if its cost is continued carnage inflicted on the
Syrian people.
Putting aside the devastating outcome of today's
vote for the Council's credibility, we must not lose sight
of the fact that the biggest losers today are those on
the ground who, instead of having a chance to restore
small parts of their lives, will continue to be subjected
to the bombing and blasting that have blighted their
lives for so many years. However, we will not let
today's great disappointment deter us. New Zealand
will continue to work in the Security Council, in the
General Assembly and elsewhere to continue trying to
protect Syrian civilians.

