Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic Conference) (spoke in French): I join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. I am grateful for this opportunity to address
the Council.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2001/331)
and its annexes underscore the vital importance of such
protection and offer guidelines through practical
recommendations that can make it better and turn it
into a reality. The report notes that the realities of
distressed populations have hardly improved since the
first report of the Secretary-General (S/1999/957) of 8
September 1999, which itself had sketched a gloomy
picture of the situation faced by millions of civilians
held hostage as a result of the many armed conflicts in
today's world.

The Secretary-General regretfully stresses that
most of the recommendations made in his first report,
which could have resulted in clear guidelines for
conduct, have unfortunately not been followed up. The
recruitment and use of child soldiers, the proliferation
of light weapons, the unthinking use of landmines, the
denial of fundamental human rights and the impunity
enjoyed by those who commit such atrocities all
continue. Even worse, the Secretary-General tells us
that civilians are no longer merely incidental victims,
but have become the main target of the forces involved.

Activities that could help protect civilians are of
great diversity, but they are all intended to strengthen
measures to that end. Each situation may be unique, but
on the basis of past and present experience it is clear
that the categories identified in the report deserve our
attention; those defined as involved in protection
should take all necessary steps, at the State level, at the
level of civil society, nationally and internationally, to
make it possible to carry out those recommendations.

The protection of civilians requires an integrated
approach drawing on all elements that can be of
assistance. It would be misleading to isolate any single
dimension, because all the conflicts in question are not
inter-State conflicts; very often they are complex
internal conflicts.

The establishment of cooperation between the
Security Council and regional organizations and
arrangements, as suggested in recommendation 14 of
the report of the Secretary-General, through the
establishment of a regular regional reporting
mechanism, would be very positive. Beyond keeping
the Security Council informed, it would make it
possible to formulate an acceptable definition of
coordination between the United Nations system and
regional organizations, and to establish clearly defined
mandates for the participants in such coordination.

I cannot conclude without speaking of the tragic
situation of Palestinian civilians in the occupied Arab
territories. Under the pretext of protecting their own
civilians - who are by the terms of international law
in those territories illegally - Israel is denying such
protection to Palestinian civilians. Irrespective of the
nature of the Power involved, of the State concerned or
of the geographical zone in question, the protection of
civilians must be total. The Security Council must not
be paralyzed by considerations unrelated to the
protection of civilians. Any effort to do this will only
undermine the effectiveness of the international
community's efforts to bring about lasting peace and
prosperity. Otherwise, the risk of failure is very real.

