Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your able conduct of the
Security Council's work.

In three and a half years of Palestinian terrorist
attacks that have murdered hundreds of innocent Israeli
civilians and wounded thousands more, this Council
has not met even once to express condemnation of a
single attack. Not one resolution, not one presidential
statement has been adopted by this Council to
specifically denounce the deliberate massacre of our
innocent civilians - not even two months ago, when
11 Israeli citizens were murdered in a horrific homicide
bomb attack on a bus in central Jerusalem on 29
January. In the wake of our anguish, our efforts to elicit
some response from the Council were not met even
with a presidential statement.

And yet today, following a sad and familiar
pattern, the Council convenes. Why? Not to condemn
the terrorism, not to honour the memory of the
hundreds murdered by it, but to come to the defence of
one of its prime perpetrators, a godfather of terrorism.
This is not a message of which the Council can be
proud. Frankly, it is an outrage. It is the ultimate
hypocrisy.

As long as we pretend that the response to
terrorism is more serious than the terrorism itself, we
only invite more of it. If we want to give the peace
process a chance, the kind of terror that Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin directed and perpetrated, and which he swore to
continue relentlessly, cannot be appeased or assuaged.
It must be defeated. It must be defeated not just for our
sake, but for the sake of the whole free world.

Although the Security Council has never met to
discuss the attacks for which Sheikh Yassin was
responsible, the list is gruesome and shocking. To
characterize him as a spiritual leader is tantamount to
characterizing Osama bin Laden as a Mother Teresa.
Underneath his supposed clerical garb, Sheikh Yassin
was a true pioneer in the ruthless murder of innocents.
Under his direct leadership, inspiration and instruction,
Hamas - an organization recognized around the world
for its brutal terrorism - perpetrated over 425 attacks
that killed 377 Israelis and wounded 2,076 in less than
three and a half years of violence. He stood at the head
of a command and control structure dedicated to the
destruction of Israel. If Sheikh Yassin was not an arch-
terrorist, there is no such thing.

In my hand, I hold in front of the entire Security
Council 187 pages documenting the horrific scope and
extent of Hamas terrorism that has wreaked
unspeakable anguish on the lives of the citizens of
Israel. These are not just pieces of paper. They are
filled with the names of real people - babies, children,
women, men - with dreams and aspirations, whose
lives were cut short and extinguished by Sheikh Yassin
and the followers of his murderous ideology. I could be
here until tomorrow reading the biographies of ll-
month-old babies, of pregnant mothers and of others
who were murdered viciously by this person.

Among 425 attacks perpetrated by Hamas since
September 2000, the organization has perpetrated no
less than 52 separate suicide attacks in which 288
Israelis have been murdered and 1,646 wounded. I will
mention only a few of them to give members an idea of
the evil this man represented and the horror the
organization he headed has inflicted, while he proudly
claimed responsibility. Yes, time and time again, while
Israeli mothers were in excruciating pain, burying their
babies, and widows mourned their husbands, Sheikh
Yassin's gloating face appeared on every television
screen, exalting the murderers as martyrs. What
follows is just a short list of his bloody and gruesome
record.

The 1 June 2001 suicide bombing of the
Dolphinarium discotheque in Tel Aviv, in which 21
teenagers were murdered and 120 wounded when a
Hamas terrorist blew himself up while standing in a
large group of teenagers waiting to enter the club and
dance the night away.

The 9 August 2001 suicide bombing of a
Jerusalem restaurant in which 15 people were
murdered and 130 wounded.

The 1 December 2001 double suicide bombing on
the Ben Yehuda Street pedestrian mall in Jerusalem, in
which 11 people were murdered and 188 wounded.

The 2 December 2001 suicide bombing of a
number 16 bus in Haifa, in which 15 people were
murdered and 40 wounded.

The 9 March 2002 suicide bombing of a
Jerusalem cafe in which 11 people were murdered and
54 wounded.

The 27 March 2002 suicide bombing in the dining
room of the Park Hotel in the coastal city of Netanya
on the first night of Passover - on seder night - in
which 30 people were murdered and 140 wounded.

The 18 June 2002 suicide bombing of the number
32A commuter bus in Jerusalem, in which 19 people
were murdered and 74 wounded; the bus, which was
completely destroyed, was carrying many students on
their way to school.

The 4 August 2002 suicide bombing of the
number 361 bus at Meron junction in which nine
people were murdered and 50 wounded.

The 21 November 2002 suicide bombing of a
number 20 bus in Jerusalem, in which 11 people were
murdered and 50 wounded.

The 5 March 2003 suicide bombing of a number
37 bus in Haifa, in which 17 people were murdered and
53 wounded.

The 18 May 2003 suicide bombing of a number 6
bus in Jerusalem, in which 7 people were murdered and
20 wounded.

The 11 June 2003 suicide bombing of a number
14A bus in Jerusalem, in which 11 people were
murdered and over 100 wounded.

The 19 August 2003 suicide bombing of a
number 2 bus in Jerusalem, in which 23 people were
murdered and over 130 wounded.

The 9 September 2003 suicide bombing of a
hitchhiking post near the Israel Defence Forces base at
Tzrifin, in which 9 soldiers were murdered and 10
wounded.

The 9 September 2003 suicide bombing of a
Jerusalem cafe in which 7 people were murdered and
70 wounded.

The 29 January 2004 suicide bombing of a
number 19 bus in Jerusalem, in which 11 people were
murdered and 44 wounded.

And just last week, on 14 March 2004, at the
Ashdod port, 10 people were murdered and 16
wounded.

This is the legacy of which Sheikh Yassin was
proud. His hands were steeped in the blood of the
innocent. Sheikh Yassin personally instigated and
specifically authorized homicide attacks, encouraged
individual men and women to become suicide bombers,
ordered the firing of Qassam missile attacks against
Israeli communities, coordinated joint activities with
other terrorist organizations and collected funds for
terrorist activity, campaigning throughout the Arab
world to raise millions of dollars to improve Hamas
terrorist capabilities.

Through his words he spawned an ideology of
hatred, incitement and murder, glorified as martyrdom.
In numerous public appearances, Sheikh Yassin called
repeatedly for the intensification of the armed struggle
against Israelis and Jews everywhere - and I quote,
"everywhere". Just one day before the twin homicide
attacks at Cafe Hillel in Jerusalem and the bus stop
near Tzrifin on 8 September 2003, which claimed 17
lives, Sheikh Yassin called on Hamas to attack Israeli
civilians without restraint, saying, "We will not limit
the military command, battalions or factions." Indeed,
he knew no limit.

Sheikh Yassin's murderous reach extended not
only to the streets of Tel Aviv and Jerusalem but to our
global streets. He was an arch-terrorist with
international aims and international ties. He called for
suicide attacks against American and British forces in
Iraq and praised Osama bin Laden, wishing that Allah
grant him the possibility of continuing his fight against
the United States.

This is the man whom the Council is asked to
defend. His victims were denied the attention of the
Council. Will it now give that attention to the person
who bears direct responsibility for their murder?

In comparative terms, the number of innocents
deliberately murdered by Palestinian terrorists as of
March 2004 is equivalent to 22,499 Russian citizens;
43,136 citizens of the United States, or 58,936 citizens
of the European Union. Can there be any doubt as to
what your countries would do, or in some cases are
already doing or have already done, in the face of
terrorism of this scale and magnitude? I ask those who
have joined us today for this debate if they could sit
quietly and wait for the next homicide bomber to
appear on their doorstep?

By any reasonable standard of international law,
Israel has a legitimate right, in fact a duty, to defend
itself against those illegal combatants and their
commanders, who are committed to murdering as many
of its civilians as possible. The Palestinian leadership
has proved beyond any doubt that it has no intention of
taking a single measure to fight terrorism, as it is
legally and morally obliged to do. This mass murderer,
Sheikh Yassin, lived and operated for years not just in
freedom, but under the protective authority and in the
safe haven of the Palestinian Authority, in violation of
the most basic international norms. What would you
have us do? Stand idly by as Yassin and the Palestinian
leadership co-sign the death warrants of more innocent
civilians?

It is the basic obligation of the Government of
Israel - like that of any other Government - to
protect the lives of its citizens from the threat of
terrorism. Unlike the terrorists we confront, we make
every effort, under excruciatingly difficult conditions,
to minimize harm to civilians. We recognize that we
have responsibilities. But we will not negotiate by day
and bury our dead by night. By removing Sheikh
Yassin from the international stage, we send a very
strong message to the terrorists: "When you kill our
civilians, you are not immune."

Yesterday's operation constitutes an important
stride forward in our march against fundamentalist
terrorism in our region, enabling a return to the peace
process. Sheikh Yassin was one of the greatest
obstacles to the cessation of hostilities and the renewal
of negotiations - a roadblock on the road map to
peace. Since he founded Hamas from the ranks of the
Muslim Brotherhood organization in 1987, the
organization has opposed peace talks with Israel and
attempted to thwart every single peace initiative. So the
question should not be, "Why now?" The question
really should be, "Why not before?"

There cannot be peace and terror. There cannot be
peace and Hamas. The road map explicitly requires the
elimination of Hamas and other terrorist organizations;
it calls for an end to funding and support for their
efforts; it recognizes that peace is impossible while
those messengers of death are allowed to flourish.

Israel remains committed to peace. We will
persevere in the hope that a partner for peace will
emerge, so that we can arrive at a political solution
based upon the implementation of the road map. In the
meantime, Prime Minister Sharon has announced plans
for bold measures of disengagement that hold the
potential for re-energizing the process.

The Palestinian leadership has a choice. It can
continue to get into bed with terrorists and tyrants. It
can continue its morally depraved strategy of murder
and terror and, in so doing, continue to bring suffering
and despair to the Israeli and Palestinian peoples alike.
But it can also choose a different path. It can prove to
the world that it is ready to assume responsibilities, not
just assume privileges. It can show that it is ready to
establish a democratic society that will respect the
rights of its people and the rights of its neighbours, and
not another terrorist dictatorship in the heart of the
Middle East. Israel is ready, as it always has been, to
be a partner to such a leadership.

The Security Council has a choice, too. It does
not have to continue to send a message that puts the
response to terrorism on trial, instead of terrorism
itself. It does not have to pander to initiatives that
defend the terrorist rather than the victim.

In the legacy of resolutions such as 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1373 (2001), the Council can also send
another message - one of hope and of peace, one that
does not pretend that this is a conflict in which one side
has a monopoly on rights and on victimhood, one that
rejects terror without compromise.

Which message will you send today to our region
and to the rest of the world?

