Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today on the report of
the activities of the United Nations Interim Mission
in Kosovo (S/2012/818). We welcome Serbian Foreign
Minister Mr. Ivan Mrkie to the Council and thank him
for his statement. We also welcome Mr. Enver Hoxhaj
and thank his for his statement.

We are pleased that the situation in Kosovo remains
relatively stable. However, the security incidents that
have occurred are an indication that tensions remain,
and unless the legitimate concerns or all parties are
resolved through a negotiated, peaceful settlement,
they will continue to be a threat to the stability of the
region.

South Africa takes note of the decision announced
by the International Steering Group concerning the
end of the supervised independence of Kosovo and the
subsequent action by the Kosovo authorities in that
regard. We maintain that resolution 1244 (1999) should
remain in force and forms the basis for the resolution of
the situation in Kosovo. It is therefore incumbent on the
international presence in Kosovo, including the Kosovo
Force and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, to maintain a status-neutral position in the
execution of their mandates, in line with the previous
decisions of the Security Council,

The two sides should refrain from any unilateral
action that could undermine the achievements attained
in the dialogue process. We therefore call on the parties
to exercise flexibility and enhance their engagement
in order to resolve outstanding matters and for
reconciliation to prevail.

My delegation continues to support the dialogue
process between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by the
European Union, as mandated by the General Assembly.
We have noted the many positive developments during
the reporting period, in particular the resumption of the
European Union-led talks in Brussels on 19 October
following their suspension in February. Those
discussions are essential for building trust and mutual
confidence between the parties and will, we hope,
facilitate agreement on outstanding issues. We look
forward to the continuation of that dialogue.

Regular and direct contact is an important
confidence-building measure to improve trust and allow
the parties to address the outstanding and contentious
issues.

We welcome the signing by the Serbian authorities
on 25 September of the technical protocol on the
implementation of the agreement on the joint
management of crossings. South Africa encourages
all sides to strengthen the dialogue process in order
to reach agreement on outstanding contentious issues,
including the difficulties being encountered in the
implementation of agreements already reached.

We are, however, concerned that the security
situation in northern Kosovo remains fragile. The
outbreaks of violence and increased tensions between
ethnic groups have a negative impact on efforts to
build an environment conducive to building peace and
national reconciliation. Both sides should work together
and exercise restraint to prevent violent confrontations
from occurring. Furthermore, we concur with the
Secretary-General that

"the peaceful integration of minority communities,
creation of conditions for sustainable returns and
laying the foundation for long-term reconciliation
among communities must remain priorities"
(S/2012/818, para. 53).

We are concerned that the number of returnees
remains much lower compared to previous years, It is
imperative that the parties work together to create safe
conditions on the ground to encourage the minorities
to return to their homes. It is equally important that
the rights of the minorities and their properties are
protected by law.

My delegation has noted with appreciation
the parties' determination to cooperate on the
reconstruction of some Serbian Orthodox Church sites
that were damaged. Such cooperation is a positive step.
However, we reiterate that security at religious sites
should be strengthened to protect them from the risk of
vandalism. Public reconciliatory pronouncements from
leaders on both sides are welcome and remain positive
contributions towards reconciliation.

Regarding the issue of missing persons, South Africa
welcomes the progress achieved so far in identifying
some of the remains, although the number of those still
missing remains high. The parties' commitment and
cooperation on this issue are commended. We remain
confident that, with the support of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and assistance from the International Committee of the
Red Cross, much progress can be made.

Regarding the allegations of organ trafficking, we
wish to reiterate our position that a credible, thorough,
impartial and independent inquiry into these allegations
should be conducted. We hope for tangible results from
the process that is already under way.

In conclusion, South Africa would like to express
our appreciation and support for the role of UNMIK
under the capable leadership of Mr. Farid Zarif in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999).

