Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We congratulate
Russia on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September. We would like
to thank you, Sir, for having convened this important
debate and inviting us to share our perspectives.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing on the
current state of the various reform initiatives of United
Nations peacekeeping. We would also like to join other
delegations in condemning the recent terrorist attacks
that killed many civilians in Burkina Faso, offer our
deep condolences to the bereaved families and express
our solidarity with the Government and the people of
Burkina Faso.

For over seven decades, peacekeeping has remained
the United Nations flagship contribution to international
peace, security and conflict resolution. Over our past
three decades of association with this noble cause, we
have been proud of the service and sacrifices of our
peacekeepers in the world's most vulnerable places.
We are committed to remaining equally responsive
to the United Nations call for participation in future
peacekeeping missions.

Peacekeeping is a dynamic enterprise having
evolved over time in the policy and operational domains
alike. Since 2017, there have been important changes
in United Nations peacekeeping through structural
reforms in the peace and security pillar of the United
Nations, as already mentioned by Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix. Essentially, the actors in the field
have had to adapt to many resultant drivers of change in
order to cope with the shifting priorities and challenges.
The stakeholders concerned, including the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Secretariat and host countries, have shown certain
degrees of flexibility, adaptability and resilience to
build meaningful partnerships across divergent views.
In going forward, the concepts of review and reforms
must hinge on the notion of meaningful cooperation
and partnership. We must utilize various institutional
mechanisms within the United Nations system for
informed dialogue among all stakeholders to steer the
reform initiatives forward in a coherent and sustainable
manner. In our view, such dialogue must be strengthened
and should take place at regular intervals.

We support the efforts to implement the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We
appreciate the Secretariat's efforts in conducting
a gap analysis and stress the need for in-depth and
focused conversations involving all stakeholders
on the proposed way ahead in narrowing the gaps.
We also appreciate the circulation of a leaflet this
morning summarizing the progress and achievements
made so far in the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiatives. We are happy to note that in
some missions this initiative has resulted in advancing
lasting political solutions and facilitating transition.
There have been commendable achievements in the
areas of women and peace and security, performance,
safety and security of peacekeepers, and improving
peacekeeping partnerships.

Bangladesh also appreciates the initiatives taken
to strengthen the conduct of peacekeeping personnel.
In this connection, let me reiterate our commitment to
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina's policy ofzero tolerance
for any kind of sexual exploitation, harassment or
abuse in peacekeeping operations. In line with this
policy, Bangladesh takes any issues relating to sexual
harassment very seriously and has consistently
integrated this perspective into all predeployment
training for peacekeepers.
We have already expressed our interests in
championing some areas, including the protection of
civilians, women and peace and security, and reducing
the environmental impacts of peacekeeping operations
in the field. We have also contributed our part to building
consensus around aligning the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations report structure with the A4P
priority areas.

On the protection-of-civilians front, our
peacekeepers have achieved a great reputation in some
ofthe most challenging situations. In the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, for example, the engagement of our peacekeepers
with the community is very deep and friendly. They
are supporting political processes, protecting human
rights, facilitating humanitarian assistance, providing
medical care and raising awareness about health and
hygiene. Where hopes and aspirations are on the
brink, these noble initiatives undoubtedly have far-
reaching impacts in winning the hearts and minds of
the people. On reducing environmental footprints,
we are co-chairing with Italy the group of friends for
leading on environmental management in the field. We
reckon that good practices for limiting peacekeepers'
environmental footprints will also contribute to
enhancing their image as responsible and sensitive
actors in the communities they serve.

Despite our sincere efforts, the safety and security
of peacekeepers in the field remain a serious concern.
According to the Department for Peace Operations,
there have been a total of 236 fatalities due to acts
of violence since January 2013. We express our deep
condolences to the families of those heroes who lost
their lives away from their countries for a noble cause.

While we need to examine the direct causes for such
fatalities, we believe there needs to be improvement on a
range of issues - from rapid deployment to unimpeded
access for troops; from furthering our efforts to ensure
physical security to human intelligence gathering; and
from predeployment training on safety measures to
adequate medical support after injuries. We must also
be able to combat the emerging medical challenges
in peacekeeping missions, including myocardial
infarction and post-traumatic stress disorder. In
that regard, we would like once again to request the
members of the Council to explore the need for a
comprehensive resolution on ensuring the safety and
security of peacekeepers.

We cannot overemphasize the primacy of politics
for the success of peacekeeping operations, from
mandate setting to exit. If the political process falters,
vulnerability increases for civilians and peacekeepers
alike. We must therefore have an objective assessment
of conditions for sustaining peace on the ground to
determine the priorities and sequences of the mandate.
In that context, we cannot but reiterate the seminal
importance of meaningful triangular cooperation
and consultations among the Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.

That also raises the interlinkages between mandate
and performance. Our peacekeepers are generally keen
to facilitate effective mandate delivery. But, as one of
the major troop- and police-contributing countries, we
also expect the Council and other stakeholders to be
sufficiently responsive to voices and concerns coming
from the field. We support the notion of increased
accountability on the part of all peacekeeping actors
as espoused in the Comprehensive Performance
Assessment System. However, we would like to stress
that performance cannot be seen in isolation. Rather,
it may be seen in close relation to needs-based,
predictable resources and critical enablers specific to
each peacekeeping mission.

Before I conclude, I would also like to emphasize
that the budget question remains crucial for the
success of peacekeeping reforms. Doing more with
less is an unsustainable prescription in potentially
dangerous operational situations. There must be
structured consultations among the Council, troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
to rationalize widening gaps between expectations
and resources.

