The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.

At the outset, allow me to express my appreciation
to the members of the Council for the attention and
consideration that they have shown me during my
presence here in the past few days and for their
cooperation with my country's delegation in addressing
the human security challenges facing the international
community. I will also take, as the representative of the
United Kingdom said, deep reflection on the arcane ways
of the Council back with me when I return to Ottawa
later this afternoon. It certainly has been an experience
and I thank the Council for it.

Allow me, as well, to join with others in expressing
appreciation to Secretary-General Arman for his very
strong declaration and his continuing leadership in this
field. I particularly welcome Mr. Kellenberger for his
remarks, which not only set out very important ideas, but
vividly evoked the suffering endured by millions of war-
affected people whom his organization must deal with on
a daily basis.

The words of the Secretary-General and Mr.
Kellenberger underline very dramatically how the
victimization of civilians has become motive, means and
manifestation of modern armed conflict. It is a cruel
reality that none of us can ignore. In our increasingly
interconnected world, the insecurity of others sooner or
later becomes a matter of our own insecurity. This new

 

global context has, as a result, forged common interests and
common humanity into what I believe is a powerful
impetus for common action.

For Canada and our foreign policy, this has meant
putting a priority on people's security. It was the inspiration
behind the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, the impetus for the
creation of the International Criminal Court and the motive
for our efforts to address the proliferation of small arms
and the needs of war-affected children.

Advancing this human security agenda was also one
of the objectives that Canada set for itself in seeking a seat
on the Security Council. Some may recall that, last
February, during our first presidency, I came to the Council
to encourage it to make the protection of civilians in armed
conflict a primary concern in this Council's work.

Last fall, the Secretary-General presented a remarkable
report that pointed the way ahead and the Council
responded with resolution 1265 (1999) - its own
commitment for action - under the presidency of the
Netherlands. Today, the Council will take action that gives
further coherence to this activity and that effectively sets a
new course for the Council in defending the safety of
people. The Secretary-General's report was a blueprint for
action. The draft resolution we will adopt today is a
handbook. Most importantly, the text before us entrenches
the principle that, in the pursuit of peace, the security of
people is at least as worthy a subject as the security of
States. In both spirit and letter, the draft resolution provides
the basis for Council concern and action for this purpose.

This does not mean that the State is obsolete. On the
contrary. As the representative of the United Kingdom
pointed out in his very eloquent statement, human security
does not weaken sovereignty, but strengthens it by
reinforcing democratic, tolerant, open institutions and
behaviour that do protect people. For another thing, the
State remains the most powerful instrument for pursuing
collective action.
It does, however, reflect a shift in the perspective of
this Council, where the security of people is no longer a
by-product, but is increasingly becoming a central tenet of
the Council's work. The text before us calls attention to
specific human security threats that require action. This is
important because consciousness itself stimulates
conscience. We need to know before we can act. Recent
Council debates on issues of direct concern to the safety of
people have served this purpose very well: on conflict
prevention, sponsored by Slovenia; on small arms,
initiated by the Netherlands; on the protection of United
Nations and humanitarian workers, under the direction of
Argentina; on war-affected children, chaired by Namibia;
on the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Africa, presided over by the United States;
and, of course, on the broad humanitarian aspects of
issues, which was brought before the Council by the
representative of Bangladesh.

The draft resolution pulls together many of these
strands and highlights, with particular emphasis, the
special needs of women and children in conflict, the
importance for unhindered humanitarian access to conflict
zones, the protection of refugees in their camps and the
pursuit of those who violate security. In so doing, it
creates an obligation and responsibility for the Council to
shape its work accordingly.

The text before us also moves forward Council
practices in the defence of people. In the last year, new
peacekeeping missions have been deployed in Kosovo,
East Timor and Sierra Leone, each with a robust and
explicit mandate to facilitate humanitarian efforts and to
offer direct protection to civilians. The text before us
reinforces this very crucial statement and responsibility of
the Council.

There is also a movement to adapt the use of
sanctions so that they can enhance, rather than diminish,
the safety of people. The Council's decision Monday to
create an informal working group to provide concrete
reform proposals and its action yesterday to strengthen the
Angola sanctions regime are, again, positive signs that
there is a new direction appearing and that we are
building. The provisions of the draft resolution advance
these practices with further procedural references to
peacekeeping, the use of sanctions and information-
sharing between the Security Council and the United
Nations system and its members.

Council members would be the first to agree that
neither they, nor anybody else, has a monopoly when it
comes to protecting civilians in armed conflict. In
response, this draft resolution links Council practice to
initiatives elsewhere - such as the landmines campaign
and efforts to prosecute war criminals - that promote
human security. For example, with regard to war-affected
children, there is considerable momentum for global
action. In January, as many have noted, there was an
international agreement on raising the age at which young

 

people can be deployed in combat. Later this month, Ghana
and Canada will host a conference in Accra to catalyse
efforts in the West African region on the protection of war-
affected children. In September, Canada will host an
international conference bringing together Governments,
international agencies and civil society to develop a global
plan of action. This will provide a basis for the work on the
special session on children over which the representative of
Jamaica will be presiding next year. Council engagement in
these areas can go a long way towards complementing the
impact of these initiatives. They work in complementary
fashion.

In sum, the text before us conveys this basic message:
people - not just States - are subjects of global relations,
and the security and basic rights of people - not merely
the absence of military conflict between States - are
fundamental to world stability and peace. Coming from the
Security Council, this is a powerful message of change for
the United Nations and the international community.

However, it is clearly not a message without
considerable challenges, nor one that has been met with
undiluted enthusiasm, as we have seen. Those who have
suffered under colonialism and other outside involvement
in their countries might well be skeptical. However,
preventing abuse, stopping atrocities and dealing with the
impact of war are also their issues, pertaining to their
realities and clearly affecting stability in their regions.
Others argue that the promotion of human security diverts
attention and funds from the more basic priority of
development. But far from being mutually exclusive, human
security and human development are just opposite sides of
the same coin. It is hard to devote resources to improving
the gross national product when they are being spent to
repair the ravages of war. Freedom from fear is an
indispensable precursor to freedom from want. The two go
together.

Translating human security principles into practice also
means grappling directly with difficult, highly charged
subjects, being active in difficult, intractable conflicts where
human suffering is great and taking action in difficult
circumstances when the use of military force may be
necessary to alleviate extreme abuse. No one in any way
diminishes the difficulty and complexity of these kinds of
initiatives.

There has been progress; we have seen it. But frankly,
there have also been setbacks. Resistance to taking robust
Council action last year in Kosovo, reticence in dealing
openly in this Council with issues related to internally
displaced people and reluctance by the Council to become
more engaged in certain conflicts that take a relentless
and appalling toll on human life all make clear the need
for improvement.

There are, finally, some very practical considerations
in promoting human security. Council decisions aimed at
protecting the safety of people are only as good as our
ability to carry them out. This is no secret. For the most
part, we know what is needed - faster, more resolute
and more effective response. Ultimately, this takes
political will and the application of considerable
resources. Neither is inexhaustible, and the willingness of
the international community to commit them is still an
open question.

To be sure, work by the Council to promote human
security remains a work in progress. It is work that
should continue, because human security, including the
security of civilians, must not be an issue that is
considered just once or twice a year. This draft resolution
will ensure that it becomes an integral part of the
Council's deliberations each and every time it considers
action - that, in effect, human security is hardwired into
the Council's operations.

Our discussions over the last few days - on the
Rwanda genocide, the Angolan conflict, the general use
of sanctions and the protection of civilians in armed
conflict - point to immediate concerns that need Council
focus. They also suggest that the Council's hardwiring
needs to be part of a system-wide rewiring. Growing
threats such as the abuse, trafficking and proliferation of
small arms; emerging trends such as the increasing role
of non-State actors, both in perpetuating war and
promoting peace; and new and complex human security
challenges in specific areas like the Horn of Africa,
including Sudan, where a confluence of natural disasters
and man-made
warfare. especially the relentless and systematic targeting of
civilians, results in extreme human suffering - these all
require a global system that is appropriately programmed to
respond.

The Millennium Assembly offers an occasion to put
concern and action for human security and safety where it
belongs: at the very centre of the United Nations system.
The Council's action today is a step in this direction,
providing leadership and renewed meaning to the principles
of the Charter and giving renewed hope to the peoples for
whom this Organization was founded.

The meeting was suspended at 2.15 p.m.
