Ms. Gallardo (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the delegation of El Salvador,
Mr. President, we would like to say how gratified we
are to see you presiding over the Council for the month
of October. We are also grateful to you for giving us
the opportunity to speak on this topic, which is of such
great importance and concern for all members of the
international community.

At the end of the general debate during the
present session of the General Assembly, it was clear
that one of the priorities of each and every State is
national, regional and international security. For all of
us threats and challenges have gained a global
dimension, with no frontiers or limits to their
destructive forces, and are having a tremendous impact
on the political, social and economic order of our
peoples. Those global challenges surpass the capacity
of individual States to address and, therefore, require a
consistent, coordinated and comprehensive response
from a multilateral perspective.

The scope and impact of terrorist acts committed
in recent years in the United States, Spain, Russia,
Indonesia and the Middle East, among others,
demonstrate the reality of terrorism as a permanent
threat to all nations. We are thus compelled to further
strengthen all possible anti-terrorism cooperation
mechanisms at the bilateral, subregional, regional and
global levels.

El Salvador cannot hold back from or ignore the
importance of the fight against terrorism and the efforts
that are being made to establish a safer, more stable
world, particularly from the standpoint of collective
security. In that regard, my country, having lived
through a civil conflict in the 1980s in which violence
and terrorism had a tremendous impact on the
Salvadoran people, cannot forget that our commitment
to the international community impels us to seek all
initiatives and mechanisms designed to prevent
violence. We are convinced that the security and
stability of the nation is an essential prerequisite for
the implementation of a national development plan
aimed at improving living conditions for the
population.

El Salvador supports all measures and initiatives
to promote the goals mentioned earlier, and in that
regard and in keeping with our capacities and resources
we have implemented the commitments and
undertakings that we have committed ourselves to
within the framework Organization of American States
and the United Nations to combat international
terrorism in all its manifestations. El Salvador is a
party to the Inter-American Convention Against
Terrorism. We have participated actively in the work of
the Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism. We
also hosted the third session of that Committee in
January 2003.

We must emphasize that security in the
hemisphere is a priority for the countries in our region,
and we try to strengthen it by promoting measures to
increase mutual confidence and security. That is why
we participated with great alacrity - and in order to
acquire more experience in the area - in the special
conference on hemispheric security held in Mexico in
October 2003. That meeting elaborated a
multidimensional approach to traditional and new
threats, ranging from human security to State security
and including aspects of democratic and cyber security.
In addition, at the Ibero-American level, El Salvador
ratified the Ibero-American convention against
terrorism. Within the United Nations context, of the
existing 12 anti-terrorism conventions and protocols,
El Salvador has ratified 11, and we are in the process
of ratifying the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material.

Turning to the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), which established the CTC and set out its
mandate, El Salvador has taken the necessary measures
to comply with it. For example, we have submitted
four national reports and are about to hold a meeting to
determine what cooperation we need in order to fully
comply with the recommended measures to fight
terrorism.

At the national level in El Salvador, we have
created an Inter-Institutional Group Against Terrorism
to coordinate national efforts and contribute to
preparing the CTC reports. This institution will be
important in following up, evaluating and
recommending the measures and strategies for
combating terrorism that our Government considers
timely. Currently, the Inter-Institutional Group is
working on drafting a special law against terrorism that
will directly link our national legislation with the
international conventions and protocols adopted on this
issue.
At the Central American level, we are following
up on the Central America's united declaration against
terrorism adopted in September 2001, to examine and
adopt coordinated measures to promote the fight
against this scourge. Far from duplicating initiatives, it
is about cooperating on the commitments and
objectives established in the implementation of the
Central American Democratic Security Model, created
in 1995, which is followed up and coordinated by the
secretariat for the Central American Integration
System.

As regards the efforts of our Organization in
combating terrorism, it has been said that the United
Nations contribution has been negatively affected by
the imposition of some mandates and programmes and
by certain deficiencies in the general response and in
specific mandates, as well as in the amount of
resources assigned to carry out these measures. This
situation was reflected and acknowledged in the
advisory group's report on the United Nations and
terrorism. This situation, we feel, must be examined
substantively and in depth in order to make any
necessary changes and thus meet the expectations of
States.

In this regard, we feel that in order to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of United Nations efforts
against terrorism, we need to rely on the following
elements. The United Nations must be a coordinating
centre of the fight against terrorism. Its mandate should
promote an ongoing multilateral effort, and it should
implement a coordinated policy between United
Nations organizations and national, regional and global
organizations, as seen in resolution 1566 (2004).
Multilateral action should be unified, coherent and
consistent, with a joint vision that must be evaluated
periodically in order to introduce any corrections that
are necessary in the fight against terrorism.

We must examine and rationalize mandates and
the use of resources to be more effective in our anti-
terrorism goals. We therefore support the establishment
of a unit within the United Nations system to centralize
decision-making in an ongoing and impartial manner. It
is important that technical assistance and cooperation
between Member States in the fight against terrorism,
particularly as regards developing countries, be more
practical and expedient, so as to improve the capacity
of those countries.

We share the Secretary-General's view contained
in his report on the work of the Organization that
combating terrorism:
"must not take place at the expense of the
fundamental freedoms and the basic dignity of
individuals. Success in defeating terrorism can
come only if we remain true to those values
which terrorists eschew." (A/59/1, para. 77)

In my delegation's opinion, it would be extremely
worthwhile and important to create a group of eminent
personalities with a mandate to prepare a report on the
reasons and causes that drive people to commit
terrorist acts. Through that diagnosis of reality,
hopefully measures corresponding to that reality can be
adopted.

I would like to conclude by pointing out two
issues that in our opinion are fundamental and
complementary. From the United Nations perspective,
we support the efforts under way to draft a
comprehensive convention on terrorism and an
international convention concerning the suppression of
nuclear terrorism, which would formally complete the
international legal framework for fighting terrorism.
We deem timely the holding of a high-level conference
under the auspices of the United Nations to formulate
an organized joint response to terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, which would bring us closer to a
definition of terrorism and of the difference between
terrorism and the right to self-determination.

Finally, we feel that the security and stability of
every State can be better guaranteed if the fight against
terrorism is complemented with efforts to eliminate the
structural causes that lead to desperation and to the
formation of radical positions within societies.

In order to comply with the purposes and
principles established in the Charter to promote
friendly and cooperative relations among States,
including the fundamental principle of respect for
human dignity, my country reiterates its full
commitment to you, Mr. President.

