Mr. Zebari (Iraq): On Tuesday, 1 June, the
people of Iraq took the first step towards regaining
their full sovereignty and independence. United
Nations special envoy Lakhdar Brahimi supervised the
introduction of a new interim Iraqi Government to
assume authority on 30 June, which marks a major
success in Iraq's transition towards democracy and
towards ending the legal occupation of our country.

The formation of the interim Government was the
result of an extensive consultation process promoted by
Mr. Brahimi, who, despite the security constraints,
travelled throughout Iraq to solicit the views of all
sectors of Iraqi society. Over the past months, the
Secretary-General's special envoy, the Iraqi Governing
Council and the Coalition Provisional Authority were
engaged in an exercise of broad national consultation
that included public meetings and that reached out to
tribal, religious and community leaders, political
parties from inside and outside the Governing Council,
prominent individuals and women's groups, among
others. The selection of the interim Government was
based on merit and qualifications, with an element of
political and social balancing. While it represents the
vast majority of the people of Iraqi society, it would
have been impossible to include the more than 400
political parties and associations that have
mushroomed to date in the new and free Iraq.

I would like to thank the United Nations, Member
States and Secretary-General Kofi Annan for their
support and assistance in the formation of the interim
Government. I am grateful in particular for the ongoing
efforts of Mr. Brahimi, who has been an excellent
facilitator in achieving this successful outcome.

This process, in our view, was reasonably
legitimate and decent. We cannot say that it was totally
perfect, but I think the outcome will prove in the days
ahead to have been the best there could be under the
current circumstances.

Today I would urge the continued support of the
international community through the adoption of a new
draft Security Council resolution to endorse the
establishment of the sovereign interim Government. I
urge the Council to adopt such a draft resolution as
soon as possible, to support the ongoing political
process, reaffirm the need for Iraq to control its own
resources and recognize Iraq's need for the continued
presence of a multinational force in partnership with
the Iraqi authorities.

We strongly welcome and encourage adoption of
the positive text of the draft resolution, now under
consideration, and hereby present our views and
proposed amendments so that the draft resolution may
correspond more fully to the wishes and aspirations of
the Iraqi people. Iraq's views must be represented and
heard by all, as this draft resolution will be an
endorsement of the democratic process that the Iraqi
people have chosen to pursue, and as it is their interests
that lie at the heart of it.

We seek a new and unambiguous draft resolution
that underlines the transfer of full sovereignty to the
people of Iraq and their representatives. The draft
resolution must mark a clear departure from Security
Council resolutions 1483 (2003) and 1511 (2003),
which legitimized the occupation of our country. By
removing the label of occupation we will deprive the
terrorists and anti-democratic forces of a rallying point
to foment violence in our country.

We expect that the draft resolution will endorse a
genuine and comprehensive transfer of power on 30
June. This means investing full authority in the interim
Government to run Iraq's affairs, make its own
decisions and have authority over Iraq's security
matters. This transfer of sovereignty must also
authorize the interim Government to control,
administer and manage Iraq's resources and assets. Iraq
must have a leading role in mechanisms agreed upon
by the Security Council to monitor disbursement of its
resources.

We recognize that the formation of the interim
Government is a milestone in the broader political
process as defined in the 15 November agreement,
which I presented to the Council in December 2003. In
that respect, the Transitional Administrative Law,
which defines the interim law during this transitional
period, is fundamental to the political process. From
now until the end of 2005, the Transitional
Administrative Law will be the only legal framework
and the interim arrangement that reflects the wishes of
the majority of the Iraqi people for a free, united and
democratic Iraq.

Principles enshrined in the Transitional
Administrative Law reflect Iraq's path of reform and
democratization; the Law regulates the working of the
interim and transitional Governments. Our brothers in
the League of Arab States welcomed the passing of the
Transitional Administrative Law, and we urge the
Security Council to endorse and acknowledge this
important and historic document.

The continued support of the United Nations for
the political process is critical to help us meet the
challenges ahead. Here, I would like to outline further
steps taken to ensure a more inclusive process.

In order to further broaden participation, there are
plans to hold a national conference - hopefully in July
2004 - to allow all those parties and individuals who
wish to be represented to have their say in the

democratic process. A preparatory committee has
already been identified for the conference. An electoral
commission has also been established to supervise
elections, with the help and support of experts from the
United Nations. Part of the mandate of the caretaker
Government is to work closely with the United Nations
and its agencies to prepare for general elections to be
held in 2005. To achieve this, we seek the continued
advice and support of the United Nations and call upon
the Member States to assist Iraq in ensuring security
conditions conducive to holding elections.

In this respect, we Iraqis are grateful to the
coalition that helped liberate us from the persecution of
Saddam Hussein's regime. We thank President Bush
and Prime Minister Blair for their dedication and
commitment to this mission and we recognize the
sacrifices of all coalition forces in helping the people
of Iraq realize a stable, free and democratic Iraq. We
must also recognize the sacrifices made by our people
in this noble cause. The overthrow of the former
regime led to the total collapse of the State and its
institutions and since April last year we have been
working very hard to re-establish Iraq's security,
military and police forces.

However, we have yet to reach the stage of being
able to maintain our own security and therefore the
people of Iraq need and request the assistance of the
multinational forces to work closely with Iraqi forces
to stabilize the situation. I stress that any premature
departure of international troops would lead to chaos
and the real possibility of a civil war in Iraq. This
would cause a humanitarian crisis and provide a
foothold for terrorists to launch their evil campaign in
our country and beyond our borders. The continued
presence of the multinational force will help preserve
Iraq's unity, prevent regional intervention in our affairs
and protect our borders at this critical stage of our
reconstruction.

It is an objective reality in Iraq today that we
require the continued assistance and partnership of
these troops, but we also need this presence to be
regulated under arrangements that compromise neither
the sovereignty of the interim Government nor the right
of the multinational force to defend itself. Iraqi forces
must be under Iraqi command, but operate in liaison
and partnership with the multinational force to achieve
this objective. The transitional Iraqi Government and
the new Iraqi interim Government must have a say in
the future presence of these forces and we urge that this
be reflected in the new draft resolution.

I would like to end by reminding the Security
Council of the spirit of cooperation in the process of
forming Iraq's new interim Government and the
significance of its establishment. Of the 32 ministers,
six are women, and the Government is the most
representative of the Iraqi people in the history of our
country. It is significant that the handover of power to
the new Government was peaceful and entailed none of
the bloodshed that has historically characterized the
transfer of power in our region.

During the complex process of deliberation that
preceded its formation, national reconciliation
conferences were held in Arbil and Baghdad that were
addressed by Special Adviser Brahimi. We are proud of
the willingness of all parties involved to compromise
and make neutral concessions for the greater good of a
better future for all Iraqis. The endorsement of Grand
Ayatollah Sistani also represents a very positive and
important signal from the highly respected religious
leader.

Political development in Iraq is progressive and
increasingly inclusive and we remain steadfastly
committed to the clear steps we must take towards
elections in 2005. Only by following this course will
we preserve Iraq's territorial integrity and unity and
realize a peaceful and prosperous country for our
people.

