Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on China's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for November. The United Kingdom wishes you very
good luck for the month.

I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for briefing the
Council on her sixteenth report on the situation in
Libya. The United Kingdom remains fully supportive of
the ICC's work in Libya to tackle impunity and ensure
that those responsible for the most serious crimes of
international concern there are held accountable.

The Prosecutor's latest report highlights once
again the troubling situation in Libya. The United
Kingdom has been clear that the status quo is not a
sustainable option. The continued political divisions
in Libya benefit no one except certain armed groups
bent on criminality that have created an environment
of lawlessness, intimidation and fear in which ordinary
Libyans continue to suffer.

The increasing violence in and around Tripoli
since August, and the ongoing sporadic violence that
has continued since the ceasefire on 4 September,
highlight this fact. Those innocent civilians, including
many children, deserve better. There is an urgent need
to break the political deadlock and bring peace to
Libya. To that end, it is vital for all parties to engage
in good faith with the United Nations-led political
process and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame'. We must ensure that all those
committing human rights violations and abuses in
Libya, including unlawful killings, do not evadejustice.

The United Kingdom has strongly supported
resolutions in the Human Rights Council on increasing
accountability and calling for those committing acts
in Libya amounting to war crimes or other breaches of
international humanitarian law to be investigated and
held accountable. We call on all parties to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court (ICC), including
through the execution of arrest warrants.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the Prosecutor's
update in the cases of Al-Qadhafi, Al-Werfalli and
Khaled, and notes that the Prosecutor's Office believes
that Al-Werfalli is no longer under detention by the
Libyan National Army and is currently at large in
Libya. The United Kingdom will continue to work
closely with other Member States, the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor-General's office
in the investigation of the appalling reports of crimes
against migrants, including those perpetrated by
militia and armed groups in Libya and those involving
international migrants transiting through Libya.

Those crimes allegedly include torture, killing,
sexual violence and even the enslavement of migrants.
We are deeply concerned that the number of migrants in
detention centres has continued to rise, and the United
Kingdom will continue to provide assistance to those
who find themselves in such centres. In response to the
heightened risk of trafficking and sexual and gender-
based violence in Libya, we have also provided specific
support to assist in the protection of women and girls.
We acknowledge the importance of the Office of the
Prosecutor integrating a gender perspective into its
work, based on the policy paper on sexual and gender-

based crimes.

The United Kingdom is a strong, principled
supporter of the ICC. We will continue to provide
our full support to the prosecutor and her team. It is
crucial that Member States and relevant international
organizations work to assist the Libyan authorities in
their efforts to build the rule of law in Libya. We, along
with our international partners, will continue to work
with Libya to provide it with the support it needs to
meet the challenges it faces.
