Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Sir, and to the members of the Council
for having decided - notwithstanding all the difficulties -
to hold this open debate today on the situation in East
Timor.

Allow me to recognize the presence of the Secretary-
General, the first advocate of human rights, democracy and
respect for freedom. Portugal praises his actions and his
firmness in guiding this process. I thank him for the
information he has just conveyed to the Council.

We fully support the statement that will be made by
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

I will get straight to the point. Portugal has repeatedly
requested at these meetings of the Security Council to
confront the Council with its responsibilities in managing
the appalling crisis in East Timor. I would be remiss if I
did not recall that under the Charter of the United Nations
this body has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. And there can be no
doubt that international peace and security are being
threatened in East Timor.

The people of East Timor have spoken and their
wishes have not been respected. This is totally
unacceptable.

The rape of East Timor has taken place before our
eyes. Over the last week the situation in the territory has
been steadily getting worse. Step by step the "militias" -
in fact, a mere extension of the Indonesian security forces
on the ground - have been slaughtering people, looting
property and destroying all public buildings in the capital
city of Dili. This is a clear demonstration that under the
disguise of democracy and the rule of law we are
confronting, in reality, the ugly face of military abuse and
bad faith.

This organized and premeditated campaign of terror
has already forced tens of thousands of people to flee to the
mountains, while others have been herded up and sent to
West Timor and other destinations outside the territory. We
do not know what is happening to these people, but there
are reasons to fear the worst. As a result, the territory is
going through a severe humanitarian catastrophe that
needs to be addressed immediately. The tragedy of East
Timor is no different from those of Rwanda or Kosovo in
its human dimension. In this regard, and following
Indonesia's security guarantees, I would like to appeal to
all United Nations humanitarian agencies and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to step up their
efforts to assist all those in need.

Nothing seems to be off-limits to the so-called
militias. Bishop Belo, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, was
attacked twice within 24 hours and was forced to seek
refuge in Australia, and now he is in Portugal. An
undetermined number of nuns and priests, including the
Bishop's personal assistant, have reportedly been killed in
cold blood. The Bishop of Baukau was also forced to flee
from his residence. One wonders whether there is also an
element here of religious persecution at work against the
people of East Timor, the majority of whom profess
Catholicism.

At this grave moment, I would like, on behalf of my
Government, to thank you, Mr. Secretary-General, and
through you all United Nations staff that diligently and in
an exemplary manner carried out their tasks under the
most arduous circumstances.

The Secretary-General has extensively and
continuously briefed members of the Security Council on
the situation of the East Timorese and particularly that of
the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET).
Needless to say, those who are trying to expel UNAMET
from East Timor are, in fact, trying to force the United
Nations out of the territory. As hard to believe as this is,
elements of the security forces of a Member State of the
United Nations have been carrying out this action. This is
a very dangerous precedent to set. Never in the history of
the Organization have institutions of one Member State so
clearly and blatantly attempted through violence to
destroy a process organized and conducted by the United
Nations.

The United Nations cannot afford to - and it must
not - once again intervene in a conflict only to stand by
helplessly while the process then loses its way. Indeed, at
this stage it is also the Organization's credibility that is at
stake. The people of East Timor truly believed with open
hearts in the United Nations; they were told they should
register to vote; they were told they could vote freely and
in security; they were urged to vote. And, indeed, in
accord with the extremely compressed timetable requested

 

by the Indonesian Government, they answered with
remarkable courage, civility and democratic spirit.

In reality, the popular consultation ended by allowing
those who oppose this process to identify others who
favoured democracy and independence for East Timor -
in fact about 80 per cent of the population - and deal with
them in the harshest possible terms. Xanana Gusmao, who
was not even authorized to campaign for his cause, was
only spared because he was in Jakarta and, when finally
released, had to take refuge in a foreign embassy to protect
his life.
After all the assurances given to the United Nations by
the Indonesian authorities and to the Timorese people
through the United Nations presence on the ground, we just
cannot walk out, turn our backs and leave the East
Timorese dying on their own. This is crucial. It is our legal
and ethical obligation to protect the East Timorese. The
people of East Timor expect no less and deserve as much.

The decision of the Security Council to dispatch a
mission to Jakarta has unfortunately not had the slightest
influence on restraining the outrageous actions that are
taking place in East Timor. On the contrary, while the
members of the Council mission were travelling to Jakarta,
the situation in East Timor continued to deteriorate even
further. This mission, which the Portuguese Government
had called for before the announcement of the results of the
popular consultation without a positive reply from the
Council, continues to have our full support. We praise the
members of the Council who are part of the mission, and
we expect that they had complete freedom of movement so
that they can give us a complete assessment of the situation
on the ground.

What has to be done? Clearly, the first priority is to
make sure that Indonesia complies fully and immediately
with all its obligations under the 5 May Agreements and
international humanitarian law. To this end, the Council
should take action to ensure that Indonesia immediately
takes concrete and verifiable steps to stop the killings and
restore order to East Timor; immediately takes action to
stop the forced dislocation of the civilian population and
create the conditions for their safe return; immediately
allows unimpeded access by all United Nations
humanitarian agencies and the International Committee of
the Red Cross to provide relief to internally displaced
persons and to all those in need; immediately creates the
necessary security conditions to allow UNAMET to fulfil
its mandate and to allow United Nations staff temporarily
relocating to do so in conditions of safety and security;
ceases the harassment of UNAMET by the militias and
elements of the security forces; guarantees the security
and physical integrity of those East Timorese who were
forced to seek refuge inside the UNAMET compound;
and takes all necessary steps in order to arrest all those
responsible for the violence in East Timor.

However, it is clear that Indonesia has been
unwilling to fulfil its responsibilities and should not,
therefore, continue to refuse international assistance in
dealing with the situation. Indeed, nobody else is to be
blamed for what is happening in East Timor but Indonesia
itself and in particular the military authorities in the
territory who are directly responsible for the maintenance
of law and order. Indonesia has to realize that by
continuing to refuse the immediate establishment of a
multinational force under the mandate of the United
Nations, it is assuming full and sole responsibility for the
massacres being perpetrated in the territory. The time has
clearly come for Indonesia to accept help from the
international community.

We urge the Indonesian Government to immediately
agree to the sending of an international force. General
Wiranto, who is directly responsible for the enforcement
of martial law, has suggested today that Indonesia would
agree to the acceleration of sending an international
military force to East Timor. We do hope that these are
not empty words.

As the Secretary-General stressed yesterday and
again this morning, if the Indonesian Government refuses
to accept such a force it cannot escape responsibility for
what could amount to crimes against humanity. In any
event, he added, those responsible for these crimes must
be called to account. We are very pleased that the
Security Council yesterday endorsed the Secretary-
General's statement. Indeed, the Secretary-General has
indicated the road this Council should follow.

Again yesterday we again witnessed a brutal and
cowardly attack on the UNAMET compound and on the
East Timorese taking refuge there. All of this occurred
before the eyes of the world and in clear defiance of
repeated appeals by you, Mr. President, on behalf of this
body. This is clear proof that, even after the establishment
of martial law and the replacement of the troops on the
ground, the situation remains unchanged.

We strongly appeal to Indonesia to identify, detain
and bring to justice all those responsible for the atrocities
being committed in East Timor, because a strong message

 

that crime does not pay needs to be sent. I would like to
point out that long before the vote Portugal and the United
Nations repeatedly asked the Indonesian Government to
curb the activities of the militias. In this regard, we
continue to encourage all efforts by the international
community to identify the culprits now Violating
international law in East Timor. Indeed, we expect all
Member States to cooperate fully in this task, because we
believe there should be no safe haven for murderers.
Portugal is already working in this direction.

We would also like to recall Indonesia's request, under
the 5 May Agreements, to the Secretary-General to
maintain an adequate United Nations presence in East
Timor during the interim period between the conclusion of
the popular consultation and the transfer of authority in East
Timor to the United Nations. We urge Indonesia to abide
by its commitments.

Portugal has persistently demonstrated its unwavering
commitment to find an internationally acceptable solution
for the question of East Timor through the free and fair
consultation of the East Timorese people, as defined by the
5 May Agreements. My Government will continue to work,
and is ready to work, within the framework of the 5 May
Agreements and under the guidance of the Secretary-
General, for a successful transition towards the
independence freely chosen by the people of East Timor.
Portugal remains fully committed to assist this process with
all the means at its disposal.

In this context, my Government stands ready to
support financially and with human resources any action of
the international community that is agreed upon to ensure
the re-establishment of peace, security and order in East
Timor. We demand that the Indonesian Government join
efforts with the international community in order to take all
the necessary steps to achieve this aim. Portugal has been
persistently working towards this goal and Portugal stands
ready to do what ever it takes for as long as it takes to
achieve it.

On 30 August 1999, the Security Council expressed its
support for the courage of those East Timorese who turned
out in record numbers to express their views. I am quoting
from a formal statement by the President of the Security
Council (S/PRST/ 1999/27) in which the Council also
declares that "It regards the popular consultation as an
accurate reflection of the views of the East Timorese
people", a people who unambiguously chose freedom,
independence, democracy and the rule of law.

Bishop Belo, quoted by his American biographer in
a book with a significant title, From the Place of the
Dead, says:

"I beg the outside world not to forget us. If this
happens, we are doomed."

I ask this Council to take action to make sure that
East Timor will become again a place for the living. This
Council must act, and act now.

