Mr. Lucas (Angola): Mr. Minister, we welcome
your presiding over this debate and the adoption of
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/l4) that you
have just read out on behalf of the Security Council
as a demonstration of the Council's support of and
commitment to Afghanistan. We also welcome the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto.
We thank him for his briefing and extend our praise and
support to UNAMA and its personnel, who are working
in extremely challenging conditions.

Two years after the establishment of the National
Unity Government, the situation in Afghanistan
remains unpredictable. Despite the remarkable advances
registered in the past 15 years and the genuine efforts
made by the Government to advance towards peace,
stability and national reconciliation, much remains
to be done. Among the many challenges facing the
country, the fight against poverty, the implementation
of political reforms, specifically the electoral system,
and the security situation remain sources of the utmost
concern. Tackling such challenges requires unity in
the country's leadership, cooperation and a spirit of
compromise in order to strengthen the Government's
capacity to implement much-needed reforms for the
benefit of the Afghan people.

Also of great concern is the increasingly volatile
situation in the country, the persistent security
challenges and the growing pressure from the political
opposition, which the ambassador of Afghanistan
describes as "part of a routine exercise of democratic
debate and a hallmark of our vibrant society, where
citizens express their views in accordance with their
democratic rights". This is remarkable progress in
Afghanistan's political development, to be maintained
and strengthened.

The security situation has not improved against the
backdrop of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces' engagement against the Taliban. Tersistent acts
of violence by terrorists, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, suicide bombings and other
forms of violence are the main causes of the ever-rising
numbers of civilian casualties.

UNAMA's semiannual report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan, released in
July, sheds grim light on the number ofcivilian casualties
victims of the conflict. The indiscriminate killing of
civilians deserves our most energetic condemnation,
and once again we urge all parties involved in the
conflict to respect their obligations under human rights
and international humanitarian law.

We praise NATO's decision, taken at the Warsaw
Summit, by which its members and contributors to the
Resolute Support Mission formalized the agreement on
the continuation of the mission in Afghanistan beyond
2016, a crucial decision considering the intensified
conflict in the country. It is widely understood that
sustained stability and prosperity in Afghanistan are
dependent on national reconciliation based on respect
for human rights and essential freedoms, on regional
and international cooperation, mutual respect and
non-interference in one another's internal affairs. The
Afghan Government's efforts in reaching out to its
neighbours and fulfilling its regional commitments,
mainly concerning security and economic issues, are
praiseworthy, as well as the Chinese initiative to hold
discussions on counter-terrorism measures in the context
of the Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination
Mechanism, comprising Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Tajikistan, which resulted in pledges by those countries
to strengthen coordination and information-sharing,
including border management.

Insecurity and deep-rooted discrimination against
women, in particular regarding their fundamental
rights and freedoms, are absolutely unacceptable.
We took note of the statement by the Ambassador of
Afghanistan that

"women [are] increasingly assuming leadership
positions at different levels of Government. There
are more women in senior Government positions
now than at any other time in Afghan history".

It is our hope that this trend will be irreversible
and that women will occupy their rightful place in
Afghan society.

We welcome the Government's efforts to combat
violence against women and girls, and the approval
of the strategy and the action plan on the elimination
of violence against women for the period 2016-2020.
We encourage the Afghan Government to effectively
implement the measures laid out in the plan allowing
women to exercise their legitimate rights and
guaranteeing their protection.

In concluding, we wish to reiterate our support
to the Afghan Government in this extremely difficult
struggle against the forces of evil and darkness. The
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on
5 October and organized by the European Union
and the Government of Afghanistan, signals the
determination of the international community to
pursue efforts to help the Government and the people
of Afghanistan in a consistent manner to foster
self-reliance and accountability. It is vital that the
international community maintain its commitment
towards Afghanistan, taking into account the fact that
the future of the country depends upon the building
of a stable, safe, economically sound State free
from terrorism and criminal networks, with reliable
democratic institutions guaranteeing the rights and
duties of all Afghan citizens.
