Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and thank
the eminent briefers for their presentations.

Peru continues to follow with deep concern the
continuing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and
the serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation
there. Women and children, as is often the case in
savage conflicts such as the one that brings us together
this afternoon, are the most affected. The north-eastern
part of the country remains the focus of attention.
According to United Nations estimates, in just a few
days 180,000 cases of displacement were recorded, in
addition to the civilian deaths and injuries reported.

We commend the efforts under way by the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies to assist these
people, who are experiencing conditions of extreme
vulnerability. We also appreciate the efforts made at
the highest levels of Government by the United States
and the Russian Federation along with the authorities
of Turkey aimed at preventing any further deterioration
and to establish a ceasefire that we hope will prove to
be permanent.

The principle of the peaceful resolution of disputes,
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, is, in
this context, particular apt and relevant. At the same
time, we note that any reduction of tensions or other
arrangements, as well as the presence of foreign forces,
should always be temporary in nature and should not
trigger a de facto partition of the country.

We believe also that any initiative aimed at
ensuring the return to Syria of the millions of refugees
and internally displaced persons should be carried
out under internationally accepted parameters that
would guarantee, as has been said, that they take place
in a dignified, secure and voluntary manner. The
oversight work of the United Nations is therefore of
critical importance.

The emphasis placed on unfolding events in the
northeast part of Syria should not detract in any way
from the urgent need to tackle the humanitarian crises
looming in other parts of Syrian territory, and, as
noted by the Assistant Secretary-General, we deem it
imperative to continue pursuing efforts to ensure that
we can provide, without interruption, basic necessities
for the 68,000 internally displaced persons who
have taken shelter at the Al-Hol centre and for the
approximately 12,000 persons who are still languishing
in Rukban camp.

The presence here of the Director of UNMAS
also impels us to stress once again the importance of
continuing to mobilize the international community's
support for humanitarian demining and the clearing of
improvised explosive devices in Syria, which continue
to wreak havoc among the population and hamper the
delivery of aid and assistance.

Faced with the intensification of violence in
recent weeks and the devastating consequences for the
population, we cannot but recall the urgent need to make
headway towards a political solution based on resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). We therefore look forward to the holding of the
first meeting of the Constitutional Committee, which
we hope will help lead to Syrian reconciliation.

The Council must, inter alia, keep a close eye on
events on the ground with a view to maintaining the
ceasefire in Idlib and in the north-east of the country.
Any effort to bring about lasting peace will depend to
a large extent on preventing all these situations from
deteriorating into fresh human tragedies.

