Mr. Mardini: The International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) warmly welcomes this debate
on strengthening multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations. We know from our humanitarian work
in armed conflicts around the world how cooperation
among States is of critical importance the maintenance
of international peace and security. As guardians of
international humanitarian law, we also have our own
distinct relationships with States and have seen how
effective multilateralism can have a long-lasting impact.

The Geneva Conventions will celebrate their
seventieth anniversary next year. Adopted in 1949,
they have been universally ratified by States and are
at the core of international humanitarian law. To this
day, we see their impact on the ground. We know
not only that they are proof that multilateralism can
work, but that they are essential for multilateralism
to work. Today, I want to emphasize three points on
why international humanitarian law is key to better
upholding multilateralism and effectively addressing
today's global challenges.

First, international humanitarian law mitigates
suffering and the impact of armed conflict on people's
lives. Multilateral agreements among States develop
international humanitarian law to ensure that legal
limits are in place. For example, multilateral efforts
have secured humanitarian agreements on nuclear
weapons, chemical weapons, landmines and the arms
trade. Those rules save lives. Current multilateral
discussions on certain new weapons are essential to
keeping international humanitarian law up to speed
with the rapid developments in technology. Greater
State support for the implementation of and respect for
international humanitarian law can help prevent and
minimize human suffering in armed conflict.

Secondly, international humanitarian law regulates
and limits the methods and means of warfare. Today's
armed conflicts involve large numbers of States in
protracted regional conflicts in many parts of the world,
often working together in multilateral coalitions and
partnered operations. Multilateral military operations
must respect the rules that States have developed and
committed themselves to under the Geneva Conventions
and other components of international humanitarian
law. States supporting parties to armed conflict can
and should use their influence on the conduct of
hostilities to encourage greater respect for international
humanitarian law. They can do that, for example, by
embedding humanitarian rules into their own and their
partners' policies on targeting military objectives,
training soldiers and fighters and detaining adversaries.

Thirdly, international humanitarian law is
principled and people-centred. Under the Charter of
the United Nations, all people of the world and the
sovereign equality of States are given due consideration.
This people-centred View is core to international
humanitarian law, to principled humanitarian action
and to impartial humanitarian organizations like the
ICRC. Our work in reducing human suffering across
all conflict-affected communities is founded on the
principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence. Multilateral cooperation respecting
those principles and rules - agreed to by all States - is
necessary if humanitarian action is to be effective, so
that civilians can receive the support they are entitled
to under the Geneva Conventions.

International humanitarian law is integral to
multilateralism and multilateralism is integral
to international humanitarian law. These
rules 4 painstakingly developed by States over the
years - create important multilateral consensus on the
limits of violence, which can be used on the ground
every day to reduce human suffering and protect
essential infrastructure. These rules work best when
multilateralism works. People suffering in armed
conflicts need multilateralism that works. Our call
on the Security Council, on the upcoming seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, is to renew its
commitment to people, to international humanitarian
law and to multilateralism.

