Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): First of all, my
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2008/300, annex, enclosure) and for his briefing to the Council. We
welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and we thank him for his statement.

We have closely followed developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina over the six-month period
covered by the report. We are pleased to recognize the
important progress that has been made in several fields
of activity in the country, most notably efforts to
further stabilize the political and security situation,
including the agreement among the ruling parties on
police reforms and the passage of police reform laws in
mid-April, enabling the European Union to initial a
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the consensus and the ensuing
February decision of the Political Directors of the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board to give
priority to the entrenchment of the rule of law; the
adoption by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly of the law on the residence and movement of
aliens; and the better coordination and unity of efforts
among parties concerned in relation to cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

Regarding economic development, we are
encouraged by achievements as shown in the strong
revenue growth registered early this year, which has
resulted in a general government budget surplus. Also,
we welcome the various positive actions at different
levels towards a series of laws, as noted in the report.
In that connection, we commend the efforts of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's leaders to set their country back on
path of overall socio-economic development.

However, we note with concern renewed tensions
among political actors over the future constitutional
make-up of the country and the role and competencies
of the State, as well as statements calling for secession.
We are mindful of the comment made by Mr. Miroslav
Lajcak about the divisive, confrontational and self-

defeating character of the country's politics. This, in
our View, represents a major challenge to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement, which
guarantees the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore call upon the
parties to work together in a spirit of reconciliation, to
continue their patient search for a mutually acceptable
solution regarding an integrated, multi-ethnic State
made up of two entities, with guaranteed rights for the
Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats living there. It is important
that the constitutional reform process continue and be
based on the principles set out in the Dayton
Agreement. We also urge Bosnia and Herzegovina's
leaders to make concerted efforts to facilitate the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons to their
pre-war homes, with assurances that their basic needs
will be met, and to ensure dignified long-term living
conditions for those unable to return for one reason or
another. We also agree with the point raised by the
Indonesian delegation, that the integration of refugees
and internally displaced persons with the communities
in which they are living is very important in that
connection.

Finally, my delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to express our great appreciation for the
international community's assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in that country's regional and
international integration process. We also commend the
Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union for the important
roles in, and significant contributions to, the promotion
of the country's peace, security and development. All
that combined has proved to be essential not only for
Bosnia and Herzegovina but also for the Balkans and
Europe as a whole. Viet Nam supports all constructive
efforts to that end.

