Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): My delegation deems it
a distinct honour to see the Foreign Minister of a
neighbouring country member of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations, with which Indonesia enjoys
close and friendly relations, presiding over these
important deliberations.

It is indeed a great pleasure for my delegation to
participate in this open meeting of Security Council to
commemorate a real milestone event: the birth of East
Timor as a fully fledged sovereign and independent
nation. Indeed, this is a historic occasion that will be
forever etched in East Timor's history as a defining
moment, whereby its newly inaugurated President,
Xanana Gusmao, and the East Timorese Government
have become the masters of their people's destiny,
enabling them to follow the path to their chosen goals.

Allow me in particular to pay special tribute to
President Xanana Gusmao, who has already proven to
be a visionary statesman, particularly in valiantly
promoting reconciliation among the East Timorese
people and in committing himself to building a secure
and prosperous nation. Our congratulations also go to
the East Timorese people themselves on their
unstinting efforts to attain independence by democratic
means.

In reaching that objective, credit no doubt goes to
the effort of the Secretary-General and to the pivotal
role of the United Nations. We commend in particular
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), under the leadership of Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for assisting the people of East Timor
in the transition to independence.

For its part, my Government will continue to
extend its cooperation to the newly established United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
in its mandate to strengthen an environment for the
nation-building of East Timor. In this regard, the
international community should render its support to
the Governments of Indonesia and of East Timor in
realizing this objective.

Similarly, my Government is committed to
expanding bilateral relations with East Timor. It will
endeavour to find ways and means to explore new
areas of cooperation so as to inject greater vitality into
our bilateral relations. A significant step was taken in
that direction with the visit of President Megawati
Soekarnoputri to East Timor today, 20 May 2002, to
participate in the independence day celebration. This
has indeed added momentum to further building an
edifice of enhanced bilateral relations between our two
countries and towards realizing our commitment to
implementing forward-looking relations with East
Timor.

In that context, it is important that the
international community continue its support to help
East Timor become a solid and prosperous country,
which will in turn enhance the stability of the region as
a whole.

