Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council at this extremely important meeting. This
meeting is being held under grave circumstances that
have deteriorated more than ever before. They call for
an immediate intervention by this Council in order to
put an end to the Israeli acts of aggression and for the
Council to discharge its responsibilities.

We meet today a few days after the beginning of
the violent attack carried out by the occupation forces
in Ramallah, in particular against the compound of
President Arafat, and the remaining buildings of the
Palestinian Authority. You are well aware of the events
and well aware of the losses to life and property.

The aim is to undermine the Palestinian Authority
and Palestine's national security. This is happening at a
time when Israel is calling on the Palestinian Authority
to deter and stop the suicide bombings and violence.
What kind of logic is that? How can the Authority play
its role in maintaining security and deterring suicide
attacks when Israel is destroying the infrastructure of
the Palestinian security forces, apprehending and
killing its members?

Israel's justifications for its acts of aggression
against Ramallah and the Palestinian Authority
compound, using the pretext of the Palestinian
Authority's failure to stop the suicide bombings against
Israel, are totally unacceptable. First, the magnitude of
Israeli aggression - every time and particularly this
time - is totally disproportionate to the attacks carried
out by suicide bombers. Secondly, no proof has been
offered of any involvement by the Palestinian
Authority in instigating any suicide bombings, which
have been repeatedly condemned by the Authority.

We all reject terrorism and suicide bombings.
They take a toll in innocent lives. They are acts that are
totally proscribed by all religions and humanitarian
values. But we must stop now and wonder about the
reasons and the motives that would lead some groups
and individuals to carry out such acts. The answer is
simply that occupation, repression, attacks, killings, the
demolition of homes, closures and blockades all lead to
desperation and thus to acts of suicide. Those who have
lost everything, including a dignified life, do not care
about sacrificing their own lives, which are unvalued
by others. Violence on the Palestinian side is therefore
simply a reaction against the arbitrary occupation by
the forces of occupation. The spiral of violence thus
continues, and it is the innocent on both sides who
alone pay the price.

By carrying out repeated massacres and
confiscating Palestinian land, Israel proves beyond a
shadow of a doubt that it does not wish to travel the
path of peace or to accept the Quartet initiative. We
View Israel's action as an attempt to kill any serious
opportunity for movement towards a comprehensive
peace. We View it as an attempt to impede international
efforts to arrive at a peaceful settlement based on
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle of
land for peace. Destroying the Palestinian Authority's
infrastructure or harming its elected President, Yasser
Arafat, will not ensure Israel's security. To the
contrary, those actions will complicate the situation.

It is frustrating and disappointing to us that for
almost two years terrible treatment has been meted out
to the Palestinian people by the Israeli occupation
forces, without the Security Council taking any
tangible steps to put an end to the repression by the
occupation forces or to compel Israel to comply with
resolutions of international legality.

In that light, and in order for the Security Council
to retain its credibility, we believe that the very least
the Council should do today is to adopt a resolution
binding upon Israel, ordering it to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally from Ramallah and to
lift its siege against President Arafat and members of
the Palestinian Authority.

