Mr. Brammertz: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council on
the progress made by my Office towards the
completion of our mandate.
Some recent developments have shown
significant advances in establishing accountability for
the crimes committed during the wars in the former
Yugoslavia. Foremost among these, of course, is the
arrest of Ratko Mladie, who for 16 years evaded
capture and transfer to The Hague. The arrest is
significant on many levels. For victims of the crimes
alleged against Ratko Mladie, it is a long overdue
opportunity for redress. For the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), it removes one of
the last obstacles to holding accountable those most
responsible for the wartime atrocities in the former
Yugoslavia. For international criminal justice, it is a
welcome confirmation that accountability for war
crimes is not a fleeting interest, but an enduring value.

Serbia now has an important opportunity to help
the public understand why Ratko Mladie has been
arrested and why justice demands that he stand trial.
We thank the Serbian authorities for making the arrest,
and we particularly acknowledge the role played by the
National Security Council, the action team established
to track the fugitives and operatives from the security
services.

In our written report (S/2011/316, annex II) we
were critical of Serbia's efforts to locate the fugitives,
and we identified a number of operational
shortcomings for the Serbian authorities to address. We
urged them to translate their stated commitment to
arresting the fugitives into concrete action and visible
results. With the arrest of Ratko Mladie, Serbia has
taken a considerable step towards achieving that
objective. Serbia has met one of its key obligations to
the Tribunal and simultaneously acknowledged the rule
of law as a central building block for its future.

While the arrest of Ratko Mladie is an excellent
result, the fact remains that he was at large for 16
years. That raises troubling questions about how it was
possible for this individual to elude the substantial
resources of a State for so many years. We welcome
the Serbian Government's statement that it will
investigate and prosecute the networks that supported
Ratko Mladic' during his time in hiding. We also
welcome the Government's expressed determination to
expose and punish any State official who assisted him.
We ask the Serbian Government to follow through on
those undertakings as a matter of priority.

We also ask the Serbian Government to continue
the operational improvements that led to Ratko

Mladie's arrest. The recommendations set out in my
report for strengthening Serbia's fugitive-tracking
efforts remain valid. We want the remaining ICTY
fugitive - Goran HadZic' - apprehended without
further delay.

When it comes to our ongoing trial and appeal
proceedings during this reporting period, Serbia has
promptly provided access to the documents and
archives we have requested. The Serbian National
Council for Cooperation with the Tribunal continued to
promote cooperation among the different Government
bodies handling requests from our office. Similarly, we
received prompt and adequate responses from Bosnia
and Herzegovina to our requests to access documents
and Government archives.

From Croatia in general, timely and adequate
responses were received concerning our requests for
witnesses and evidence. However, during the reporting
period, limited progress was made in locating the
missing military documents concerning Operation
Storm. Nevertheless, on 15 April the Trial Chamber
rendered its judgement in the Gotovina et al. case and
found that the crimes against Gotovina and Markac
were proven based on the evidence submitted at trial. It
is, however, unfortunate that in the aftermath of the
judgement, the highest State officials failed to
comment objectively on the outcome of the case.

From cooperation, I move to another core
development: the progress of our trials and appeals. In
this reporting period, we have finalized a large
component of our trial work. We have completed the
presentation of the Prosecution's case-in-chief in all
but three cases. We must now add the Mladic' case to
that list. As the focus of our attention turns towards the
appellate phase of proceedings, we are positioning
ourselves to deal effectively with the intense appellate
caseload on the horizon.

We are also making steady progress towards
implementing the Security Council's resolution 1966
(2010 establishing the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are conscious
of the dates that have been set for the Residual
Mechanism to begin taking over the ICTY's remaining
work, and we are assisting our Registry colleagues
with the necessary preparations. We are also working
together with our counterparts at the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to ensure a coordinated
and efficient structure for the two prosecution offices
of the Mechanism.

As we approach the completion of our mandate,
staffing issues remain a significant concern. Staff
attrition is now a sharp reality, leaving our remaining
staff members to shoulder unrealistically heavy
burdens. Retaining our key staff will become a growing
problem for us in the next reporting period.

A further reflection that we are nearing the end of
our work is our intensifying focus on supporting
national war crimes prosecutions. It is a positive
development to see prosecution offices in the region
taking over responsibility for making sure that the
crimes committed during the war are punished.
However, cooperation among prosecutors in the region
must be a priority in order to resolve problems such as
parallel investigations. In July, we expect that an
agreement will be signed between Bosnia and Serbia to
improve the situation. We hope that increased
cooperation between Bosnia and Serbia will also lead
to more effective efforts to apprehend Radovan
Stankovie, who remains at large nearly four years after
escaping from prison in Foca.

Improvements in regional cooperation will
depend on strong national war crimes strategies in each
country. We are deeply concerned by recent political
initiatives in Bosnia and Herzegovina that sought to
undermine the work of the State Prosecutor's Office
and the State war crimes court.

In conclusion, over the past six months we have
made great strides towards the successful completion
of our mandate. The long-awaited arrest of Ratko
Mladic' stands out as one of the most significant
developments, and we are committed to moving ahead
expeditiously with his trial. At the same time, we ask
the international community to ensure that we have the
resources needed to complete our work. We also call
upon Governments in the former Yugoslavia to support
our work and to use it as a platform for promoting
reconciliation in the region.

