Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in French): I join my colleague, the representative of the
Russian Federation, in what he has just stated in such
a dignified matter with regard to behaviour by certain
Council members towards me. Having said that, since
the three musketeers, the advocates of a system aimed
at sowing moral confusion, have left the Chamber and
are thereby no longer in a position to undermine and
poison our important discussion on my country, Syria,
I can now deliver my statement in peace.

(spoke in Arabic)

At the outset, I welcome Ms. Hoff, who joins
us from Damascus, the world's oldest capital. I bid
welcome to the United Nations personnel in my country.
They are on-the-ground witnesses who can effectively
inform the Security Council with far more accurate
information than the United Nations bureaucrats in
New York can muster.

Allow me first to share a piece of information
with my colleagues with regard to a fresh massacre
committed by war planes of the so-called international
coalition led by the United States against Syrian
civilians. More than 10 civilians lost their lives in a raid
conducted by those United States aeroplanes against
the village of Al-Salhiya in rural northern Al-Raqqa.
Other war planes of the same coalition targeted a cotton
mill in the same village, resulting in the martyrdom of
three workers and an entire family, composed of six
civilians, that had been displaced from another area.
Those are today's developments, which have resulted
from the actions of United States war planes.

Naturally, I will not respond to the statements made
by certain colleagues. I would like, however, to respond
to the statement delivered by the representative of the
United States to the effect that she was allegedly told
by an eye witness among the terrorists sponsored by the
United States in eastern Aleppo that Syrian and Russian
war planes conducted 180 air raids on Saturday alone.
Being a seasoned and expert diplomat, she naively
believed the eye witness, who is putatively a terrorist
from J abhat Al-Nusra, which her own Government has
qualified as a terrorist group in the Council. What kind
of hypocrisy is that? What sort of lies are we hearing
in these unnecessary meetings on the humanitarian
situation in my country?

Then she mendaciously Al-Nusra Front falsely
claimed that leaflets were dropped by the Syrian air
force, urging civilians in eastern Aleppo to leave or
they would be killed. That is what was stated by the
representative of the United States. Such talk simply
amounts to lies upon lies and, frankly, they are shameful.
The Syrian air force did drop leaflets in eastern Aleppo,
calling on civilians to distance themselves from armed
terrorist groups in the eatern part of the city and to
leave eastern Aleppo. The Syrian Government opened
six humanitarian corridors for civilians and two for the
fighters who wish to leave eastern Aleppo. However,
the terrorists, of course, did not leave and did not
allow the civilians to leave because they use them as
human shields.

At any rate, if some Governments are concerned
about the terrorists in eastern Aleppo, why do they not
issue them with passports or visas and take them in? If
the representative of the United States believes that the
arrival of 8,000 armed terrorists from eastern Aleppo
in the United States will help the Syrian people, then
take them, especially given the fact that most of them
are not Syrian. In a special report from the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Council stated that there are
approximately 80,000 foreign terrorists in Syria, who
came to my country from around 100 States Members
of the United Nations. That was stated by the Council.
That seems to have fallen on deaf ears, in the case ofthe
Ambassadors of the United States, the United Kingdom
and France.

Not once did Mr. O'Brien refer to terrorism in his
briefing. Not once was the word terrorism used, as if
there were no terrorism whatsoever in my country,
Syria, and it is all a mere Tom and Jerry cartoon in
the minds of some. I respect the comments made by
my colleague, the Ambassador of Uruguay. He quite
rightly wondered about which god and what values
compel a terrorist to kill civilians.

It is a valid question. However, the reply can be
found in the hundreds of letters that we have sent to the
Council over a five-year period, stating who is doing
what on Syrian territories. There are hundreds of letters
in which we have explained the presence of terrorists
on the ground. Many resolutions have been adopted,
in particular resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign armed
mercenaries. Yet some in the Council still do not know
which Godand which religion, and who is the takfiri who
brought us Saudi and Qatari Wahhabi's Fatwas to shed
blood in my country, as if it is a piece of information
not known to some, and as ifwhat the takfiris are doing
is occurring in Somalia and not in Syria.

To my dear friend the Ambassador of Uruguay,
I say * the terrorists are the takfiris. The takfiri
terrorists are influenced by the Saudi Wahhabi way
of thinking. In other words, a takfiri is anyone who
considers you infidel and deserve being killed because
you do not share his extremist views. That is the
meaning oftakfiri. The actions of Da'esh and Al-Nusra
are based on the same Wahabi doctrine that prevails
in Saudi Arabia. They have exported that terrorism to
us. They have brought terrorists to us from all over the
world - Australians, Canadians, French, Belgians,
Spaniards, Chinese, Russians. The entire garbage pail
ofthe world's terrorism has been heaped on us. Yet some
are still wondering what is occurring in Syria? who is
killing whom? Why does humanitarian assistance not
reach eastern Aleppo? Who is hampering humanitarian
assistance to eastern Aleppo? As if such questions need
a key to be answered after five years of criminal acts
being perpetrated against my country.

The kind of terrorism we suffer is the same that
prevails everywhere - in Iraq, Libya, Egypt, Kenya,
Somalia, Tanzania, the Niger, Chad and Nigeria. It is
the same terrorism; its roots are the same. Why do we
all, without exception, support the fight being waged
by the Iraqi Government and the popular mobilization
forces against Da'esh terrorism in Mosul? We do so
because it is a valid right. The Iraqi Government is
fighting terrorism. We are combating the very same
terrorism in Syria. Terrorism in Aleppo is the same
kind of terrorism carried out in Mosul, so why then
are we being condemned while the very same people
who criticize us support those who are fighting the
same terrorism in Mosul? Da'esh is there and the same
Da'esh is here, in my country. Why does that double
standard exist?

Let us not forget that United States air raid against
the Syrian Arab Army sites in Deir ez-Zor, allowing
that city to be besieged by ISIL. There are 300,000
people in Deir Ez-Zor receiving food and medical
assistance, air-dropped by helicopters, simply because
the United States air force struck the Syrian Arab army
sites in Deir ez-Zor. Does the representative of the
United States recall the theatrics at the meeting that
immediately followed that attack, and the claims that a
mistake had been made? Two days later, every civilian
bridge on the Euphrates was also struck. Is this fighting
Da'esh? Is it the goal of the United States air force to
target Syrian infrastructure? There were 200 victims
when Manbij was struck by the French air force, and the
same number after it was struck by the United Kingdom
air force. What is all this absurdity.

The statements made by the representatives of some

States and the briefing given by the Under-Secretary-
General for humanitarian affairs met our expectations
for the thirty-third time with their same negative,
erroneous approach of distorting facts and making
light of the suffering of the Syrian people. It reveals
the politicization of the humanitarian situation in order
to demonize the Syrian Government with a view to
creating a terrorist entity - a terrorist statelet - in my
country, Syria. That is the plan - to create a terrorist
statelet in Syria. It is a fact - a terrorist entity that
obtains support from the Western sponsors of terrorism.
It is further proof that those States and actors have no
will or desire to end the suffering of our people and
continue to deny the root causes of the crisis in Syria.

In that regard, I repeat once again that we reject
the fact that the crisis in my country, Syria, is being
addressed without serious consideration for its root
causes. Those causes are the emergence and spread
of armed terrorist groups, the recruitment of tens
of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters supported
by well-known States, and their deployment in
neighbourhoods, villages, towns and cities where they
use civilians as human shields. Let me repeat again that
certain States that today use the suffering of the Syrian
people as a cheap tool to implement their political
agenda, by claiming to be concerned for their security
and well-being, are the main reason for this suffering,
either through their direct support to armed terrorist
groups or their imposition of unilateral coercive
measures, which affect Syrian citizens directly. Let me
repeat again that no one in the world is more eager than
us, the Government and the people of Syria, to preserve
the lives of Syrian citizens, whether in Aleppo, Dara'a,
Damascus, Raqqa or any other place where civilians
suffer because of the practices of armed terrorist
groups that use them as humans shields, besiege them
in their towns and villages, prevent them from leaving
those areas and obstruct their access to humanitarian
assistance or sell them such assistance at prices they
cannot afford.

Let me repeat yet again that, in the light of this
bitter fact, any Government, including the Syrian
Government, has the moral and legal obligation to save
their citizens from becoming hostages to terrorists.
Yesterday, 20 November, groups that certain parties and
States like to call non-State armed opposition groups
perpetrated a new, horrific and premeditated massacre
when their terrorists stationed in the Bustan Al-Qasr
neighbourhood of eastern Aleppo launched a number
of missiles against the Al-Furqan and Saria Hassoun
schools in the Al-Furqan community of western
Aleppo, killing 10 children between the ages of 7 and
12 and wounding 59 others, including a female teacher
whose leg had to be amputated. These are pictures of
the school that was bombed in Aleppo by the so-called
moderate armed groups - the genetically modified
armed groups. Obviously, some people do not care
about such photographs and will not speak about them.

Incidentally, as I mentioned, one of the schools that
was attacked is named Saria Hassoun. Five years ago,
I spoke to the Council (see S/PV.6627) and stated that
armed terrorist groups had killed the son of the Mufti
in Syria, the Public Mufti of the Syrian Arab Republic,
whose name is Saria Hassoun. That school was named
after the martyr Saria Hassoun, son of Syria's Mufti,
who was killed by terrorists five years ago. Today, they
are attacking the school named after him.

In addition to striking those two schools, the
terrorists from Jabhat Al-Nusra, the Nur al-Din
al-Zenki Movement, which is supported by Turkish
intelligence services, and other terrorist groups
classified as moderate armed groups by Washington,
Paris and London, who pay their mercenaries and
provide them with funding and weapons, part of which
came from Ukraine, Bulgaria and Croatia, also opened
fire on the law school and the Mogambo and Al-Midan
neighbourhoods, killing two individuals and wounding
33 others. Furthermore, missiles launched by terrorist
groups against Al-Ma'damia and Saif Al-Doula
neighbourhoods in western Aleppo killed two people
and wounded seven citizens.

Those attacks by terrorist armed groups
coincided with another truce, the third of its kind
since 9 September, which was declared by the Syrian
Government and its allies in the city of Aleppo in
order to save the lives of innocent citizens and end
their suffering. I repeat that this is the third truce since
9 September, which goes completely counter to what
the American Ambassador said to the effect that an eye
witness told her that the Russian and Syrian air forces
bombed eastern Aleppo 180 times on Saturday. Imagine
such ridiculous talk coming from the representative of
a super-Power and a permanent member of the Security
Council . The truce declared by the Syrian Government
and its allies provides for safe passage to be given to
any armed persons seeking to leave the area, normalize
their situation or take their personal weapons to another
place of their choice; for the evacuation and medical
care for the wounded, in order to restore normal life to
the eastern part of Aleppo - and I am talking about the
eastern side of Aleppo, not the east side of Manhattan,
California, Glasgow or Marseille; the eastern part
of Aleppo, a Syrian city - and for the resumption
of the State institutions' tasks to to provide services
and meet the needs of citizens who wish to remain in
eastern Aleppo.

Regrettably, well-known States and parties have
hampered all such initiatives by instructing the armed
terrorist groups to reject any initiative, target civilians
inside their schools and homes in western Aleppo,
entrench themselves in civilian neighbourhoods in
eastern Aleppo, use civilians as human shields and
kill any civilian trying to reach the safe exit points, as
was the case on 17 November when 17 civilians were
executed for protesting the practices of terrorist groups
in eastern Aleppo. That fact demonstrates that these
armed terrorist groups are a tool for a heinous blackmail
by certain States to achieve a tawdry political agenda
at the expense of the suffering of the Syrian people and
their blood.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
rejects the selective approach of certain States and
United Nations bodies to the humanitarian crisis
in Syria. It stresses that the main reason for the
non-delivery of humanitarian assistance in many
regions are the following. First, terrorist groups are
besieging entire areas and rejecting the delivery of
any assistance. Secondly, armed terrorist groups are
targeting and stealing from humanitarian convoys.
Thirdly, insecurity in the regions where armed terrorist
groups are active, including highway robberies,
targeting of civilian aircraft and aircraft carrying
assistance, attacking humanitarian and medical workers
and selling humanitarian assistance material. Fourthly,
politicizing the humanitarian question in Syria and
a double standard maintained by certain States and
organizations that focus on the humanitarian situation
in some areas exclusively for political aims, while fully
ignoring other regions. Fifthly, a lack of cooperation
and coordination with the Syrian Government,
and the use of agreements with non-governmental
organizations that are not accredited by Syria, or
organizations working from Gaziantep in Turkey
without coordination with the Syrian Government.
That is something we will not tolerate. Sixthly, there
is a lack of funding for humanitarian response plans
as a result of the failure by some States to fulfil their
pledges. The funding for the response plan for 2016 did
not exceed 33 per cent. Lastly, there is the delay in the
implementation of projects and programmes under the
response plan.

In conclusion, the Syrian people have grown sick
and tired of mendacious statements and hypocritical
initiatives, as well as the misleading reports that have
flooded the work of the Security Council and United
Nations bodies almost on a daily basis over the past five
years, but have brought about no humanitarian benefit to
the Syrian people. Indeed, their suffering has increased
in an unprecedented manner because some within, and
outside, the Council have been involved in fuelling and
perpetuating the crisis. As for the assistance that has
arrived - and Ms. Hoff did say that millions of Syrians
benefitted from that assistance - that was done in
coordination with the Syrian Government - 70 to
75 per cent of the assistance was provided by the Syrian
Government itself - not the United Nations, despite

the siege imposed on us by the States sponsoring
terrorism and the economic sanctions that have been

levelled against us for years.

