Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would
like to welcome you, Sir, as you preside over the
Security Council today. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Delattre for France's work on this very
important mandate.

We are entering a critical time with regard to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and today's vote
represents a pivotal juncture for the United Nations
Mission there. Just as the previous United Nations
Mission helped organize the first free elections in more
than 40 years in 2006, the current Mission is now poised
to help support the first peaceful transfer of power in
the country's history. It has not always been clear that
this day would come. Last year the Council said all
the right things about prioritizing the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), but throughout
the year it was clear that the Mission continued to be
pulled in multiple directions. Its mandate was too broad
and unfocused.

The Secretary-General's strategic review
recognized that lack of focus and called for
streamlining the mandate to emphasize a limited set
of priorities. We shared that view and have fought to
ensure that the protection of civilians and support of
the electoral process are at the heart of the Mission.
By streamlining the number of non-priority tasks and
directing the Mission to allocate resources according
to the tasks that remain, we have made it clear that
the Mission and the Council will work to fulfil their
common purpose, which is ensuring that elections are
held. After all, without free, open and credible elections
in December, anything that MONUSCO sets out to do
will be complicated by political unrest and the spectre
of violence.

We even took the step of endorsing key benchmarks
leading to elections in December. In advancing those
benchmarks, the Mission must work closely with the
country's Independent National Electoral Commission,
while the Secretary-General must provide honest,
accurate assessments of progress - or the lack of
it, as the case may be - in the approach to election
day. However, adhering to an electoral calendar will
mean little if the Congolese people are denied their
fundamental rights to freedom of expression and
assembly, or the right to choose among a variety of
credible candidates. Free and fair elections simply
cannot coexist with attempts to harass, intimidate or
otherwise silence voters.

Beyond elections, we sought to make the Mission
more responsive by clarifying that the Intervention
Brigade operates under the command of the United
Nations Force Commander. That mandate enables the
Force Commander to deploy the Intervention Brigade
throughout the entire country rather than confining it to
the east, and ensures that a unified command structure
can respond to the needs of the Congolese people. We
also sought to improve the performance of MONUSCO's
troops. Too many peacekeepers and innocent civilians
lost their lives in the past year when the Mission's forces
failed to respond. We must hold troops to the highest
possible standards and demand accountability if they
underperform. The Secretary-General can make a real
difference by ensuring that troop performance reviews
presented to the Council are clear and actionable.
That includes taking concrete steps to address sexual
exploitation and abuse. MONUSCO had more reported
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse than any
other United Nations peacekeeping mission in 2017.
That cannot continue.

Ultimately, the leaders of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must take responsibility for the future
of their country. No Security Council resolution or
peacekeeping mission will bring about this incredible
country's true potential. There must be the political will
necessary to bring about change and to see elections
through in 2018. We call on the United Nations, and
all States Members of the United Nations, particularly
regional partners, to invest more than troops or money.
We call on them to invest their time and political
capital in promoting free and fair Congolese elections
in 2018. The people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must know that we have their backs, and the
Government must know that failure is not an option.

