Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is deeply concerned
over the latest dangerous developments in the Gaza
Strip. The situation in this region, in Palestinian-Israeli
relations and in the Middle East region in general is an
extremely difficult one. It calls for urgent actions to
prevent further destabilization; both sides need to
exercise restraint and display wisdom. It also calls for
recognition of the dangerous point to which they have
come.

The operations of the armed forces of Israel in
the Gaza Strip have already claimed considerable
civilian lives and have greatly worsened the prospects
for reaching an Israeli-Palestinian settlement. Moscow
is extremely concerned over the tragic incident in Beit
Hanoun on 8 November 2006. We express our
condolences to the bereaved families and loved ones.
The actions of the Israeli army go beyond the
framework of the declared goal to preventing the
shelling of Israel from the Gaza Strip. Such a
disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force is
unacceptable.

Unfortunately, the current escalation of violence
is taking place specifically at a point in time when the

political forces of the Palestinian National Authority
are trying to create a coalition Government that would
be capable of addressing the pressing problems of
Palestinians and establishing constructive cooperation
with Israel. According to the latest reports, the talks
between the Palestinian factions Fatah and Hamas to
form a Government have been suspended. We expect
that, despite the challenging situation in the Palestinian
Authority territory, this process will be resumed in a
constructive spirit in the near term.

The Russian side again calls upon the leadership
of the Palestinian Authority to take robust measures to
reign in extremists, to put an end to terrorist attacks, to
halt the firing of Qassam rockets into Israel, which are
provoking the Israeli Government's response, and to
release the abducted Israel soldier, Gilad Sharit. We
support mediation efforts to that end.

All Palestinian political factions and groups need
to finally recognize that provocations aimed at
exacerbating tensions are detrimental to attaining the
national aspirations of the people of Palestine.

Major responsibilities for preventing further
destabilization of the situation in the Palestinian
territories and in the entire region lie with the
Government of Israel. Its right and obligation to
protect the life and security of its citizens is not in
doubt. However, these goals will not be achieved at the
price of severely impacting the Palestinian civilians,
massively punishing totally innocent residents of Gaza.

We see only one solution to the current situation.
Both sides need to put an end to violence, undertake
urgent steps to stabilize the situation and resume the
political dialogue. Joint efforts are needed to clear the
way for this kind of dialogue and not create further
impediments to advance it. There is no alternative to
this approach.

The Russian delegation is of the view that, at the
official meeting of the Security Council on 21
November, it will have an opportunity to express its
views on other aspects of a comprehensive settlement
in the Middle East.

