Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I commend
your leadership, Sir, in convening today's meeting on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. My delegation is grateful to be a part
ofthis important meeting. I also thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General
Andrew Gilmour for their enlightening briefings, which
reminded us once again of the reason why we must take
up the issue of human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in this chamber.

On a more personal note, it is with a heavy heart
that I make my first statement to the Security Council
as the new Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea on an issue that has such serious implications for
the future of our divided nation.

Since 2014, when the commission of inquiry
first shed light on the dire and unprecedented human
rights situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, the international community - including
the Council - has moved swiftly to seek its early
resolution. Concrete steps have also been taken to save
North Koreans from the pain and horror that plague
their lives each and every day. Those steps, to name
just a few, include the establishment of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Seoul
last year and the group of independent experts on
accountability this year.

Regrettably, however, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has continued to turn a blind eye
to international calls for improving its human rights
record. Countless instances of torture, execution and
arbitrary detention are still being committed, and people
disappear overnight into political prison camps devoid
of any semblance ofjudicial due process. Evidence of
systematic and widespread human rights violations
is also found among the 60,000 or so North Korean
workers abroad, who are suffering from what amounts
to forced labour. Even as I speak, a large number of
North Koreans are risking their lives to cross the border
in search of freedom and happiness. The people of in
North Korea are destined to live miserable lives from
the very moment of their birth, trapped in the State
machinery that systematically tramples on their basic
human rights.

As was rightly pointed out in draft resolution
A/C.3/7l/L.23, adopted by the Third Committee of the
General Assembly last month, the gravity of the problem
lies in the fact that such systematic, widespread,
and gross human rights violations are committed by
institutions under the effective control of its leadership.
The leadership in Pyongyang shamelessly employs a
reign of terror merely for the sake of the survival of
his regime.

Moreover, he has poured his country's already
scarce resources into developing nuclear weapons and
missiles,w hile completely ignoring the impoverished
livelihoods of his people. In fact, this year alone the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has squandered
an estimated $200 million on two nuclear tests and
24 missile launches. In September, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea went so far as to conduct
its fifth nuclear test near a region severely hit by the
worst flooding in decades, which had taken took place
only a couple of days before. How can we comprehend
such brazen and shameless behaviour by a regime
that is begging for international aid for flood-damage
recovery, yet spending a far greater amount of money
on the development of weapons of mass destruction?

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
reckless pursuit of developing nuclear weapons is not
only a serious threat to international peace and security,
but also a grave human rights problem that threatens
the very survival of its people,who are already at risk.
That is the reason why the human rights situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea stands
apart from those in other places of the world and why
the Security Council has an important role to play in
seeking its resolution.

The history of over a half-century of division on
the Korean peninsula is also the history of the agony
and misery of 130,000 separated families in both parts
of the divide. Seven decades after the division of our
nation, we are witnessing yet another sad chapter
of family separation being written in the history of
the Korean peninsula. A case in point is the heart-
wrenching story of the 30,000 North Korean refugees
who have now settled in the South. As the price for their
newly found freedom in the South, they are living a life
of agony, longing day and night for reunion with the
beloved ones they left behind in the North.

The North Korean leader may have a firm belief
that it is only nuclear weapons and missiles that can
ensure the survival of his regime, but that is a delusion.
No regime can sustain itself as long as there are those
at home who are ready to risk their lives to escape the
reign of terror. Concrete and sincere steps must be taken
without further delay so that those people - wherever
they may reside - can carry on a normal, dignified
life. Until the day comes when we see such a change in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's behaviour,
we must continue to exert pressure on that country.
If we stop working together on this united front, it
would be tantamount to abetting the most systematic,
widespread and gross human rights violations on the
globe. As William Gladstone once said, "justice delayed
is justice denied."

I cannot recall without pain the story that I heard
from a North Korean woman just before I left Seoul last
month. A teenage cellmate of hers back in the prison
camp in North Korea was crushed to death as others
in the cell jumped on her to catch and eat a rat that had
fallen into her bowl of soup. I was stunned and rendered
speechless as that woman, with tears in her eyes and
anger in her face, recounted this haunting story. And
yet that is just one of too many.

The North Korean leader must realize before it
is too late that time is not on his side. He must listen
attentively to the solemn voice of reason resonating in
the Chamber today, and that is that darkness can never
overcome the light.

The meeting rose at noon.
