Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is pleased to welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Jose' Luis Guterres, to whom we express our
gratitude for the progress achieved in his country and
the good relations that he has maintained with the
United Nations presence over the last decade.

We also are especially grateful for the report
(S/2009/504) presented by Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste. I take this opportunity to once again express our
thanks to him and commend the excellent job he and
his Office have done in supporting the Government of
Timor-Leste. They have provided a comprehensive
model worthy for use in United Nations efforts in other
areas of the world. We express our deep gratitude for
that and wish him every success for the future.

Just a few months after celebrating the tenth
anniversary of the referendum in Timor-Leste, which
laid the foundations of the country's independence, we
are pleased to see a climate of stability and
strengthened governance in that country. There is no
doubt that United Nations support to the Government
of Timor-Leste has provided the country with the
opportunity to shape its own future. In this context, we
believe that Timor-Leste should continue to enjoy the
benefits of the presence and support of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
in order to continue to make progress on matters such
as security, justice, human rights, development and
democratic governance.

When the Security Council met to discuss Timor-
Leste on 19 February (see S/PV.6085), Mexico stated
that it was important to strengthen the machinery for
transparency and accountability in the government
sector. Today we welcome the fact that the parliament
has adopted a law establishing an anti-corruption
commission and that ratification instruments of the
United Nations Convention against Corruption have
been deposited. That will contribute to further
strengthening democratic governance in that country.

We also commend the continued support of
UNMIT in the process of transferring command to
enable the National Police to assume the policing
responsibilities thus far carried out by the Mission. We
consider that complete transfer must occur once the
criteria laid down in the agreement signed between
Special Representative Khare and Prime Minister
Gusmao have been met, with particular emphasis on
United Nations certification of national officers and on
ensuring that the National Police is accepted by its own
community and is strengthened as an institution so that
it can exercise real control.

We are aware that the road to strengthening the
rule of law and guaranteeing human rights still holds
many challenges. We support UNMIT's endeavours to
support the Government in its institution-building and
in implementing the recommendations of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and the Commission of Truth and Friendship.
Mexico agrees with the report of the Secretary-
General and believes that, in line with the United
Nations position, there should be no amnesty or
impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity or
genocide. We urge the Government to cooperate
closely with the independent Special Commission of
Inquiry to address unresolved cases of crimes
committed during the crises of 1999 and 2006,
pursuant to resolutions 1704 (2006) and 1802 (2008).
We also recommend that the Timor-Leste authorities
intensify their cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

On the issue of internally displaced persons
(IDPs), it is important to highlight the achievement of
closing the country's 65 IDP camps. We support the
Government's efforts to promptly meet the needs of the
nearly 3,000 IDPs still in temporary shelters and to
facilitate their return to their places of origin in an
atmosphere of calm and reconciliation.

We also welcome the progress achieved less than
a year ago through the signing of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework 2009-2013 by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Prime Minister. We trust that the Framework will
continue to promote democratization and social
cohesion and make it possible to meet the major
challenges of unemployment, the fight against poverty
and providing access to basic social services in the
country.

I wish to conclude by welcoming the widespread
atmosphere of peace in which the recent municipal and
village elections took place on 9 October. This reflects
the commitment of the people of Timor-Leste to
strengthening democracy and its institutions. Mexico
reaffirms its readiness to continue its cooperation with
the Timorese authorities in this sphere, as demonstrated
by our support in the preparations for and holding of
the recent elections through Mexico's Federal Electoral
Institute.

