Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive
briefing. We are also pleased to welcome President
Mahmoud Abbas to today's meeting.

Poland strongly supports all initiatives aimed at
stabilizing and strengthening peace and security in
the Middle East. Regrettably, since our last briefing
(see S/PV.8167), no significant positive moves towards
achieving peace have been made. On the contrary, we
cannot fail to notice that the situation has deteriorated.

We note with concern an increase in the number
of incidents along Israel's border with the Gaza
Strip - mortar rockets fired from the Strip and Israel's
retaliatory measures, as well as growing tensions over
Israel's northern border. We recognize Israel's right to
defend itself and ensure the security of its citizens. At
the same time, we urge all parties to exercise restraint
in order to avoid further hostilities that would put large
groups of the population at risk. Particularly worrying
is the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, where
we face a deep crisis with regard to life-saving health,
water and sanitation services. The current shortages of
fuel could soon aggravate the situation even further,
depriving the inhabitants of Gaza of hope and real
prospects and inciting inflammatory remarks that result
in violence, extremism and radicalization, in particular
among young people.

We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). The effects of reducing support could lead
to serious security and humanitarian consequences, not
only in Palestinian territories but also in neighbouring
countries that host Palestinian refugees. The Agency
already faces great challenges in upholding its mandate
to preserve key services, such as education and health
care. The international community, as a whole, cannot
shirk its responsibility and obligations to Palestinian
refugees. We must make every effort to ensure the
smooth continuation of the Agency's work on a solid
financial basis. For its part, for years, Poland has
actively and regularly supported UNRWA and will
maintain its support for Palestinian refugees through
annual contributions to the Agency. In response to the
current needs, Poland will contribute to UNRWA's
general budget in the first quarter of the year.

I would like to add that a stable humanitarian
situation in the entire Middle East region is a key
priority for Poland. For that reason, in recent years, we
have significantly increased our support for the most
affected people in Syria, its neighbouring countries
and the West Bank through bilateral and multilateral
assistance, including the Polish contribution under the
Economic Resilience Initiative last year.

In more general terms, let me underline that the
Security Council must maintain its commitment to
resolving one of the longest-standing conflicts on our
agenda. We should continue to seek an end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict by reviving the peace process.
Only a return to meaningful bilateral negotiations,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law, can provide positive input to the
process. That is the only path towards a two-State
solution and resolving all final-status issues. Poland
supports a two-State solution under which the national
aspirations of both parties to the conflict would be met,
including Palestine's right to self-determination and
independence and Israel's right to ensure its security
and normalization of relations with Arab States.

In line with the long-standing European Union
position, we would like to reiterate our position on
Jerusalem. We strongly believe that the aspirations of
both parties with regard to Jerusalem must be fulfilled,
and a way to resolve the status of Jerusalem must be
found through negotiations.

We appeal to Israel and Palestine to refrain from
unilateral steps that prejudge the outcome of final- status
negations, and expect them to demonstrate their
commitment to peace through their actions and policies.
We condemn all acts of terrorism and incitement to
violence. In our opinion, they constitute a significant
obstacle to the reactivation of the peace process.

We continue to watch developments on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation closely, and we call
on all Council members to support that process in
accordance with the Quartet principles. We believe
that reaching an outcome accepted by the international
community could be an important step for the unity of a
future Palestinian State and may, in the long term, lead
to a sustainable peace agreement. An important element
of such a solution is the involvement of countries of the
region. We should build on the relevance of the Arab
Peace Initiative of 2002 as a comprehensive framework
for the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, thereby
contributing to regional peace and security.

