Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to begin this
important discussion. This is the first time in four
months that Sergio Vieira de Mello has graced us with
his presence. As you, Sir, have just said - I echo your
comments - he has once again given us an
informative and encouraging briefing. This has been an
extraordinarily busy month in the Security Council.
This will be the last time I will be able to be here this
month, because I am leaving for London and Geneva
this evening. So I want to thank you, Mr. President, for
your extraordinary stewardship in a month which
rivalled China's month of presidency in terms of the
number of crises confronted, and which equalled
China's achievement in steering us through these
difficult times.

I want to thank the Special Representative for his
briefing, as well as for his leadership at the Lisbon
conference last week. You are, Sergio, a testament to
the talent and capabilities of the United Nations at its
best. I saw in the quarterly Foreign Afiairs recently that
the United Nations had sent out the A-team of
international technocrats to East Timor. I am not sure
technocrat is always a compliment, but I think that you
and your colleagues in Kosovo, Bosnia and elsewhere
really are in that category, although maybe you do not
appreciate being compared to Mr. T. - you have got
fewer gold chains on and so on. I think your job is
tougher than anything that people can imagine, and I
think you are doing a great job. And I have to say that
you are still better dressed than I am, to my eternal
embarrassment.

It is now 10 months since we had our historic
open meeting in this Chamber to deplore the violence
then raging in Dili. On the one hand, I am struck by
how much progress has been made - as we heard this
morning - particularly as the focus has shifted from
emergency needs to developing consultative
mechanisms for interaction with the people of East
Timor. This is what the United Nations should be
doing. In the midst of our enormous difficulties in
other parts of the world, I think we should note here
that - as in an earlier era, in Cambodia, Mozambique
and Namibia- the United Nations is doing its job.
While it is not cheap, let the world see that it is worth
it. On the other hand, I am deeply frustrated at the
situation with the refugees, to which I wish to return in
a moment.

First I want to comment on two absolutely critical
operational issues. Despite the outrageous events in the
camps - and I will mention those in a minute- I
want to say how pleased our Government is to note that
Mr. Vieira de Mello has reported that the overall
security situation is stabilizing and that the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) can downgrade its security classification.
We strongly support the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to downsize the peacekeeping
elements- the troops- in UNTAET. It is very
important that these plans be codified and made
precise, and made public early.

I would like to ask Mr. Vieira de Mello if he
would, in the response period, be able to inform us as
to when the first major downsizings will occur and
what his planned projections and recommendations are.
I want to state that the earlier and more visibly he can
do this, the better. I would further like to state that my
own Government hopes that he can drawdown as
quickly as he can, and at the same time, taking into
account the very legitimate question of a resurgence of
violence by the militia, that the United Nations reserve
a capability to reinforce on short notice if a crisis
should hit. But he now has over 10,000 personnel in
East Timor. While that is entirely appropriate up to
now, it is equally important and imperative, given the
tremendous demands we are facing - and all of us in
this Chamber know that we are about to meet to receive
a new request for Ethiopia and Eritrea, on top of
southern Lebanon, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo- that we try to
plan long-term for a drawdown. I hope he will be able
to inform us about how he intends to do this.

We applaud the Special Representative's
increasing shifting of responsibility from peacekeepers
to civilian police, and then from civilian police to the
newly trained East Timorese police and, at some future
date, I assume, an East Timorese defence force. This
would allow an even faster and deeper reduction in
Size.

Let me now turn to the question of a date for
independence. Last month, Jose Ramos-Horta visited
us, and we had an opportunity to hear from him about
how the East Timorese are feeling about the pace of
reconstruction and transition. Many more people had
the opportunity to hear directly from the East Timorese
during last week's important donors' conference in
Lisbon.

We have just heard from Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello about a possible timetable for independence, to
take place between 31 August and December of next
year - dates proposed by Mr. Gusmao and
Mr. Ramos-Horta in Lisbon. I want to associate our
Government in the strongest possible terms with that
timetable, as proposed, and assuming that the United
Nations believes it is appropriate. This would be a
historic event, a signal achievement for the United
Nations and for the world community. I believe that it
is very important to set the date publicly, clearly and
early so that the people of East Timor can adjust to it,
so that the challenges to it from West Timor can be
dealt with swiftly and appropriately by the Indonesian
Government - and in this matter we are not satisfied
at this point - and so that everyone can be prepared to
work on this issue.

But I want to state again, and I know that Sergio
agrees with me on this, that the independence date is
not the day on which the United Nations leaves. It is
the day on which the United Nations continues a
transition, but continues to assist the people of East
Timor in a different way. The world should not expect
a date on which the United Nations just disappears.
That would be highly against the interests of stability
in all of the South Pacific and the region of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations.
The United Nations, however, should not
overstay its role as a governing power. It should turn
into an advisory power - in other words, the kind of
role it is playing in places like Bosnia. This is entirely
appropriate. The United States should, and I hope will,
support that. I say "I hope" because these decisions
will take place under a different Administration. While
I cannot commit a future Administration, I can
certainly speak for the current one in the strongest
possible terms.

Let me now turn to the question of the refugees. I
have spoken in the Council many times about this since
I returned from East Timor last December. I have
described the climate of fear, and I have expressed my
Government's outrage. Last February, when Sergio was
last here, every member of the Council said that we had
to put an end to these militia incursions across the
border. We all agreed that full and lasting
reconciliation would not be possible until that was
done. Yet - and I say this with a combination of
sorrow and anger - the climate of fear is still a reality
in these camps.

Just last week, one of the most serious of all
incidents of the last nine months took place. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) had to cease its operations temporarily in the
Noelbaki camp after 70 militia members attacked the
brave UNHCR staff in that camp. This is inexcusable.
Although we support fully the Government in Jakarta,
we must again ask whether the Indonesian Government
can control the military officers on West Timor, who
are certainly capable of preventing this.

With regard to the resettling of East Timorese, we
have heard plan after plan from Jakarta. We support the
new plan, which would resettle militia members,
former East Timorese members of the Indonesian
armed forces and former East Timorese civil servants
outside of the island of Timor, as participants in the
transmigration programme. But let us get on with it.
Jakarta's approval of this plan is a positive sign that the
Government of Indonesia is taking the international
community seriously and, more importantly, that it
wishes to bring stability to West Timor. This is
essential if the project that we have been discussing
today is to succeed.

While we are encouraged by these decisions on
resettlement, we are also deeply shocked by the
continuing militia activities along and across the border
in East Timor. The Indonesian Government and its
military have failed to disarm and disband these
militia. But some militia members are now armed with
sophisticated weapons - grenades and automatic
weapons - that they did not have before. They used
them, for example, against an UNTAET outpost in the
Bobonaro district on 21 June, just a few days ago. This
attack followed a reported increase in cross-border
militia actions during the previous two weeks,
including an incident in which a United Nations
peacekeeper was injured at a bridge on the border.

We strongly believe that the United Nations
forces should use force pre-emptively to make clear to
the militia that this will not be tolerated. We do not
believe that a drawdown in forces is inconsistent with
restoring order, because the forces that can be
withdrawn are way to the east, in the eastern part of
East Timor, where the situation is calm. The areas of
difficulty are small, and the people causing the
difficulties are well known to the local authorities. I
feel very frustrated on this point because I know that
everyone in the Council agrees on this, and no one
quite understands why the Indonesian Government,
which is making such a tremendous effort to grapple
with an immense panoply of issues, has been unable to
get this particular problem under control. But we need
to do it urgently.

