Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to provide members of
the Security Council with an update on the
developments in Kosovo since the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, briefed the Council last month. Members
of the Council will also recall that, on 19 November,
we provided a briefing on the partial results of the
elections for the Kosovo Assembly. My briefing today
will focus on the major developments leading up to the
elections for the Kosovo Assembly, which were held on
17 November, including the signing of the common
document, the election itself and the impending
establishment of provisional self-government.

I shall first speak about the lead-up to the
elections. The period leading up to the elections was
relatively calm and free of violence. All parties,
including the Kosovo Serb Return Coalition - albeit at
the last minute - carried out rallies throughout
Kosovo in a peaceful manner and largely adhered to
the electoral rules. Infringements that went to the
Election Complaints and Appeals Subcommission were
relatively minor in nature and all were adjudicated in a
timely manner.

The total number of eligible voters for the
Kosovo Assembly elections was 1,250,3l8 -
representing l,l08,787 in Kosovo, 105,159 in Serbia
and Montenegro and 36,372 by mail. The United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) estimates that around 150,000 of the eligible
voters were Kosovo Serbs. More than 1,300 candidates
from 26 political parties contested the elections,
including 60 from the Kosovo Serb Return Coalition,
whose candidates were certified by the Central Election
Commission on 15 November.

As the Council may recall, a common document
was signed by UNMIK and the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 5 November, the
text of which has been made available informally to
members of the Council. The aim of the common
document was twofold: first, to provide the Yugoslav
authorities with an authoritative list of measures that
UNMIK had already taken, or was taking, to assist the
Kosovo Serb community in order to make it easier to
encourage Kosovo Serb participation in the 17
November elections; and, secondly, to provide a solid
basis for a future cooperative relationship with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It
was the signing of that document that made it possible,
in large part, for the Kosovo Serb Return Coalition to
decide to participate in the elections and to provide its
list of candidates.

Before agreement was reached on the final
details, both the Yugoslav and Serbian Governments
and President Kostunica announced, on 3 November,
the decision to endorse the participation of Kosovo
Serbs in the elections. At the same time, it was agreed
that a memorandum of understanding would be signed
with the respective commissariats for refugees,
enabling UNMIK's third pillar - which, as the
Council knows, is led by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe - to carry out the technical
preparations for the elections in Serbia and Montenegro
in conjunction with its implementing partner, the
International Organization for Migration.

Since then the Contact Group on Missing Persons
has completed a protocol on the exchange of forensic
experts and expertise, and work is also continuing on
all aspects covered by the common document,
including security and efforts to ensure the transfer of
Kosovo Albanian detainees held in Serbian prisons.

I will now move to the election itself. The
Assembly election went very smoothly, leading the
Council of Europe Election Observation Mission to
conclude in its final report, "The whole election
process was conducted in an efficient, democratic
manner, largely free from intimidation and violence."

An encouraging factor was the level of domestic
observation and participation in the electoral process
by the Kosovars. There were 13,286 local observers
from all communities, as well as several hundred
observers from the Belgrade-based Centre for Free
Elections and Democracy; they monitored both the
ballot and the count. Members of all communities have
also assisted in the counting of the ballots. A little-
known fact is that one of the largest multi-ethnic
initiatives to date is the Counting Centre team, which
comprises 600 national staff from all communities.

The overall turnout was 64.3 per cent of Kosovo's
1.25 million registered voters. Based on the location of
the polling stations, UNMIK estimates that the turnout
in primarily Kosovo Albanian areas was about 65 per
cent and that the turnout in non-Albanian areas was
about 46 per cent. Kosovo Serb participation was
patchy, with a higher turnout in the enclaves than in
northern Mitrovica, due in part to an intimidation
campaign in northern Kosovo led by those Kosovo
Serbs who were against participation. Kosovo Serbs
turned out in significantly higher numbers in both
Serbia and Montenegro, where turnouts were assessed
at 57 per cent and 56 per cent respectively. Given that
the decision to participate was taken rather late and that
UNMIK's institution-building pillar had only 12 days
to prepare for elections in Serbia and Montenegro, this
is considered to be a good result.
Mr. Haekkerup certified the results of the vote on
24 November. The final results are as follows: Mr.
Rugova's Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK)
received 45.65 per cent, representing 359,851 votes;
Mr. Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK)
received 25.7 per cent, representing 202,622 votes; in
third place, the Return Coalition with 11.34 per cent,
representing 89,388 votes; followed by Mr. Haradinaj's
Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) with 7.83 per
cent, representing 61,688 votes.

Seven smaller political parties, including three
from the minority communities, received enough votes
to obtain one seat each in the Assembly. These are the
Vatan Coalition, a coalition of Bosniaks and Gorani;
the National Movement for the Liberation of Kosovo
(LKCK); the Turkish People's Party of Kosovo
(KDTP); the Christian Democratic Party of Kosovo
(PSHDK); the Justice Party (PD); the People's
Movement of Kosovo (LPK); and the New Democratic
Initiative of Kosovo (IRDK), which is a new Egyptian
political party.

On the basis of these results, 14 parties will be
represented in the Assembly, 11 through direct
elections and 3 with set-aside seats. The seat allocation
will be as follows: the LDK - 47 seats; the PDK - 26
seats; the Return Coalition - 22 seats, which include,
as members of the Council will recall, the 10 seats set
aside for the Kosovo Serb community in the
Constitutional Framework; the AAK - 8 seats;
VATAN - 4 seats, including 3 set-aside seats; the
Turkish People's Party of Kosovo - 3 seats, including
2 set aside; the Ashkali Albanian Democratic Party -
2 set-aside seats; the New Democratic Initiative of
Kosovo - 2 seats, including 1 set-aside; the National
Movement for the Liberation of Kosovo - 1 seat; the
People's Movement of Kosovo (LPK); the Justice
Party - 1 seat; the Christian Democratic Party of
Kosovo - 1 seat; and 1 set-aside each for the United
Roma Party of Kosovo (PREBK) and the Bosniak Party
of Democratic Action of Kosovo (BSDAK).

I would like now to give a brief outline of the
next steps that UNMIK is contemplating. UNMIK now
has to make sure that provisional self-government
becomes a reality, with all that this entails, including
setting up Ministries, establishing a functioning local
civil service and providing services for the incoming
Assembly, including security for certain Assembly
members.

The inaugural session of the Assembly is
scheduled to be held on 10 December. Its first task will
be to elect the presidency of the Assembly and the
President of Kosovo, who will subsequently propose a
candidate for Prime Minister.

It is clear from the results that no party will be
able to govern alone, since 61 seats in the Assembly
are required for a majority. Now that the results have
been certified, negotiations have begun on coalition-
building. All sorts of combinations of coalitions are
being speculated about. It seems likely, however, that
the LDK will be part of whatever coalition emerges.

In conclusion, UNMIK and we are satisfied, of
course, with the way the whole election process in
Kosovo has unfolded. This applies to the violence-free
campaign, to the complex preparations that went into
ensuring their smooth conduct and to the all-inclusive
nature of the elections, which we believe will provide a
solid basis for the institutions of provisional self-
government that will now be established in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

It is also gratifying that members of the minority
communities turned out in significant numbers,
contrary to what had happened during the municipal
elections last year. Their elected representatives must
now take up their rightful place in the provisional
institutions and work together to show all communities
that participation in the democratic process can yield
tangible results.

The impending establishment of provisional self-
government will be a major step forward. As Mr.
Haekkerup outlined to the Council last month, UNMIK
is working to ensure that the transfer of authority will
be as smooth as possible, while UNMIK will retain, of
course, an advisory and monitoring capacity in those
areas handed over to the provisional self-government.
The onus is now largely on the incoming Kosovo
administration to make provisional self-government
work, to show that democracy can work and to show
that it is possible to bridge the inter-communal divide.

