Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin my statement by
congratulating the Dominican Republic on its successful
presidency of the Security Council, with a substantive
agenda for January. We welcome the presence of
Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, in presiding over
this open debate, and we thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings.

Uruguay believes that it is timely to reaffirm
that climate change poses a real threat to the present
and near future for all of humankind, and as such
international peace and security are also affected. The
fight against climate change is a very high priority
for Uruguay. My country's economy, including its
export sector, is highly dependent on agricultural
production, which in turn is exposed to the fluctuations
of the climate and increasingly intense and damaging
meteorological phenomenons.

The commitment to renewable energies made
over the past decade in seeking energy independence
through economic and environmental policies is
the best example of Uruguay's commitment to the
environment and the fight against climate change.
Likewise, developing countries, and in particular the
States of our Latin American region, are particularly
vulnerable to climate change and increasingly frequent
natural disasters.

While we view this open debate as a contribution
to the discussion on a priority topic for the future of
life on our planet, my country believes that, in order
to avoid linking climate change to security issues,
the discussion of specific related topics should be
restricted to the corresponding decision areas, namely,
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the
United Nations Environment Programme, the World
Meteorological Organization, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council.

The Paris Agreement on Climate Change, as
the international community's main multilateral
instrument to meet the challenge of climate change,
is irreversible, and we therefore call on all parties to
defend it and accelerate its implementation. We must
continue to work within the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, the Paris Agreement
and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030, among others, and fulfil our commitments.

Notwithstanding all this, the Security Council is
very good at regularly considering the indissoluble
link between climate change and the exacerbation
of devastating impacts of conflict, poverty and
underdevelopment. As a participant in several Security
Council missions to the Sahel, the countries of the Lake
Chad basin, Somalia and Haiti from 2016 to 2017, and
as a result of field Visits and interviews with authorities
and community members, were able to see how tensions
are often exacerbated by the effect of climate change.

Uruguay is convinced that adequate and flexible
cooperation between the different organs, programmes
and specialized agencies ofthe United Nations is crucial
to addressing climate degradation processes that affect
conflicts, starting with tackling their underlying causes.
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres recently stated that
climate change is the definitive issue of our time. If we
do not act soon, and in a coordinated and joint manner, it
will be too late to combat this existential threat hanging
over us all. Future generations have the right to inhabit
a safe planet, ripe for sustainable development.

To conclude, we would like to underscore the
importance of the climate summit, to be held in
September, as a way to reinforce the commitments
already made and intensify joint efforts in the fight
against climate change.

