Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): At the outset,
Madam President, allow me to thank your delegation
for having convened this timely debate on the issues of

nuclear proliferation, nuclear disarmament and nuclear
security. My delegation also wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing to the Council
earlier today.

We align ourselves with the letter dated 13 April
2012 (S/2012/223) from the Chair of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It remains South Africa's firm conviction that
weapons of mass destruction do not guarantee security
but, rather, detract from it. As long as those weapons
exist, humanity will continue to face the threat of
catastrophe. That conviction informs our firm
commitment to the principles of nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation, which are both key contributions
to the system of collective security envisaged in the
United Nations Charter. South Africa remains fully
committed to a world free of nuclear weapons and to
the multilateral system that seeks to advance that
objective.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of the nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime. The
NPT represents a historic bargain between the nuclear-
weapon States and the non-nuclear-weapon States, in
terms of which the former have undertaken to eliminate
their nuclear weapons based on the reciprocal
understanding by the latter not to pursue the nuclear
weapons option.

On the issue of nuclear disarmament, South
Africa wishes to reiterate its principled position that
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing and that efforts aimed at nuclear
non-proliferation should be parallel to simultaneous
efforts aimed at nuclear disarmament. In acting on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations, we
therefore believe that it is imperative for the Council to
address both nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation dimensions with equal vigour. In that
regard, South Africa welcomes as a positive
development the fact the Security Council again
reaffirmed the need for all Member States to comply
fully with their obligations and fulfil their
commitments in relation to nuclear disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation in all its aspects.
While the implementation of all nuclear
non-proliferation commitments no doubt remains
essential, the attainment of true international peace and
security also requires the implementation of nuclear
disarmament commitments, while ensuring that the
inalienable right of States to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes is upheld. South Africa is of the
View that non-nuclear-weapon States have on the
whole made great strides in their efforts to implement
their non-proliferation obligations, including pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). It is essential that nuclear-
weapon States similarly abide by their own
commitments and obligations.

While remaining firm in our View and in our
resolve to combat proliferation, the international
community must remain respectful of the need for
developing countries to use nuclear energy in the
context of sustainable and accelerated economic
growth. Our approach to nuclear issues should also
strike an acceptable balance between the concerns of
States regarding their energy security and the
non-proliferation of sensitive nuclear technologies,
while upholding the right enshrined in article IV of the
NPT. State choices and decisions in the field of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be respected
without jeopardizing their policies or international
cooperation agreements and arrangements for peaceful
uses of nuclear energy and their fuel cycle policies.

South Africa welcomes the progress made by
States to strengthen nuclear security at a national level
and through the relevant multilateral organizations,
especially the International Atomic Energy Agency. We
should, however, remain vigilant regarding the
continued risk posed by nuclear terrorism, illicit
nuclear networks and criminal acts, and the use of
nuclear or other radioactive material for malicious acts.
South Africa believes that through a cooperative
approach with the relevant multilateral organizations,
the international community can effectively deal with
those risks.

In conclusion, South Africa affirms that the
international community needs to work together
towards the goal of the elimination of all weapons of
mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons. That
endeavour should not be undercut by any process
outside of the already established multilateral
negotiating processes.

