Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing.

Uruguay associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Peru on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, and my remarks
will therefore focus on aspects that that intervention
does not cover.

Uruguay's commitment to Haiti has been constant,
both on the ground and here at Headquarters. On
the ground, we have been with the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) from
its launch in 2004 to the present, contributing troops
deployed in a joint battalion with Peru, and here at
Headquarters, we have chaired the Group of Friends of
Haiti since 2009. MINUSTAH has been and still is a
very important instrument designed to support Haiti on
its road to stability, but Haiti's stakeholders, particularly
its political leaders, also have to be committed to
that task.

Haiti's challenges are huge, ranging across issues
such as poverty, a lack of security, natural disasters,
food insecurity, health problems that include water-
borne diseases such as cholera, and internally
displaced persons, as well as a number of others that,
unfortunately, even this list has not covered. It is clear
that when a country is facing such serious situations,
its political leadership is a key element in overcoming
them. However, as the Secretary-General points out in
his report (S/2016/225), the opposite has been true of
the period from August 2015 until now, which has been
one of political uncertainty. In that regard, Uruguay
has been very concerned about developments in the
political process in Haiti, particularly the fact that the
elections originally scheduled for December 2015 have
been postponed once again. We appreciate the fact that
the political agreement reached on 5 February between
the outgoing President, Mr. Martelly, and the presidents
of the two chambers of the National Assembly, was the
result of a clear process of national ownership that was
led, negotiated and agreed to by Haitians. Uruguay
hopes that it will now be respected by Haitians.

Resolution 2243 (2015) asked the Secretary-General

to send a strategic assessment mission to Haiti in order
to make recommendations on the future presence and
functions of the United Nations in Haiti, if possible
within 90 days after the new President's assumption
of office, and ideally after the formation of a new
Government. Given the impossibility of complying with
those provisions of the resolution, given the political
situation in Haiti, the Secretary-General proposes in his
latest report that the strategic assessment mandated by
the Security Council be carried out once the electoral
process has been completed.

Considering Haiti's history, one has to ask if
having to make the strategic assessment conditional
on the conclusion of the electoral process means that
we will end up with neither one nor the other. The
result could be the indefinite postponement of the
ability to formulate recommendations on the United
Nations presence and functions in Haiti in the future,
as requested in resolution 2243 (2015). We sometimes
get the feeling that, for some Haitian stakeholders,
MINUSTAH's presence and the assurances that it gives
them are permanent and have resulted in a kind of
addiction and hence in the assumption that the Mission
will always be there, until MINUSTAH ceases to be
part of the solution by becoming part of the problem.

Since we realize that the Council should not allow
Haiti's political stakeholders to hold MINUSTAH
hostage, we believe that it is therefore essential that,
whether or not the electoral process is concluded, the
strategic assessment should be carried out and the joint
transition plan advanced, with a View to gradually
transferring the Mission's functions to the Haitian
Government and the United Nations country team. In
our view, the strategic assessment could begin as early
as in May.

Despite the political situation and the MINUSTAH
drawdown, which was decided under the mandate
adopted in October 2014, the security situation has not
been seriously affected, with the crime rate remaining
stable, as the Secretary-General's report shows,
including in areas from which the Mission has been
withdrawn. In that regard, we would like to highlight
the role played by the Haitian National Police and hope
that the progress that it has made can be consolidated,
thereby enabling the Haitian people to be able to count
very soon on an autonomous force capable of ensuring
security and order throughout the country.

Considering the enormous efforts that have been
expended in Haiti by the United Nations, countries of
the region, regional organizations, donors and troop-
and police-contributing countries, one would hope that
Haiti's political actors, especially the interim President,
will show respect for the international community
and work constructively to achieve the goals of the
5 February agreement, with a View to concluding
the electoral process and installing a constitutional
Government as soon as possible. After all the support
that Haiti has received, it would be intolerable to see the
country's political actors working only to find creative
ways to remain in theirjobs.

I would like to conclude by saying that Uruguay
would like to express its appreciation to the men
and women of MINUSTAH - many of whom have
lost their lives in the line of duty, including some
Uruguayans - for their dedication and commitment to
restoring stability in Haiti.
