Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First,
like others, I would like to thank Mark Lowcock
and Geir Pedersen for their very detailed and useful
briefings, as always. I am particularly pleased to see
Mr. Pedersen in the Council restored to full health.

The Syrian tragedy has, for some months, entered
into a new phase ofthe Syrian regime's ruthless strategy,
following the horrifying destruction of Aleppo at the
end of 2016 and the dreadful battle in Ghouta in 2018.
We are witnessing a similar situation in Idlib, even as
elements could be put in place to advance the political
process, the only way to definitively put an end the
vicious cycle of Violence. In that regard, collective
action is urgently needed on three fronts - strictly
enforcing the rules of war, bringing about a cessation
of hostilities and beginning, at long last, the search for
a political solution to the conflict, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

There is an urgent need to silence Idlib's weapons
and prevent Syria from becoming the scene of a new
escalation and conflagration. France is particularly
concerned about the significant intensification of
the offensive of pro-regime forces in Idlib in recent
weeks. We call on the signatories to the ceasefire
agreement - Russia, first and foremost - to return to
full compliance with their commitments and to ensure
an effective ceasefire in the north-west, with a view to
freezing the fronts and reaching a nationwide ceasefire,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

In that regard, we welcome the dialogue between
the United States and Turkey on north-east Syria, as
well as the first steps towards establishing a security
mechanism, which advance the necessary de-escalation
of tensions in the east. It is essential that all efforts
focus on the fight against Da'esh, which continues
to pose a major threat to our security. For our part,
we are pursuing action within the framework of the
international coalition against Da'esh, with a view to
the lasting stabilization of these liberated territories.

The second and equally important point is that
respect for international humanitarian law is binding
on all and is not negotiable. I would like to reiterate
two absolute priorities 4 the protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, and
immediate, secure, comprehensive, sustainable and
unhindered humanitarian access to the entirety of
Syrian territory. We condemn in the strongest terms
the attacks of the regime and its allies, which continue
to indiscriminately target civilian populations and
infrastructure in the north-west. It is particularly
unacceptable that health infrastructure, including those
that have been de-conflicted, and schools continue to be
targeted. We reiterate our full support for the internal
investigation launched by the Secretary-General in that
regard. The fight against terrorism cannot justify the
sacrifice of civilians, much less children. Such crimes
must not go unpunished.

It is also critical that humanitarian aid reach the
people who need it most through the fastest and most
direct channels. We reiterate our call for parties that
have the means to do so to exert the necessary pressure
on the regime to ensure unhampered humanitarian
access to all areas under its control, and thereby enable
humanitarian workers to respect the cardinal principles
of neutrality, independence, impartiality and humanity,
especially in the south-west and eastern Ghouta. It is
also essential that the United Nations be able to access
displaced persons and refugees who have returned home.
It is also critical that significant and concrete progress
be made with regard to detained and missing persons.
In that connection, I support the recommendations just
made by Mr. Pedersen.

The third priority is to ensure that the urgency of
the situation in Idlib does not cause us to lose sight
of the political urgency. We all know, but it bears
repeating, that only an inclusive political solution can
stabilize Syria in the long-term and eventually allow
refugees to return to their country. In that regard, we
reiterate our full support for the Special Envoy's efforts
to relaunch a political process, under the auspices of the
United Nations, on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
in its entirety.

More than ever, it is necessary to finalize a
constitutional package that is credible and balanced, both
in the composition of the committee and in its rules of
procedure, and to convene the constitutional committee
in Geneva, under the auspices of the United Nations, as
soon as possible. The Special Envoy has indicated that
we are close to achieving that goal. We therefore call on
the parties to finalize its establishment without delay,
with the supervision of the United Nations. However,
if the regime's obstruction continues, it will be up to
the Special Envoy to tell us whether the constitutional
committee can really help initiate a political discussion.

Nevertheless, the constitutional committee cannot
be the only driver for the political process. In order to
ensure that the process does not stall, we must now
address the other aspects ofresolution 2254 (2015), first
by paying attention to the preparations for the Syrian
elections, which must be free and transparent and, in
keeping with resolution 2254 (2015), supervised by the
United Nations. All Syrians, including refugees, must
be allowed to participate. In order to emerge from the
Syrian tragedy, it is critical to give the Syrian people
the ability to once again freely express their views on
their country's future.

To bring about the political future that we all so
ardently seek, France places its full support in the
efforts of the Special Envoy to bring together the small
group and the guarantors of Astana within the same
international forum. We hope to see progress on this
issue over the weeks ahead.

Lastly, Council members are aware of our
position - shared with the European Union and which
remains unchanged - on reconstruction, the lifting of
sanctions and normalization.

We call on all members of the Security Council
to assume their responsibilities to bring an end to the
tragedy unfolding before our very eyes in Idlib and
urge them to support the draft resolution put forward
by the humanitarian co-penholders, Belgium, Germany
and Kuwait. Tragically, we have been too slow to act.
There is no more time to lose.

