Mr. Jolle (Denmark): My Government warmly
welcomes the initiative by the Council to hold this
special ministerial meeting today in order to address
the growing problems posed by piracy off the coast of
Somalia. In itself, the meeting underlines how piracy
has rapidly developed into a significant challenge to
the entire international community. Interventions made
here today by ministers and others representing all
regions of the world clearly illustrate the widespread
political will and determination to fight piracy and, in
particular, the need for us to do so in a joint effort.

The problems related to piracy cannot be solved
by any one State alone; they need to be addressed by
the international community through initiatives that
match the severity and urgency of the situation. As
expressed in the letter sent last month by my
Government to the Secretary-General, we therefore
strongly welcome and recognize the important work
already undertaken within the framework of the United
Nations and the International Maritime Organization,
including the recent adoption of Security Council
resolution 1846 (2008). We are also pleased to see
regional organizations, such as the European Union,
NATO, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, taking steps in various
ways to join international efforts to alleviate the
problems.

For some time now, Denmark has been engaged
in the international efforts to combat piracy. As a
nation with a large commercial fleet operating globally
with a substantial number of seafarers on board,

Denmark, for obvious reasons, has a keen interest in an
intensified international effort in this field. We have
contributed by providing maritime military escorts for
the transport of World Food Programme aid to
Somalia, and we are participating with a naval vessel
in the United Nations-supported operation Combined
Task Force 150, which is engaged in anti-piracy
activities off the coast of East Africa. We are currently
entrusted with the leadership of that maritime
operation.

In light of the large variety of actors in this field,
strengthened coordination is absolutely essential. We
therefore warmly welcome the paragraph in the
resolution calling for the establishment of an
international cooperation mechanism to act as a
common point of contact between and among States
and regional and international organizations on all
aspects of combating piracy off Somalia's coast. The
mechanism should be given a broad scope and will
constitute a major step forward. We welcome plans to
form a contact group based on resolution 1851 (2008)
and stand ready to participate actively in that effort.

A major focus area for the international
community's attention should be the question of
judicial infrastructure. Recently, Danish naval forces in
Combined Task Force 150 detained a number of
suspected pirates in international waters. Since it was
impossible to prosecute the suspects in Denmark or in
any other relevant State, Denmark eventually had to
release the detainees. That episode illustrates how third
States engaged in anti-piracy activities are faced with
very difficult challenges regarding the handling and
prosecution of persons detained in international waters
and suspected of piracy or other criminal activities.

In the long term, we may need to examine the
concept of bringing suspected pirates before an
international tribunal. In the shorter term, however, we
need to also focus on more practical solutions. In that
respect, it is of key importance to conclude regional
and bilateral agreements between States on the
extradition and prosecution of pirate detainees,
particularly in the region concerned. Consequently, we
strongly support the initiative of Governments in East
Africa, in cooperation with the IMO, to conclude a
regional agreement to prevent, deter and suppress
piracy and armed robbery against ships. In general, we
note and warmly welcome the many constructive and
cooperative signals we receive from nations in the
region.
We must also consider new and innovative
approaches. Denmark has suggested to the IMO that a
team of experts be established in order to assist
detaining States in ensuring that pirates detained at sea
are prosecuted. We have also proposed that the IMO, in
the context of technical cooperation, give priority to
those issues concerning the building of a stronger legal
infrastructure in the region. We appreciate the support
which we have received so far concerning those
proposals.

Finally, as indicated by others here today, piracy
is in many ways merely a symptom. Obviously, we also
need to look at its root causes and continue the work to
produce a cure. The situation inside Somalia is indeed
deeply worrying. We need to assist Somalia in
preventing and fighting piracy inland by supporting a
political solution and promoting peaceful and
sustainable development in parallel with our efforts to
combat piracy.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the strong
support of my Government to the international fight
against piracy reflected in resolution 1851 (2008).
Denmark will remain actively engaged and looks
forward to continued cooperation with all other actors
in this field.

