Mr. Tshibanda N'tungamulongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Sir, on your appointment as Secretary of State of the
United States of America. I also convey the pleasure
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo at seeing
you preside over the Security Council at this critical
moment in its history and to thank you for having taken
the initiative to organize this special meeting of the
Council on the Great Lakes region, which for some
years now has been prey to cyclical rebellions that have
been incontrovertibly shown to bear the same genetic
imprint and to be characterized by massive human rights
violations, summary and extrajudicial executions, the
drafting of child soldiers, sexual violence and rape, the
pillaging of private and public assets, and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.

By choosing to talk about the Democratic Republic
of the Congo at this specific moment, you have borne
witness to the importance that the Government of the
United States of America and the Security Council attach
to a return to lasting peace in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire region.

I would also like to take the opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his personal
involvement in the negotiation, conclusion and
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region, concluded in Addis Ababa
on 24 February. The Framework Agreement and its
supporting resolution 2098 (2013) represent major
innovations in both the understanding of the crisis that
has affected the Great Lakes region since the second
half of the 1990s, and of United Nations traditional
peacekeeping doctrine.

The long-suffering populations of the countries of
the region consider the Framework Agreement and the
aforementioned resolution to be compelling evidence
of the international community's determination to
help to find a sustainable solution to the instability
that has lasted far too long and for which my country
in particular has paid a heavy toll. The same is true
with respect to the recent joint visit to the region by
the Secretary-General, the President of the World
Bank and Ms. Mary Robinson, as well as the recent
appointments of Mr. Kobler as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Senator Feingold as United States
Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is a sad, often overlooked reality that, because of
the ongoing conflict, my country has lost over 6 million
souls. The scale of the tragedy has no equal in the
history of humankind, and to face it with indifference
would risk the loss of our collective soul. Today's
meeting forms part of the mutual effort to reaffirm
our humanity and to evaluate frankly and together the
implementation of the commitments made, with a view
to ending the tragedy in accordance with the important
Framework Agreement of 24 February and to identify
the remaining challenges so that, once peace is restored
once and for all, the region can devote its energy and
intelligence to the critical issues of fighting poverty
and improving the living conditions of the people.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
determined to shoulder its responsibility to ensure
the rapid restoration of peace and harmony in the
region. As proof, the day after signing the Framework
Agreement, the Congolese Government set out to fulfil
its obligations, which, incidentally, correspond to the
priority tasks identified 11 years ago. In that context,
we have not only accelerated security sector reform, but
promoted its institutionalization. The consolidation of
the infrastructure and personnel of the army, security
services and police; recruitment in the defence forces
of young Congolese from all provinces of the country;
the reopening of military academies; and the training,
with the assistance of bilateral partners, of special
forces and support units, with the primary aim of the
operationalizing the rapid reaction force are some of
the concrete actions recently undertaken with the goal
of creating professional and disciplined security and
defence forces that respect human rights in order to
more effectively defend our territory and bolster State
authority.

In order to strengthen that authority, especially in
the eastern part of the Republic, starting with Goma, the
national police, public administration and courts have
benefitted from prioritized capacity strengthening,
which has enabled the gradual resumption of control
of the situation. Decentralization, which is provided for
in the Constitution, is another step closer to realization
with the adoption of the necessary implementation
laws.

The positive results achieved in reforming public
finance administration over the past few years are
evident in the continued stability of the macroeconomic
framework, which has just been usefully supplemented
by the implementation of measures to enhance the
business climate and the national mineral resources
certification scheme. This will effectively strengthen
economic growth, which nevertheless is already one of
the highest in the continent and has been consistently
so for nearly 10 years. Better still, the Government
has just undertaken a thorough review of the poverty
reduction strategy paper with a view to more inclusive
growth, reversing the time lost in efforts to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals and ensuring
greater credibility and effectiveness in the fight against
poverty.

On the political front, reconciliation and
strengthening national unity are more than ever
on the daily agenda. Thus, the national oversight
mechanism on the implementation of the Framework
Agreement has been entrusted to a competent and
experienced individual from the political opposition.
The Independent National Electoral Commission has
been completely reformed and a new, more seasoned
and more inclusive team has just assumed leadership
of that important institution supporting democracy.
The new Commission has already mastered its task and
prioritized the preparation of the electoral process with
a view to organizing, in the best possible conditions,
local, municipal, provincial, senatorial and provincial
gubernatorial elections.

Moreover, upon the initiative of the President
of the Republic, national consultations are to begin
in August. Their purpose is to endeavour together
to find ways and means to enhance national unity in
order to better cope with all of the challenges facing
the Congolese nation. In an effort to be inclusive, the
forum will gather together, in addition to national and
provincial political institutions, political parties of
all persuasions, civil society in all its diversity, and
a significant representation of women and youth. Its
preparation and administration has been entrusted to a
presidium consisting of the President of the Senate - a
leader well known to the opposition, on whose behalf
he was elected to his post - and the President of the
National Assembly, a functionary of the presidential
majority.

As proof of the presidium's participatory nature,
the political opposition has recently prepared and
filed with the presidium and with the President of
the Republic a list of demands and proposals to be
addressed in the forum. For each of those reforms, as
for all other tasks of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo under the Framework Agreement, the terms
of reference or benchmarks have been or are being
developed and communications related to the matter
are under way with Ms. Mary Robinson and her team,
to whom we reaffirm our support and cooperation.
We will therefore be ready for the next meeting of the
regional oversight mechanism set to take place on the
sidelines of the next session of the General Assembly,
right here, in September.

While we are gathered here, the people of Goma
and Rutshuru are again living in fear and uncertainty
because of sporadic attacks carried out since the
adoption of resolution 2098 (2013). In defiance of the
latter, the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has launched
attacks on the defensive positions of the Forces arme'es
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC).

To conceal its inconsistent peaceful gesture,
that negative force is attempting to justify its crimes
through baseless accusations to discredit the FARDC,
the Force Intervention Brigade and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) by stating without
proof that they are collaborating with the Forces
democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda (FDLR).
United Nations officials have already responded to
these accusations.

For its part, the Democratic Republic of Congo
has categorically denied those allegations. It has sent
its response to the President of the Security Council,
with a request that it be distributed to all members of
the Council as an official document of the Security
Council. Careful examination of the documentation
that we have provided eloquently demonstrates the
policy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in that
area, as well as the scope, quality and effectiveness
of its efforts in the past five years to fight the FDLR,
which it would have completely neutralized had it not
been for the outbreak of the M-23 rebellion.

It should be noted that this positive assessment
has been certified by non-Congolese experts, who
could hardly be accused of complacency in that regard,
namely, MONUSCO and, most especially, those very
people who, today, by their accusations, seem to have
repudiated their own signatures.
It also should be noted that no country of the Great
Lakes region has advocated as hard as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the creation of the Force
Intervention Brigade, whose task is to neutralize all
negative elements, including the Forces de'mocratiques
de liberation du Rwanda, and for the Brigade to be
granted an offensive mandate.

It should be understood that the Democratic
Republic of Congo, whose population suffers more than
any other from the presence of foreign armed groups
on its territory, cannot maintain any collaboration
whatsoever with such groups, whose specialties include
murder, rape, all kinds of abuses, and the looting of
public and private property and natural resources. Any
such collaboration, if substantiated, would represent
instances of independent action on the ground, and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would unequivocally condemn them and stands ready
to unflinchingly punish them.

I take this opportunity to solemnly reaffirm that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has never waivered
from respecting and will continue to scrupulously
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other
States of the region and the sacrosanct principle of
non-interference in their internal affairs.

With regard to the involvement of certain elements
of the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) in human rights violations in Minova,
this case is being dealt with by the justice system and
any FARDC members whose guilt is established will
be severely punished, regardless of their rank. As for
recent allegations of the mistreatment of prisoners,
inhumane and degrading treatment, and the desecration
of the dead, investigations have just been launched to
establish the truth. Justice will be equally merciless for
the perpetrators of these acts, if confirmed. It should
nevertheless be underscored, with regard to these
allegations, that they are, to say they least, surprising,
because, while such human rights violations are known
to have been committed by the leaders of rebels groups
that were forerunners of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), this is the first time in 15 years of struggle
against various rebellions that regular army of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been the subject
of such accusations. That has something to say about
their credibility.

As is clear, the Democratic Republic of Congo is
significantly advanced in the implementation of its
commitments. It is therefore legitimate for us to expect
that other regional and international partners will make
the same effort.
The deployment on the ground of the Intervention
Brigade established under resolution 2098 (2013)
represents undeniable progress, which we fully
appreciate. Our aim now is to see the Brigade assume, as
quickly and efficiently as possible, the responsibilities
entrusted to it by the Security Council, which include
monitoring and securing the border between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours
to the East on the one hand and, on the other hand,
neutralizing all negative forces, without exception.

That said, we recognize that military force cannot
alone solve the complex equation of peace in the Great
Lakes region of Africa, where the causes of conflicts
and disputes are interlinked, as well as home-grown and
external alike. In the light of the extremism of virtually
all of these negative elements, force is necessary, but
not sufficient. To be sustainable, the solution must
also involve sincere dialogue among all internal and
external parties and the exhibition of good faith when it
comes to the conclusions reached these parties.

That is why, for our part, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will remain actively involved in the
Kampala talks, facilitated by Uganda in its capacity
as current Chair of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). However, we wish
to emphasize that, based on our experience of the
agreements reached in 2003, 2006 and 2009 with the
rebels- most of whom are now part of the M-23 - and
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, we are not ready to sign an agreement
that endorses impunity and reintegrates into the armed
forces persons subject to prosecution or international
sanctions due to mass violations of human rights, war
crimes, crimes of genocide or crimes against humanity,
as this would lay the foundation of a new breach of
peace and sow the seeds of instability.

To conclude, whatever the scars and horrors of the
suffering of the past, of which we are all aware and
which none of us would seek to understate, we cannot
lock us forever into a stance whereby no compromise
is possible. Without forgetting the past, we must focus
on reconciliation and cohesion within our States and
peaceful coexistence and cooperation between our
States. History and geography requires us to do so;
survival and sustainable development demand it.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo will never
surrender a square inch of its territory or any part of its
sovereignty over its wealth. But it remains ready, today
as yesterday, to agree on a pact for peace, stability
and development throughout the Great Lakes region
and, in this context, to develop regional cooperation.
Others before us, in other regions, have lived through
challenges similar to those facing our region. And they
found a way, without forgetting anything, to renounce
the reckless thirst for revenge. Their prosperity and
ongoing entente cordiale should inspire us.

The peoples of the Great Lakes region of Africa
have, like those elsewhere throughout the world,
the right to peace and prosperity. In reiterating my
congratulations and thanks, I beg you to believe, Sir,
in the inexhaustible determination of His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President ofthe Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to work towards a lasting peace
in the Great Lakes region, together with the Council,
the Secretary-General, his counterparts in the ICGLR
and the Southern African Development Community,
and all our other bilateral and multilateral partners.

