The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, Azerbaijan, Canada, Egypt,
Guatemala, Iraq, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Nigeria,
Norway, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Switzerland and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Nicolas Michel,
Legal Counsel of the United Nations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Michel to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Judge
Rosalyn Higgins, President of the International Court
of Justice.
It is so decided.

I invite Judge Higgins to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 June 2006 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2006/4l7 and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Thursday, 22 June 2006 in connection with the
open debate on strengthening international law:
rule of law and maintenance of international
peace and security."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document 5/2006/367, which contains the
text of a letter dated 7 June 2006 from the Permanent
Representative of Denmark to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

I should now like to make some introductory
remarks in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Denmark.

It is an honour, and indeed a pleasure, to
welcome all of you to this debate. The topic of today's
discussion is "Strengthening international law: rule of
law and the maintenance of international peace and
security" or, in short, the "Security Council and
international law".
06-40028
The Security Council is essentially a political
body with far-reaching powers to maintain or restore
international peace and security. Yet the Council
operates within a legal framework set out in the United
Nations Charter. The consequences for international
law of the actions of the Security Council should not
be underestimated. That is particularly true when the
Council acts in the context of the challenges of a
changing world. It is therefore, in my view, most
relevant that the Council from time to time addresses
the issue of international law in a more comprehensive
way. That is the purpose of this debate today.

The aim of this debate is to take a step back from
the daily business of the Council - to start from the
well-established recognition that international law
plays a critical role in fostering stability and order in
international relations and, from that basis, to consider
how the Council can further contribute to strengthening
and developing an international order based on the rule
of law.

The Council promotes the rule of law in post-
conflict national societies in order to ensure the
stability and legitimacy of those societies. International
relations need to be governed by the rule of law in the
same way. Today, more than ever before, the Council's
legitimacy and credibility rest on its explicit
commitment to operate within the framework - and in
the furtherance -of international law.

In order to focus our debate, we have distributed
a discussion paper under the symbol S/2006/367, of
7 June 2006, identifying certain issues we believe merit
particular attention.

The first issue is that we must not allow a culture
of impunity to prevail. Those responsible for atrocities
must be brought to justice. The resolution passed last
Friday on Charles Taylor and his transfer to The Hague
is the latest example of the firm hand of the Council on
this dossier.

Secondly, sanctions should be targeted in order to
enhance their efficiency and reduce the risk of innocent
third parties becoming victims of such measures. The
fight against terrorism must be conducted in
accordance with human rights standards. We must
improve due process guarantees in our sanctions
regimes, inter alia by introducing adequate
mechanisms for delisting. Our sanctions will then be
even more credible and efficient.
06-40028

Thirdly, the promotion of the rule of law in post-
conflict situations is crucial to preventing the
recurrence of armed conflict. Security, development
and human rights for all are mutually reinforcing
elements in establishing and maintaining societies
based on the rule of law.

The fourth issue is that the peaceful settlement of
disputes, inter alia through resort to the International
Court of Justice, is at the heart of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Those are the four overriding themes of today's
discussion.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Nicolas Michel and Judge Rosalyn
Higgins.

I now give the floor to Mr. Michel, Legal Counsel
of the United Nations.


