Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his informative briefing
and welcome Director Imam to our deliberations.
The visit of members of the Security Council to the
countries of the Lake Chad basin enabled us to learn
more about the Multinational Joint Task Force, as well
as the humanitarian situation. That will help in devising
a future comprehensive strategy focused on addressing
the root causes and the socioeconomic dimension of
the crisis. The measures of the Multinational Joint
Task Force and the national armies of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria have resulted successfully
in combating Boko Haram. Notwithstanding those
gains, much needs to be accomplished. To fight Boko
Haram, we have to robustly strengthen the framework
of integrated assistance for countering terrorism
for the joint force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Resolving the humanitarian situation requires the
resettlement of displaced people and refugees and
immediately addressing the level of critical food
insecurity. Returning to villages of origin is vital to
beginning a new life and restarting agriculture to avert
a potential famine.

Access to areas remains a challenge, despite efforts
to overcome them, and therefore the establishment of
humanitarian assistance in Nigeria and other measures
should be supported. It will also be essential to
implement the tripartite agreement between Cameroon,
Nigeria and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to manage the voluntary
return of refugees across the countries' borders.

Care for the half-million children suffering from
severe, acute malnutrition and disease should be
administered in the light of destroyed health facilities.
The detention of children must be stopped during
counter-terrorism responses, with the prohibition of
the use of schools and hospitals for military purposes.
Furthermore, the abduction of and Violence directed
against women and girls by Boko Haram, as well as
the responses of security forces and vigilante groups in
counter-terrorism operations, demand global attention.

Headquarters, together with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and UN-Women, must continue to advocate with the
Governments and the Multinational Joint Task Force
to advance a strategy to prevent sexual exploitation
and abuse. That could be facilitated by recruiting
dedicated gender advisers at all phases of the peace and
development process.

The complex plight of people living in affected
areas continues to impede the recovery in progress. In
that regard, implementing the tripartite convention to
strengthen judicial cooperation signed by Chad, Mali
and the Niger would offer them better legal protection.

The trip to the Lake Chad basin region vividly
demonstrated that we need to strengthen the role of
the United Nations system, in close consultation with
national authorities within the context of the United
Nations development assistance framework so that the
United Nations delivers as one. The coordinated activity
of all United Nations agencies and programmes across
the board will help deliver assistance in an effective,
economically rational and transparent manner.
Moreover, investments are essential to reducing
poverty, providing education, health care and social
services, and encouraging opportunities, which would
considerably improve the socioeconomic situation.

We are convinced that long-term stability and
sustainable peace can be achieved only through the nexus
linking peace, security and development. Above all, the
recent two visits by members of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to Africa, respectively, have
amply demonstrated the need to promote a regional
approach, which is the only way forward. Threats to the
region, such as terrorism, environmental degradation
and underdevelopment, cannot be successfully
addressed in one country alone. They are interregional
in nature and must be addressed accordingly.

