Mr. Yacouba: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
honour and opportunity to speak to the Security Council
about improving protection by building governance in
ungoverned spaces.

A combination of factors, coupled with the slow
implementation of the peace agreement and with the
2012 crisis, have significantly reduced the capacity of
the State in the northern and later central regions where
it is struggling to carry out its functions. That has
eroded public confidence in the State and its services,
thereby creating a conducive environment for extremist
and terrorist groups, who provide the social needs
of the populations in their areas of influence, with
multiple asymmetric attacks against Malian defence
and security forces, international forces and civilians
who refuse to accept their cause.

Despite the gradual operationalization of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the
announcement of efforts by the Malian security forces
and the extension of the State of emergency, some
communities have fallen under the sway of violent
extremist groups and resorted to self-defence groups,
which further complicates the situation by exacerbating
inter-community conflicts and their impact on civilians.

(spoke in French)

Police of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
acting in accordance with the integrated strategic
framework, are committed to the priorities of the
Mission as defined in resolution 2480 (2019) and are
contributing to the administration of governance in a
way that enhances protection in ungoverned areas in
Mali. Capacity-building and developing the Malian
security forces is therefore a major part of our work,
as reflected in training activities and advice in various
areas, in addition to efforts by other actors, including
the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in the
Sahel. We have also been developing infrastructure and
equipment in order to accelerate the restauration and
expansion of State authority throughout Mali.

In the area of civilian protection, MINUSMA
police provide crucial support to the operationalization
of the strategy for the centre of the country, to the
functionality of the operations and intelligence analysis
centre, as well as to the centre for coordination and
risk management in analysing information. Those
coordinating mechanisms allow for an improvement in
operational capacity through monitoring and an early-
warning system.

Moreover, in the centre, MINUSMA police support
the implementation of Government-initiated strategies,
including the Integrated Security Plan for the Central
Regions and a Malian comprehensive strategy to protect
civilians, reduce inter-community violence and restore
the authority of the State and essential social services.
That support has made it possible to redeploy defence
and security forces, albeit hesitant, and to organize
coordinated and joint operations, operational logistical
support and transport.

In the fight against impunity, which is one of the
root causes of the crisis, MINUSMA provides crucial
support in strengthening the criminal justice system
through capacity-building, development, advisory
support and the use of technical and scientific data.

Regarding the development and implementation
of a comprehensive plan for the redeployment of
reformed and reconstituted defence and security forces,
MINUSMA strongly advocates for the acceleration
of the security sector reform process and through
consultation and will contribute to the development of
internal security and civilian protection strategies.

Overall, the issue of governing in ungoverned zones
is a daily reminder that strengthening trust among the
population and authorities is a requirement that is
often forgotten. In that regard, MINUSMA supports
Government initiatives in engaging with communities
and civil society on the security issues affecting them.
Indeed, in a country as geographically and culturally
diverse as Mali, great importance must be attached
to the concept of community policing, a major focus
of security sector reform. The aim is to establish
strategic partnerships based on prior consultation and
community involvement.

(spoke in English)

There are many challenges to these efforts,
including the slow pace of the security sector reform
process and ensuring an integrated and coordinated
approach to security issues, border management and
continued funding for the capacity-building of the
Malian defence and security forces. Nevertheless, I
am convinced that, in the long term, our integrated
efforts will contribute to strengthening protection and
restoring State authority through the development of
the resilience of communities at the grass-roots level
and the improvement of trust between the population
and State authorities, especially the security forces.
