Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting.
Following Uruguay's example, I wish to briefly express
some views before the discussion on this item in closed
consultations. I thank Mr. Mladenov and Mr. O'Brien
for their briefings.
We stress once again - as we do every month when
we hear yet another report on what is happening ~ that
the tragedy in Palestine is the longest-lasting case with
no resolution by the Security Council. We have beaten
the Council's sad record of lack of ability or political
will to reach a positive response to the tragedy that the
Palestinian people are suffering.

We would like to voice our deepest rejection of and
indignation at the State of Israel's permanent policy
of aggression towards the Palestinian people and its
occupation of their territory. It is surprising that Israel is
one of probably only two or three countries in the world
that disregard Security Council resolutions, and that in
violation of all United Nations resolutions, including
the Council's, it has continued to move forward, in as
flagrant and illegal manner, with a policy of colonizing
Palestinian territory. The status quo is unsustainable,
as every delegation in the Security Council has said,
but it continues to dig itself in deeper and weaken the
possibility of a two-State solution.

We reiterate that the occupation ofPalestine requires
re-establishing the full rights of the Palestinian people
to their self-determination and independence, as well as
Israel's withdrawal from all occupied territories to the
pre-l967 borders. We once again reject the settlement
policy of the occupying Power. Israeli settlements are
not only illegal and run counter to all international
law and resolutions but - worse yet - are also part
of an ongoing strategy by the occupying Power aimed
at colonizing Palestinian territory and expelling
Palestinians from their land. We think that the recent
decisions by the Israeli Government to attempt to
use legal subterfuge to justify settlement expansions
requires a resounding response by the Security Council.

We do not know for how long we will be able to
ask Palestine to continue to be patient or how long we
can ask the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian
people to continue to wait until the Security Council
agrees upon a strategy. This is a situation in which
the Security Council is shirking its responsibility.
As an elected member of the Security Council until
31 December, and given that many States here are
involved in dealing with the question of Palestine,
including, in particular, Senegal, which co-chairs the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People and is the African representative
of the Arab people, we believe that time is right for
the Council to at least adopt a draft resolution that
denounces the settlements as illegal and insists that
Israel comply with international law.
I want to underscore that at the latest informal
consultations we held with representatives of Israeli
civil society, one of the participants said that part of the
problem and the reason for which Israeli Governments
acts with impunity is that there is no international
response to the violations of the provisions of the
Security Council and the United Nations. There is no
response, and the Israeli authorities therefore are acting
as though they have the support or, at least, the green
light of some of the members of the Security Council.
We would like to make a particular appeal to the United
States delegation. Although we are in a transition
period between Administrations, President Obama is
still in power and perhaps has a last opportunity to say
something in favour of the Palestinian people, legality
and the rule of law.

Lastly, we would be remiss if we failed to mention
the humanitarian situation in the occupied territories
and the situation marked by extraordinary violence
that the occupying Power exerts upon the Palestinian
people. More than 7,000 Palestinians are held in Israeli
prisons. More than 700 men, women and children are
subject to administrative detention. We want to speak
out in particular on behalf of the Palestinian children
who are subject to military tribunal simply because
they are voicing their ire and opposition to the Israeli
occupation and ongoing Israeli violence against
their people. We would also like to say that, through
the settlements policy and their expansion, great
prominence is being given to a very aggressive group,
that is, extremist settlers, who carry out daily acts
oppression and violence against the Palestinian people.

Finally, we once again call on all members of
the Security Council to have the courage to take the
historic step to reject clearly what Israel is doing in the
occupied territories and to give a glimmer of hope for
all the diplomatic efforts, including those supported by
the Quartet, Russia and France, and all initiatives that
deserve the unqualified support of the Security Council.

