Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to welcome
the decision of the Security Council to convene this
open debate on the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, which is of great concern to all
Member States. I wish to commend the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for its
work in updating the aide-memoire as well as the road
map on protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Let me also take advantage of this opportunity to
welcome the press statement by the President of the
Security Council - you yourself - issued yesterday
on the condemnation of the attacks in Iraq on foreign
and Iraqi nationals and on international and coalition
personnel, including two fellow Japanese diplomats.

Japan shares the conviction that, under any and
all circumstances, civilians should be protected from
becoming the targets of deliberate attacks. Attacks on
vulnerable civilians, who have no means of defending
themselves - especially children and women - are
disgraceful, barbaric and cowardly acts. They also
destroy the basic fabric of society, generate enmity and
mutual distrust, and do irreparable harm to any
opportunity for rehabilitating post-conflict
communities. Every attack against civilians must be
strongly condemned and the perpetrators brought to
justice in accordance with international law.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is an
area where a human security approach is also
indispensable. As the report of the Commission on
Human Security points out, human security should be
placed on the security agenda, and humanitarian action
should be strengthened; these are two important
policies, which must be enhanced. Japan is determined
to cooperate closely with the various stakeholders to
promote human security in this field.

The aide-memoire is an important tool; it helps to
guide us in our consideration of protection issues.
Threats to civilians are so diverse and complex that we
may find it difficult to focus our efforts. However, we
must not become confused in the face of seemingly
complicated situations. Let me try to draw a clearer
picture ofthe challenges we face and the tasks ahead of
us with respect to the protection of civilians by
discussing the sources, types and duration of threats to
civilians in armed conflict.

First, let me turn to the sources of threats and
ways to address them. In recent times, while the
number of armed conflicts taking the form of
traditional wars between sovereign States is down, we
have, however, witnessed an alarming increase in
armed conflicts within national borders, or sometimes
across national borders, between Governments and
rebel groups or among non-State parties. Such armed
conflicts often take place because of bitter enmity
based on such factors as tribal, ethnic or religious
differences. In such cases, the hostilities are usually
extremely intense, and a large number of civilians tend
to fall victim to them.

Protecting civilians in the midst of armed conflict
under such circumstances requires the engagement of
those groups that have taken up arms. In many cases,
only neutral players such as special representatives of
the Secretary-General or the Emergency Relief
Coordinator can accomplish this. These are among the
few agents who are in a position to communicate
directly with armed groups to remind them of the
necessity of protecting civilians and of their direct
responsibility under international humanitarian law to
do so.

Such involvement is sometimes looked upon with
suspicion, as it is considered interference in internal
affairs. However, it should not be viewed as a
challenge to national sovereignty, especially when
national authorities have failed, or have a limited
capacity, to protect civilians. In reality, such a direct
dialogue should be seen as an effort to complement
national sovereignty.

Secondly, let me turn to the types of threats that
exist. It is not sufficient simply to protect civilians
from physical harm; their human dignity must also be
protected. Vulnerable civilians cannot recover their
dignity if they are left in extremely poor conditions as
a result of armed conflict. They need to engage in their
livelihoods free from fear of extreme poverty,
starvation or deadly disease. They need to be
empowered in order to become constructive actors in
their communities. Humanitarian and rehabilitation
assistance plays an important role in addressing such
needs.

Without proper arrangements to secure access to
people in need and to ensure the safety of aid workers,
however, such workers will be unable to perform their
roles. Thus it is Vital, through the concerted efforts of
the international community, including direct dialogue
with armed groups, to ensure that such arrangements
are made. We should redouble our efforts to discuss the
expansion of the scope of protection, under a clear
definition, of the existing Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel.

Thirdly, on the duration of threats, we must bear
in mind that civilians often continue to be in danger
even after major battles have ended. We should not be
misled by the rather artificial demarcation between
conflict and post-conflict situations. So-called post-
conflict situations often remain precarious and highly
likely to revert to conflict situations in the absence of
deliberate measures and attention.

The restoration of social stability is indispensable
to the lasting protection of civilians. To that end, it is
of the utmost importance to collect and destroy
firearms that have been widely circulated throughout a
society, and to demobilize ex-combatants and then
rehabilitate them and reintegrate them into society as
normal citizens - what is called the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
(DDRR) process. The reconstruction of an impartial
and dependable police force and of other law
enforcement systems is indispensable, too.
Furthermore, it is also important to put an end to
impunity for those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian, human rights and criminal
law, in order to achieve real national reconciliation and
rebirth.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
task that requires close coordination and cooperation
among various organs of the United Nations system as
well as with Member States and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). In this context, it might be
worthwhile for the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council to convene a joint meeting to
address the issue. Coordination among the relevant
departments of the Secretariat should also be
strengthened and continuously reviewed. We welcome
in this context what has been done to improve
coordination between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and OCHA better to reflect the
points made in the aide-memoire. Due attention should
be paid to the aide-memoire at every stage of planning
a response to a complex emergency situation.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
not a new agenda item, but, as the road map
demonstrates, there are still many tasks to be carried
out. We must not forget that most civilian casualties
have occurred in the course of emergencies that have
been prolonged but have failed to attract much
international attention. Japan welcomes further
discussion, which will help us better to position
ourselves to meet the wide range of challenges we face
in addressing the question of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

