Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset I should like to express our thanks
and appreciation to all the members of the Security
Council that voted in favour of the draft resolution that
was just voted upon. The overwhelming support for the
draft resolution, expressed in the fact that 14 members of
the Council voted in favour of it, is a genuine
demonstration of the clear and decisive position of the
international community against the illegal Israeli action
to confiscate land in occupied East Jerusalem.

I should like also to express our deep appreciation to
the members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) that
are members of the Council, namely, Botswana,
Honduras, Nigeria, Indonesia, Rwanda and Oman - the
Coordinator of the NAM. caucus, and a sister Arab
country - for their cosponsorship of the draft resolution,
as well as for their introduction of it before the Council,
and their decisive insistence on upholding the principled
positions of the Non-Aligned Movement on this crucial
and essential question: the question of Jerusalem. We are
proud of the position taken by the Arab and Islamic
countries on this central issue, which is of great concern
to both the Islamic and the Arab countries. All this, in
addition to the position expressed by a large number of
those who spoke before the Council, should be seen as
genuine achievements in the interest of justice,
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
It should be understood as a clear message to the parties
concerned. To the Palestinian and Arab party it is a
message of support from the international community for
the essence of the Palestinian position with regard to the
question of Jerusalem. To the Israeli side it should be
seen as a total rejection by the international community of
the land confiscation measures and the illegal Israeli
actions in the Holy City, including the expansion of the
municipal boundaries of Jerusalem, the annexation of
Jerusalem and the declaration of the city as the capital of
Israel.

Unfortunately, despite the clear stand taken by the
international community, the Security Council was
intentionally and by coercion prevented from expressing
itself and from assuming its duties and implementing its
responsibilities - responsibilities that remain in place
either within or without the peace process. That has been
demonstrated by the use by the United States of its right
of veto. This United States position, which cannot conceal

 

the real position of the international community that I have
just outlined, without a doubt will cause harm to the
Security Council itself and to the pattern of prevailing
international relations. In addition, it will cause harm to the
United States itself and to its commitment to international
law and its role as a cosponsor of the peace process. Lastly,
it will cause severe harm to the peace process itself.

As is known, this veto today is the first political veto
that has been cast since the end of the cold war and comes
at a time when the world had begun to think that the
pattern of international relations had gone beyond such a
practice, at least in this form, while there exists some
international consensus on a position different from the
position of the permanent member concerned.

At this juncture, I must emphasize that we do not
accept the position of the United States of America, which
seems to consider that the existence of the peace process
would marginalize the role of the Security Council and its
responsibilities vis-a-vis the situation in the Middle East.

With regard to the United States itself, it is very hard
indeed to understand how a super-Power, a party to the
Fourth Geneva Convention and all relevant Security
Council resolutions, could vote against the provisions of the
Convention and those of the Council's resolutions. In point
of fact, this vote contravenes the supreme law of the land.
Then there is the general political meaning of the United
States position with regard to the Arab and Islamic
countries, in particular those that enjoy a special, friendly
relationship with the United States. This position indeed
totally ignores the strong views expressed by these
countries en masse and at the highest level, and does not
take into account the arguments; nor does it take into
account the centrality and sensitivity of Jerusalem to those
countries, which consider Jerusalem to be a red line.
Tampering with it will surely produce dire consequences
sooner or later.

We believe that the use by the United States of the
right of veto will complicate the peace process in the region
and will not help the parties in the negotiation process; on
the contrary, it will be counterproductive. We believe also
that this veto runs contrary to the foundations of the peace
process and to the Palestinian participation in that process.
By this we have in mind the United States letter of
assurances to the Palestinian side. It is our View that in the
interest of the continuation of the peace process the United
States side should reaffirm to the Palestinian side its
commitment to the full contents of this letter and its
position, as well as to the tenets of the peace process as a
whole. In addition, we believe that a more neutral and
balanced United States position towards the parties to the
conflict in the Middle East would definitely contribute to
the success of the peace process. Any attempt to deviate
from that position, as we have seen today, will only
complicate the process and lead to its loss of credibility.

Indeed, it is unfortunate that Jerusalem, the key to
peace, has become the issue upon which the United States
side has chosen to exercise its veto power. This step, in
the view of many, represents a clear backing of the illegal
Israeli action and an attempt to legalize it, thus preventing
the international community from sending a decisive
message to the Israeli Government regarding the dangers
of its action and its negative implications for the peace
process. At this point I really cannot assess those
implications very accurately.

Finally, I should like to express our deep thanks to
you personally, Sir, for the skilful manner in which you
have presided over the Council this month. May I call on
you to follow up this matter and to continue to fulfil your
obligations as President in order to ensure that the Israeli
confiscation orders, which are illegal, are rescinded.

