Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this Security
Council meeting at the request of the Arab Group. The
situation on the ground clearly justifies this meeting.
The issue under consideration is certainly one of the
most sensitive that the international community is
called upon to consider and take a stand on.

My country has always maintained good, friendly
relations with the Arab world, based on the principles
of solidarity and mutual understanding. We have also
expressed our support for the Palestinian people and
have consistently reaffirmed their inalienable right to
self-determination and statehood. On the other hand,
my country, the Republic of Angola, has established
good, friendly relations with the State of Israel -
relations that we hope to see strengthened and made
mutually advantageous to our countries and peoples.

It is therefore with a sense of profound grief that
we witness the ongoing conflict between two peoples
who have made outstanding contributions to the
world's civilization. The issue is where, when and how
to break this fatal linkage, the cause of daily loss of life
and untold suffering for both peoples. On the ground,
we witness a state of affairs that is absolutely contrary
to the wishes of the international community and of all
those who strive to bring about a new era in Israeli-
Palestinian relations.

To us, the separation wall seems the most
conspicuous initiative in such a state of affairs, an
initiative likely to jeopardize all the efforts by the
international community with a view to settling the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and bringing a just and
lasting peace to the region. In the long run, the wall -
like identical ones built in the past to divide peoples -
is doomed to fail and to fall.

The building of the wall in the West Bank has
translated into a state of fear that assuredly will not
lead to positive results. Fear is always a very nasty
adviser, and it is an artificial solution to the problems
Israel faces. Instead of solving the problems it was
intended to solve, the wall will only create new,
unresolved ones. The separation wall is doomed to
create a situation that will definitely jeopardize all
prospects for peace as well as the vision, so eloquently
spelled out, of two peoples and countries living side by
side in peace and security. We deem it essential that
Israel be persuaded that its security will be better
ensured in the long run by genuine gestures of peace
than by walls of separation.

The last meeting of the Quartet, held in New York
on 26 September, was very clear on its position. While
recognizing Israel's legitimate right to self-defense, it
called on Israel to put an end to the collective
punishment of the Palestinian population while noting
with great concern, the building of Israel's West Bank
fence, a real euphemism for the separation wall we are
discussing.

The Quartet recalled its direct consequences on
the daily lives of the Palestinian people, and how it
undermines the Palestinians' trust in the road map
process, by prejudging the final borders of a future
Palestinian State.

We fully agree with the Quartet's position and
call on the parties to abide by its provisions in order to
put the peace process back on track. We must
encourage the parties to give peace a chance.

To conclude, we took note of the draft resolution
tabled by the other group. The principles outlined in
the draft are universally accepted principles of
international law, such as the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. The building of the
separation wall stands as a clear violation of such a
principle; therefore, we cannot but accept the reason
why such a resolution has been tabled.

We agree with the need to end the occupation of
the Palestinian territories, for which the construction of
a wall of separation is yet another act which further
aggravates the spiral of violence prevailing in the
region. We would therefore like to appeal to the parties
to consider the positions which have been followed
until now and to give peace a chance. Through this
resolution, our Council will be sending a clear signal to
the parties and to the region.

