Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): It is an honour to address
the Council during today's debate on the question
concerning Haiti. We naturally align ourselves with the
statement delivered by The Honourable P.J. Patterson,
Special Representative of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) on Haiti and former Prime Minister of
Jamaica. On behalf of the member States of the
CARICOM. region, allow me to extend a special thanks
to your Government, Madame President, for convening
this very important debate.

For CARICOM. member States, the rebuilding of
Haiti into a democratic, stable and economically viable
society is a matter of the utmost priority. We thank all
States members of the international community for
their continued support and assistance to our sister
country, Haiti.

CARICOM. continues to commend the critical
role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) in its efforts to maintain peace and
security in Haiti and to lay the foundation for long-
term recovery and stability. The activities undertaken
by MINUSTAH, which span the entire spectrum -
from security to development, from support for State
institutions and the rehabilitation and training of the
Haitian National Police to child protection, HIV/AIDS
and gender issues - have laid the foundation for
Haiti's long-term post-earthquake recovery. The men
and women of MINUSTAH deserve not only our
gratitude but also our support and commitment to
ensuring that we too meet our obligations to the
Haitian people.

More than a year after the earthquake, Haiti
continues to face daunting challenges. A significant
number of those displaced by the earthquake continue
to live in camps; the situation of women and girls and
other vulnerable groups within those camps continues
to be very precarious; and crime and criminality are on
the rise. The survival of the people of Haiti demands
our long-term engagement.

The recent successful conclusion of the second
round of voting, which was overseen by a joint
monitoring team of the Organization of American
States and CARICOM, will in the long term,
reinvigorate Haiti's political process, and place the
Haitian people firmly in charge of their own destiny.

As we work collectively towards a viable future
for Haiti, CARICOM. has undertaken a number of key
initiatives to provide a viable economic future for the
Haitian people. CARICOM, through its Council of
Trade and Economic Development, has granted a three-
year, one-way, duty-free concession to goods entering
the CARICOM. Single Market from Haiti. The Council
is also examining an expansion of the list of goods
covered. It is our firm belief that Haiti's long-term
economic recovery and its full integration within the
CARICOM. Single Market and Economy will redound
to the benefit of the entire Caribbean.

Furthermore, CARICOM. Governments have
encouraged the regional private sector to collaborate
and take advantage of the opportunities offered by
Haiti, in order to strengthen its position in regional and
external markets in the long run. Additionally,
CARICOM. Governments have supported the
establishment of a CARICOM. special fund for private-
sector investment in Haiti to facilitate Caribbean
private-sector investment in development activities in
the country. Outreach will continue to be undertaken,
including to members of the Caribbean diaspora, to
contribute to the fund.

CARICOM. Governments have also committed to
providing support to augment Haiti's institutional
capacity and to make available professional and
technical expertise in the short to medium term.
CARICOM. remains steadfast in its goal that Haiti will
not be left behind. Ultimately, we will judge our
success by Haiti's success. I am pleased to report that
the Bahamas and Trinidad and Tobago are both
members of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti, which I think is indicative of
CARICOM. member States' readiness and willingness
to assist and support, in all ways possible, the creation
of the conditions necessary for stability and for social,
political and economic development in our sister
country. We reaffirm our commitment to work with
other Member States in whatever context necessary and
appropriate.
11-29077

However, those efforts must be complemented by
activities being undertaken by the wider international
community. In that regard, we must reiterate some of
the concerns raised by CARICOM. heads of State and
Government at their meeting held in February.
CARICOM. leaders are concerned that the seeming
shift away from the planning and implementation of
projects under the Haiti Recovery Fund, to a bilateral
approach, does not bode well for addressing the long-
term priorities laid out by the Haitian Government in
its Haiti action plan. CARICOM. leaders also called for
a review of the working methods of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission, in order to ensure that the
priorities of the Haitian Government are met with the
urgency that its mandate requires.

CARICOM. leaders also continued to call for
greater financial contributions to the Haitian Recovery
Fund by the international donor community and for
synchronization of their bilateral activities with the
priorities of the Government, while maintaining the
integrity of the process. The international community
must also make good on the long-overdue pledges of
billions of dollars that were made in the wake of the
catastrophic earthquake in Haiti last year. It is
unconscionable that promises made would become
promises not be kept, particularly when one takes into
account the dire and basic needs of Haiti and its
people.

Over the short to medium term, Haiti will require
substantial support, both political and economic, for
the new Government that is expected to be sworn into
office in mid-May.

As the Atlantic hurricane season draws ever
closer, the role of MINUSTAH will continue to be
essential, and greater focus must be given to providing
sustainable shelter to those remaining in camps for
internally displaced persons and other makeshift
communities across the country. Greater attention must
also be paid to disaster-mitigation measures, including
a public education and outreach programme for the
Haitian people.

Those goals cannot be achieved by MINUSTAH
acting without the support and cooperation of the
remainder of the United Nations system. Coordinated
action within the system by regional actors and the
international donor community, based on the priorities
identified by the Haitian Government, is the only
means of achieving tangible success on the ground.
Our commitment to building Haiti back better can
only be realized through a coordinated effort by the
entire international community. Neither the people of
Haiti nor the wider international community will
accept our failure.

