My delegation takes this opportunity to commend you, Mr. President, for having convened today's timely open debate of the Security Council on "Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace". We would also like to thank today's eminent briefers, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the Director of the Center on International Cooperation, New York University, Sarah Cliffe, for their extensive and insightful interventions today. We are now collectively coming to terms with the understanding that the challenges facing conflict-vulnerable countries and populations have multiplied due to the prolonged coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Therefore, the international community needs to pay increased attention to the unique situations of such vulnerable countries, and my delegation feels that today's discussion is essential, as it reflects a common response to this challenge. As noted in the unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), it is crucial to recognize that the COVID-19 outbreak could reverse the peacebuilding gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict countries. With that in mind, the Republic of Korea hopes that the Security Council can maintain its focus on this issue and contribute to strengthening resilience for such countries. We also hope to see more cooperative and constructive discussions on this critical topic moving forward. Against that backdrop, the Republic of Korea would like to highlight the following four points. First, we must carefully assess the pandemic's impacts on domestic and international conflicts. Furthermore, based on the shared assessment of conflict risks, we must also integrate a conflict-sensitivity lens when we establish international response strategies for countries in need. Due to the socioeconomic shocks of COVID-19, we face the possibility of a surge in conflicts. As such, it is high time to scale up our investment in the United Nations system-wide peacebuilding process in order to prevent a reversal of the peacebuilding gains that we have accomplished over the years. At the same time, we also need to consider COVID-19's impacts on inequality, which, of course, can also be a driver of conflict on its own. In that connection, it is critical to adopt an inclusive approach in any response plan to aid conflict-vulnerable countries. By increasing the engagement of civil society and local communities, we can also help deal with the root causes of conflict more effectively. In that respect, my delegation hopes that the 2020 peacebuilding architecture review can serve as an important opportunity to open up a new chapter for the entire United Nations system to introduce a conflict-sensitivity lens to the overall system- wide approach. Secondly, my delegation would like to emphasize that as this unprecedented pandemic continues, it is crucial to strengthen the coherence of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) with the Security Council and enhance the complementary relationship between the two bodies. We take this opportunity to commend the leadership of the PBC in showing agility and flexibility in responding to the crisis. We also hope that the PBC can catalyse its unique convening power to serve as a hinge in linking the three pillars of the United Nations system. As noted in the letter from the group of independent eminent persons addressed to the President of the Security Council, "the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council would benefit from enhanced interaction, particularly concerning peace operation mandates" (S/2020/678, annex IT, p. 8). Thirdly, we would also like to bring more attention to the role of the United Nations and the importance of its capacity-building, particularly in the areas of technology and health care. Recently we have been witnessing a trend where peacebuilding mandates are regarded as an important element of peacekeeping operations' missions. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to place restrictions on implementing peacebuilding mandates such as engagement with the local community. With that in mind, it is now vital to redouble our efforts in applying the latest technology, particularly to assist missions in areas related to telecommunications, intelligence-gathering and enhancing digital technology. Such efforts would go a long way towards offering timely support to those in the field striving to carry out their mandates in the time of COVID-19. Additionally, to support the medical capacities of vulnerable host countries, peacekeeping operations must go further in building up their own medical capacities. As the host country of the 2021 United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference, to be held in Seoul next April, the Republic of Korea hopes that there will be elevated interest on these two topics - technology and medical capacity - and looks forward to further developing in-depth discussions on those issues at the Ministerial. Fourthly, with regard to the financing situation related to sustaining peace, my delegation is concerned that financing for peacebuilding could diminish as a result of the surge in humanitarian aid related to the COVID-19 crisis. We hope to continue to discuss innovative solutions with a view to achieving a breakthrough on the issue. In line with Korea's strong national commitment to peacebuilding, which includes our tenure as Chair and then Vice-Chair of the PBC, we are proud to not only contribute to the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) each year but also to increase our annual contributions. However, we are concerned that funding for peacebuilding activities, including contributions to the PBF, does not yet meet the current demand from the countries in need. Therefore, broadening and diversifying the donor base is essential, particularly alongside continued cooperation with the international financial institutions. In his report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, contained in document S/2018/43, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres suggested exploring opportunities for contributions from the private sector. Considering the current fiscal realities, we hope that that suggestion will be duly considered. COVID-19 is an ongoing crisis that continues to hit the peacebuilding and sustainable development sectors of the international community hard. However, we can also use this crisis as an opportunity to refocus our discussion on the 2020 peacebuilding architecture review. In that regard, we hope that the sustaining peace approach can be more firmly established in the United Nations system. The Republic of Korea, as a member of the PBC and a member of the Group of Friends of Solidarity for Global Health Security, will continue to strive to make an active contribution to the enhancement of sustaining peace in response to this unprecedented pandemic.
