Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Madam President, in this
twilight of your presidency, the Botswana delegation takes
great pleasure in saluting you and your record of
achievement as President of our Council during this very
long month of February. We thank you for keeping us
awake until dawn on Monday and for your tenacity of
purpose throughout this hypertensive week. We wish you
a restful retirement from the presidency of the Council.

The United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) has
done a commendable job in assisting the Haitian authorities
in sustaining a secure and stable environment, in organizing
successful municipal and legislative elections and, above
all, in managing the smooth transition from one
democratically elected president to another - no mean
feat, given the tortured political history of Haiti. But our
most ardent commendations deservedly go to the people
of Haiti themselves, who have demonstrated great
determination and unity of purpose in rejecting the old
oligarchic and despotic rule and embraced a new
democratic culture. One might say that UNMIH has done
such a wonderful job that it has put itself out of a job.
Yet a lot still remains to be done in the country.

Almost everything in Haiti hinges on the question of
the security situation in the country: the consolidation of
democracy, the rule of law, foreign and domestic
investment and economic development generally would
thrive only if peace and security were assured in the
country. It is true that today there is no major direct
internal threat to the security of Haiti and that Haiti does
not pose a threat to regional peace and security, thanks to
the efforts and presence of UNMIH. But Haiti still has to
grapple with the building of the state of law and an
effective judiciary. There still remains bitter opposition in
many of Haiti's small political parties, in the wealthy and
powerful elite and in remnants of the former Haitian army
and paramilitary groups.

In other words, the democratic process and the
continued existence of a secure and stable environment in
Haiti need a formative or maturation period much longer
than we could have foreseen. Small problems such as
those that exist in Haiti today can become large and
unmanageable tomorrow if they are allowed to fester.
What we are calling for is a "mop-up action", as they say,
such as a good general would undertake after a successful
battle.

Botswana therefore supports the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Haiti until we
can be relatively certain about the security situation in the
country.

