Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to stress once again that Bosnia and Herzegovina
was among those who nourished the hope that the issue
at stake could be resolved through negotiations and in a
manner that would satisfy the concerns of all.
However, we find ourselves confronted with further
aggravation regarding a comprehensive solution to the
issue of nuclear capacity development in the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

As a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Bosnia

and Herzegovina is fully committed to implementing
the Treaty, which represents a unique and irreplaceable
framework for the promotion of security and the
prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
world. It is our strong belief that only full
implementation of NPT safeguards agreements can
ensure that nuclear energy is used in a safe and
responsible manner. The role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as the implementing
agency remains the most reliable instrument to verify
compliance with the provisions of the Treaty.

Furthermore, we consider that the right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy by all States is also
important and must be fully respected and protected.
Iran is no exception to that rule. It should be made
clear, nevertheless, that the scope and objectives of any
nuclear programme, including the Iranian programme,
have to remain in accordance with the international
rules and must be subjected to the verifiable and
transparent inspection regime of the IAEA.

The Security Council has adopted resolutions
calling on Iran to comply with the provisions of the
NPT and to extend its full cooperation to IAEA
inspections. However, according to the most recent
reports, the international community did not get a clear
and unequivocal answer from Iran, which has put the
Security Council in the position of looking for
additional measures to address this issue of utmost
importance.

Bearing in mind the importance of restoring
confidence in the strictly peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme, Bosnia and Herzegovina urges
Iran to comply with all resolutions of the Security
Council and the IAEA Board of Governors, and to
implement the additional protocol. We firmly believe
that a negotiated settlement, based on mutual trust and
respect, is the best option. In that regard, we welcome
the recent efforts by Turkey and Brazil as a significant
confidence-building measure.

The resolution adopted today by the Security
Council is tough. However, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
of the view that the resolution does not close the way
to further diplomatic efforts and an ultimate negotiated
solution. We believe that additional efforts and support
from various parties could contribute to the creation of
an environment conducive to readdressing the current
situation and finding a satisfactory negotiated solution,
which is our ultimate goal.

Therefore, once again, we call upon the parties
directly involved to explore all possible means that
could pave the way to a peaceful solution of this issue
of particular importance. Such an undertaking would
be beneficial first and foremost for the people of Iran
and would open new avenues for cooperation between
Iran and the international community.

