The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Ministers and other representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their participation is
an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
ofAfghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Colombia,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Germany, Guatemala, Italy, India, Iraq,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Morocco, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, the Niger, Pakistan, Senegal, Spain, Sweden,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Te'te Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Managing Director for Global and
Multilateral Issues of the European External Action
Service, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2014/9, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the United Nations
to help States and subregional and regional entities in
Africa in fighting terrorism.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/869, which contains a letter dated
4 December 2014 from the Permanent Representative of
Chad to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.

