Monsignor Camilleri: The Holy See thanks the
presidency of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for
convening this open debate on silencing the guns in
Africa by 2020, a noble objective to keep at the forefront
of the international community's attention.

The African Union has also taken on the ambitious
determination to achieve the goal of a conflict-free
Africa and to make peace a reality for all our people
and rid the continent of wars and civil conflicts.
Indeed, this conviction corresponds to the frequent
petitions made by Pope Francis himself in favour of
peace and reconciliation:

"To all those who make unjust use of the weapons
of this world, I make this appeal: lay down these
instruments of death."

Looking at the current situation on the continent
of Africa, the winds of hope are blowing, as the
Secretary-General himself has noted. Among the more
demonstrative signs of peace is the historic agreement
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, resolving a decades-long
conflict and re-establishing diplomatic relations, as
well as the agreement among leaders in South Sudan,
restoring peaceful coexistence.

While those are most surely encouraging signs of
hope for the African continent, there remain several
areas that suffer from fundamentalist violence and
other forms of conflict. There might be the temptation
to dismiss the African Union's determination as
unattainable, even utopian. To do so, however, would
be defeatist. We must pay heed to the noble aspirations
of African youth, who thirst for justice, peace and
reconciliation, and to whom the African Union fiftieth
anniversary solemn declaration pledges not to bequeath
the burden of war. We must look for ways to work
towards consolidating, as well as building, peace.

To envisage an African continent free of war and
civil conflicts, we must first examine why it is that
people have recourse to the instruments of death in
the first place. The list is long, but among the most
devastating causes are social and economic disparities,
weak institutions, political instability and corruption,
where battles over conflicting interests, both domestic
and foreign, have the upper hand over social cohesion
and the common good. The inequitable exploitation of
Africa's myriad resources and other scourges contrary to
human dignity - such as child soldiers and trafficking,
piracy and the illegal trade in wildlife - often
exacerbate those root causes. These are all sadly linked
to the proliferation of arms and ammunition.

To help the African continent reach its laudable and
ambitious goal to embrace non-violence and durable
peace, the international community must keep its own
commitments, particularly when it pledges help for
humanitarian emergencies and regular development
aid. In order to guarantee stability, financial and
technical support must be sustainable and predictable.
That works much better, however, when it is sensitive
to and genuinely aware of specific needs on the ground,
rather than imposed from outside in ways that are at
times alien to African cultures and values.

To this day, far too many young Africans are
more adept with guns and rounds of ammunition than
with pens and schoolbooks. They are prevented from
reaching their full potential, because their education is
interrupted by conflicts that are not of their choice or
making and they are caught up in self-perpetuating cycles
of violence that sadly become a way of life. That must
change. The proliferation of weapons simply aggravates
conflict situations and results in unimaginable human
suffering and material costs that profoundly undermine
development, human rights and the search for lasting
peace. Without greater international and regional
cooperation, especially among arms-producing States,
in controlling and strictly limiting the production and
movement of weapons, an Africa free of wars and
violent conflicts will remain an illusion.

While much remains to be done to silence the guns
in Africa, the Holy See believes that this open debate
is one more blow on the anvil towards the fulfilment of
the prophecy of Isaiah, whose words are inscribed just
across the street from these Headquarters.

"[T]hey shall beat their swords into ploughshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more."

