Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open debate on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa. I also want to
thank Secretary-General Guterres and Commissioner
Chergui for their informative briefings.

Given the complex, interconnected nature of
today's global challenges, it is widely recognized
that the United Nations cannot maintain peace and
security around the globe alone. At the same time, in
recent years a growing number of actors have gained
a better grasp of the realities on the ground and of the
resources and expertise needed to address Africa's
peace and security challenges. Building strong,
strategic partnerships with these stakeholders is now
an imperative. As the Secretary-General said, the
world already has the resources to deliver. The United
Nations, which has a brand like no other, is best placed
to convene and coordinate these different actors. It is
in that context that we welcome the fact that more than
150 Member States and regional organizations have
endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which aims
to make peace operations more fit for purpose by
enhancing collaboration between the United Nations
and the relevant actors.

The role of regional and subregional organizations
in Africa has become especially important for
implementing these shared commitments. Since its
establishment nearly two decades ago, the African
Union (AU) in particular has been making considerable
progress in strengthening ownership and enhancing
its capacity to promote peace and security on
the continent. Regional economic communities have
also been playing an increasingly proactive role in
their respective regions. Most notably, the Economic
Community of West African States took the lead in
helping to resolve the political crises in The Gambia in
late 2016 and deployed forces to maintain stability in
the country. The comparative advantage of regional and
subregional organizations vis-a-vis the United Nations
has been particularly evident in peace enforcement and
counter-terrorism operations. A clear division of labour
of those activities would allow the United Nations to
better focus on its core mandate of peacekeeping.
We therefore join others in calling on the United
Nations to work more effectively with those regional
actors by providing the necessary support, in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we welcome the recent progress made
in enhancing the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the AU, including the signing of the
Joint United Nations-AU Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. It is also encouraging
to note the greater number ofjoint briefings and field
visits by senior officials of the two organizations.
Going forward, I wish to highlight three areas in which
we would like to see further progress.

First, it is important that the AU and the United
Nations work together more strategically to facilitate
sustainable political solutions on the ground. Based
on a joint analysis and assessment of the situation,
the mandates of the United Nations and AU peace
operations should be designed as part of a broader
common political strategy. We hope that the ongoing
reforms at the United Nations and the AU will allow the
two organizations to better achieve that end.

Secondly, we encourage the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council to closely align their
agendas and to convene more regular meetings between
them to make effective joint decisions and actions.

Thirdly, there is a need to provide predictable,
flexible and sustainable financing for AU-led peace
operations, as recognized by the Security Council
and the wider membership through the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. We positively view the Council's intention
set out in resolution 2378 (2017) to consider practical
steps to finance AU-led peace operations through
United Nations assessed contributions on a case-by-
case basis, provided that the standards ensuring
oversight and accountability are met.

In that regard, we welcome the progress that the
AU, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
has made in developing compliance and reporting
frameworks. We also welcome the AU's initiative to
enhance its financial self-reliance by revitalizing the
AU Peace Fund and meet its commitment to fund
25 per cent of African peace operations. We understand
that the United Nations and the AU will soon present
a joint road map to address existing concerns on the
accountability and compliance frameworks. We hope
that those initiatives, including the draft resolution
on the financing of AU-led peace operations to be
introduced by the three African members ofthe Council
next month, will help to move the discussions forward.

Next year, the Republic of Korea is expected to
join the ranks of the top 10 financial contributors to the
United Nations peacekeeping budget for the first time.
We feel a greater sense of responsibility to ensure that
peacekeeping operations remain an effective tool for
maintaining peace and security in Africa. In addition
to deploying troops to South Sudan, we have been
supporting the AU's efforts to strengthen its capacity
to maintain peace and security through the Peace
Fund. More specifically, we deployed a level-2 hospital
in Gao, Mali, in July and we are now supporting the
Continental Logistics Base of the African Standby
Force in Cameroon, which will provide the adequate
infrastructure for the rapid deployment of African
troops. To enhance women's participation in AU peace
operations, we are helping to build the necessary
capacity within the Peacebuilding Commission.

In closing, I wish to assure the Council of my
Government's commitment to playing its due part in
strengthening peace operations in Africa.

