Mr. Muvunyi (Rwanda): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January and to extend our congratulations to the
representatives of the new members of the Security
Council - Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan and
Spain. My delegation also wishes all the members of
the Security Council a happy and prosperous new year
for 2003.

The delegation of Rwanda welcomes this open
debate on the sensitive issue of children and armed
conflict. As a country emerging from genocide,
Rwanda has a wide experience to share on this
important topic of children and armed conflict. In
Rwanda, children were killed by genocidaires, and
survivors were traumatized by the violence, which left
orphans in its wake. Rwanda believes that all children
must go to school and that they must never again be
involved in armed conflict. In the 1994 Rwanda
genocide, children under 10 years old were used by
genocidaires to hunt and to kill fellow children, adults
and rape victims of the ge'nocidaires. After the tragedy,
children suspected of genocide were arrested,
imprisoned in special prisons and re-educated.

I would like to announce that this coming Friday,
child suspects in prison will be released in accordance
with the statement made by His Excellency President
Paul Kagame of the Republic of Rwanda on the release
of 40,000 suspects of genocide.

Rwanda is totally committed to the protection of
children and does not tolerate the abuse of children
under any circumstances.

The Rwandan delegation welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
document S/2002/ 1299. Rwanda hopes that action will
be taken. We fully agree with the statement made by
the Secretary-General in the Security Council this
morning.

We believe that sufficient funds must be spent on
the education of children for development, instead of
diverting financial resources to the destruction of
human beings. Children are the hope of tomorrow; that
is why special attention should be given to our young
children. Let us lead children to school and not to
armed conflict. Let us take them school and ensure that
there is follow-up so that they acquire appropriate
skills, knowledge, education and discipline as future
leaders of the world. The recruitment of children in
armed conflict must be halted at all costs as a matter of
urgency. Children must be able to grow in an
environment of peace, and should never be involved in
any armed conflict. That is why the Rwandan
delegation condemns armed groups which enlist
children under 18 years of age. It is dangerous to
indoctrinate children with the ideologies of hatred and
genocide with the final objective using them in fighting
useless wars without a cause.

Why use children in conflicts? As we know,
children naturally obey orders, even negative ones,
such as the order to kill innocent people. Children will
carry out any order in good faith because they do not
differentiate between evil and the best things. The
irrational warlords must understand why young
children should not be brainwashed and become
hostages of conflict. It is totally unacceptable to abuse
children, and the Security Council must take a firm
decision to reverse the current situation prevailing in
some States Members of the United Nations. We call
upon the Security Council and the international
community to condemn the armed groups of the former
Rwandan Army (ex-FAR) forces and Interahamwe, the
Parti pour la liberation du peuple hutu, the Front pour
la defense de la democratic, the Conseil national pour
la defense de la democratic, the Mai-Mai and others
mentioned in the annex of the report of the Secretary-
General as currently using child soldiers in the Great
Lakes region.

My statement would be incomplete if I did not
condemn those who rape children - as well as those
who rape adults. Rape is one of the weapons used in
armed conflicts, and children committed rape and were
raped during the Rwanda genocide of 1994. According
to Rwandese law covering acts of genocide, adults who
committed rape during the genocide are in the first
category of ge'nocidaires, who are given the death
penalty. Infanticide must also be punished by the death
penalty if we are to halt this crisis imposed on children.

Let me emphasize that young children are the
potential resources that can lift this world out of
poverty and injustice and attain irreversible progress in
accordance with the United Nations objective of
achieving sustainable development. Children must
therefore be freed from disease, hunger, slavery,
corruption and conflict of all types. They must grow in
an environment of love, peace and justice, with a thirst
for appropriate knowledge and the skills to develop
themselves. The whole world would thus harvest the
fruits of such well-guided children. Those who are
today involved in armed conflict must be demobilized
without delay, and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) must put in place strategies and procedures
and must provide the means for their implementation.
Let the Security Council join hands with UNICEF as
the saviour of the children of States Members of the
United Nations. Investing in the education of young
souls is the priority of priorities.
The authorities of the Republic of Rwanda are
grateful to Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of
UNICEF, and to Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their assistance to Rwanda
orphans and to the many children who after the
genocide prematurely became leaders of families of
other children. Rwanda has a clear vision: to invest in
those children in order to achieve irreversible
development.

Finally, Rwanda requests and recommends that
the President of the Security Council declare a
universal ceasefire in favour of children in order to
withdraw them from armed conflicts. This is not a
favour, but a fundamental right for children who are
caught up in armed conflict and who are held hostage
in some areas of conflict. They must be handed over to
UNICEF. Even liberation movements must transfer
children to liberated areas or demilitarized zones. In
the case of displaced persons, Governments, non-
governmental organizations, the Red Cross and United
Nations agencies must attach special importance to the
welfare of children by providing them with appropriate
feeding, vaccination, medicines and schooling.
Demobilized children must go back to formal
schooling and should be motivated by UNICEF, the
United Nations Development Programme and
international financial institutions. Failure to save the
lives of children condemns the whole world to misery
and long-term social injustice.

