Mr. Thornberry (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, let me thank the President of the Security Council
for his initiative in convening this debate. I also
welcome the presence of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore,
and I welcome her briefing on the report of Secretary-
General on the situation in Haiti (S/2015/157).

Peru is committed to achieving and consolidating
security, stability, sustainable development and the
strengthening of institutions in Haiti. Therefore, my
country has actively participated in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since
2004 and intends to continue contributing to this
operation, which is the sole peacekeeping mission in
the Americas.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made shortly by the representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, especially with
regard to the recognition of the important role played
by MINUSTAH in supporting the stabilization and
security of Haiti as well as in strengthening democratic
institutions and the rule of law in the country. I should
like to make some additional comments in my national
capacity.

After the serious political and institutional crisis
that prevented the timely holding of elections to replace
local authorities and thereby avoid the dysfunction
of the Haitian Congress for lack of quorum, my
delegation welcomes the recent publication of an
electoral timetable to carry out presidential, legislative,
municipal and local elections throughout the second
half of this year. For Peru, the elections represent a
milestone in the process of democratic consolidation in
Haiti, which is why my delegation reiterates its call to
all Haitian political forces to cooperate with national
authorities with a view to concluding those processes
and to participate actively in them. Additionally, we
expect the international community to cooperate in the
process and expect to receive timely information on the
progress of the preparations and the execution of the
electoral calendar.

While the security situation in Haiti has remained
stable thanks to the crucial support of MINUSTAH,
the situation is quite complex, given the increase in
the protests, the deepening economic crisis, the lack
of basic services and the increasing political tensions
customary in election years.

Against that backdrop, Peru believes that the
drawdown of MINUSTAH's military component,
which will be implemented in the coming weeks, may
affect MINUSTAH's operational capacity to assist in
guaranteeing security and providing the technical and
logistical assistance needed to conduct the three rounds
of elections scheduled.

Peru reiterates its firm belief that decisions
regarding the future of MINUSTAH must be made
exclusively on the basis of the conditions on the
ground - the criterion on which the MINUSTAH
consolidation plan was designed.

While we recognize the progress made in the
professionalization and training of the Haitian National
Police, the Secretary-General's report notes that that
institution does not yet have the capacity to maintain
public order and safeguard the security of the population
throughout the entire country. It therefore requires the
operational and strategic collaboration of MINUSTAH.
In that regard, we believe that MINUSTAH's presence
in Haiti remains essential in working with the Haitian
authorities to maintain security and order as part of a
process of stabilizing and strengthening democracy in
the country.

My delegation has consistently maintained its
commitment to the principle of national ownership,
with the understanding that peace must be an inherently
national process, in which peacekeeping operations
support national authorities in setting out and
implementing their own stabilization and development
priorities. Peru therefore reaffirms its support for
the Haitian constitutional authorities in their task of
stabilizing Haiti, and asks the Council to take Haiti's
position into account when taking decisions regarding
the timeline for transitioning the MINUSTAH mandate
and regarding the nature of the future United Nations
presence in the country. That position was expressed
most clearly by the Permanent Representative of Haiti
during this morning's debate.
We join the call for the United Nations and the
international community to continue supporting
Haiti, while recalling that our assistance should be
comprehensive, given the interdependent nature of the
three pillars on which the work of the Organization
is based: upholding peace and security, attaining
sustainable development, and promoting and protecting
human rights.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that
MINUSTAH's important achievements to date must not
lead us to believe that our work is done; it is far from
it. Experience has shown us the serious consequences
suffered in the past when the Organization decided to
withdraw its presence from the ground too early. My
country therefore wants MINUSTAH to successfully
complete the task it is carrying out so well in Haiti,
without haste or artificial deadlines.

