Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): As it
participates in today's debate, my delegation hopes
very much that the Council will take full account of
what is at stake here and will send the right message to
the protagonists in this crisis in order to restore peace,
while stressing negotiation and dialogue. For, clearly,
today we have a very dangerous escalation.

In considering this item, my delegation still
recalls those moving words of the father of the Israeli
soldier who was kidnapped in Palestine a few weeks
ago - a father who hoped this tragedy was not going
to lead to more misfortune for innocent people in
Palestine and in Israel. He did not know how right he
was, nor, undoubtedly, did he imagine that the tragedy
would spill over the borders. That is why we condemn
all acts of violence, whoever the authors and whatever
the motivation. Above all, we deplore the factors that
triggered the immediate crisis - namely, the rocket
attacks on Israel by members of Hizbollah and the
abduction and detention of Israeli soldiers. All of those
acts are clearly provocative and only serve, ultimately,
to exacerbate tension, thereby making Lebanon even
more fragile and endangering the lives of the civilian
population.

But we condemn equally firmly the
disproportionate reprisals by the Israeli army, which
did not hesitate to bomb Beirut intensively, to launch
incursions into southern Lebanon and to impose a land,
sea and air blockade of Lebanon. Those, too, are acts
of war that endanger the civilian population and that
destroy socio-economic infrastructure and seriously
weaken the Lebanese authorities, who are embarked
upon a national dialogue that we have encouraged.

Nevertheless, this is not the time for
condemnation. We need to act quickly to ease tensions
in order to return to a political and diplomatic solution.
This is why my delegation welcomes the initiative
taken by the Secretary-General to send a high-level
delegation to the region; we also encourage all national
and regional initiatives. We also request that, in
accordance with the wishes of the Lebanese
Government, an immediate ceasefire be declared,
followed by serious negotiations on all pending issues:
release of prisoners and detainees, implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions relating to
this situation and, in particular, the disarmament and

disbanding of militias, normalization of relations
between Lebanon and its neighbours and respect for
the Blue Line.

My delegation reaffirms that only dialogue and
negotiation can make it possible for the States of the
region, with the resolute support of the international
community, to achieve a just and lasting peace on the
basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
principles of international law.

Of course, the response will be that there is
nothing new here. But the alternative is not having
very positive results. We do not believe that there can
be any resolution through the firing of rockets against
civilian populations, the abduction of soldiers or the
bombing of airports. Such actions will never lead to the
release of prisoners or to the dismantling of militias,
still less to the establishment of a just and lasting
peace.

