Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Sir, and the delegation of
Azerbaijan on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. I would like to assure
you of my delegation's full cooperation and support.

I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of the United States and her delegation
for their able stewardship of the Council during April.

Recent developments between the Sudan and
South Sudan, including cross-border military
operations and damage to economic infrastructure,
particularly oil facilities, have caused us serious
concern. These developments have the potential to
threaten peace and stability and lead the two countries
towards war. This will be a serious setback to the
socio-economic and political issues - the effects of
decades-long civil war - that the country has to
overcome. There is therefore an urgent need to avoid
war and to peacefully resolve the outstanding issues
related to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
through political dialogue and negotiations.

The African Union's High-level Implementation
Panel (AUHIP), led by President Thabo Mbeki, has
been facilitating dialogue between the Sudan and South
Sudan for a few years now. In its briefings to the
Security Council, the Panel has outlined realistic
frameworks that it has developed for resolving various
outstanding CPA issues. Serious negotiations based on
those frameworks can help the two countries not only
to resolve those issues but also to build an enduring
relationship based on mutual cooperation and respect
for their independence, unity and territorial integrity.

India has consistently supported the AUHIP in its
efforts to facilitate negotiations between the Sudan and
South Sudan and a resolution of all the outstanding
issues, so that they can develop into two viable and
politically stable States, at peace with each other. Our
vote in favour of resolution 2046 (2012) today is an
expression of our support for the efforts of the AUHIP
and in line with the request contained in the African
Union communique of 24 April. We hope that the
resolution's adoption will strengthen the efforts of the
AUHIP to facilitate and negotiate a settlement of all
outstanding issues. We urge the two countries to end all
hostilities between their military forces, as well as
those by the various armed groups operating in the
region, and to resume negotiations without delay under
AUHIP auspices.

