Mr. Negroponte (United States): I would like to
join others in thanking Mr. Roed-Larsen for his very
comprehensive briefing.

Over the weekend the Secretary-General and the
permanent members of the Security Council reaffirmed
their commitment to the Quartet's road map and urged
both sides to go forward with its implementation.
While all parties have responsibilities in bringing peace
to the Middle East, ending terrorism must be the
highest priority. Those responsible for targeting
civilians and obstructing the Quartet's efforts and
Palestinian prospects for an independent State are
known groups: Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade. The leaders and
spokesmen of these groups have openly claimed credit
for scores of terrorist bombings, most recently Hamas's
bombings in Jerusalem on 19 August and 9 September
and in Tel Aviv on 9 September. I think we all
recognize the tragic dynamic in play in the Middle
East. Each time a glimmer of hope - however dim -
appears, a terrorist act seeks to extinguish it.

The Council must take a clear stand against the
actions of these terrorist groups and call for decisive
action against them. In that regard, we commend the
European Union for adopting a clear stance on Hamas
earlier this month.

Any Security Council resolution on the Middle
East that we would support must contain a robust
condemnation of acts of terrorism, an explicit
condemnation of Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade as organizations
responsible for acts of terrorism. Such a resolution
must also call for the dismantling of the infrastructure
that supports those terror operations, wherever located,
consistent with resolution 1373 (2001). We will not
support any resolution that evades the explicit threat to
the Middle East peace process posed by Hamas and
other such terrorist groups.

The next Palestinian Prime Minister must have
real political authority to act against terrorist
organizations, as well as the tools to do so, including
control over all the security organizations within the
Palestinian Authority. The new Prime Minister and his
Cabinet must demand that all acts of terrorism cease
and insist that terrorist organizations and armed groups
not under the control of the Palestinian Authority be
outlawed and dismantled.

For its part, we believe that Israel must move
forward and fulfil its obligations and commitments
under the road map. That will provide a supportive
environment for the new Palestinian leadership to act
decisively against terrorist organizations such as
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs
Brigade, which are intent on destroying the road map
and the prospects for a two-State solution.

In closing, I would like to underscore that the
Government of Israel is already aware of the views of
Council members on the issue of Mr. Arafat. In
addition, Secretary of State Colin Powell stated
recently that the United States does not support either
the elimination of Mr. Arafat or his forced exile. We
have conveyed our View to the Government of Israel
and have cautioned against this.
Quartet envoys met on 13 September to prepare
for a meeting of principals in New York later this
month. In order to more quickly realize a two-State
solution in the Middle East, we urge members of the
Council, Member States and both parties to condemn
terrorism as a means of achieving political objectives
and to rally to the support of the Quartet road map.
That - not another Security Council resolution -
would represent the most constructive way forward at
this critical juncture.

