Ms. Buku: It is indeed a great honour and privilege
for me to be invited to address the Security Council
today. Resolution 2462 (2019), adopted today, is a
timely measure in the promotion of the fight against
terrorism, terrorist financing and money-laundering.
I am from Kenya, and Kenyans have experienced
firsthand the terrible consequences of terrorism, with
the most recent incident at a local hotel still fresh in
our minds.

However, it is important to recognize that the
fight against terrorism and the channels for financing
terrorism must proceed in an enabling regulatory
environment that does not stifle financial-inclusion
initiatives in the affected regions. Indeed, the FATF
guidance paper on anti-money-laundering and terrorist-
financing measures and financial inclusion, issued
in June 2011, recognized financial inclusion as a key
agenda item in the fight against terrorism and terrorist
financing, and this will be the main focus ofmy briefing
to the Council this morning.

Financial services are foundational to addressing
today's pressing global issues ofpoverty, inequality and
migration, and to enabling the achievements of a wide
array of national development goals, which is evidenced
by an expanding body of research. Numerous studies
have demonstrated that bank accounts and payment
services - and, in particular, access to them - have
a measurable impact on poverty, more particularly as
follows. They make day-to-day transactions possible,
including the sending and receiving of money. They
safeguard savings, which can help households better
manage their cashflow and build working capital,
which has also contributed to uplifting women in
these countries. They help finance small businesses or
micro-enterprises, assisting owners to invest in assets
and grow their businesses. They enable planning and
payments for recurring expenses such as school fees
and access to electricity and water. They also mitigate
shocks and manage expenses related to unexpected
events, such as medical emergencies, death in the
family, theft and natural disasters, including famine
alleviation and refugee crises. They also improve the
overall welfare of poor families.

There is a direct link between financial inclusion
and global development goals, including the eradication
of poverty, promotion of prosperity and protection of
the environment, as more particularly outlined in the
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.

Globally, around 1.7 billion adults are currently
"unbanked" and without access to safe, reliable and
convenient financial services, either through an
account at a financial institution or through a mobile
money-provider. In 2014, that number was 2 billion.
Because account ownership is nearly universal in high-
income economies, virtually all unbanked adults live
in developing economies, mainly in Africa and South-
East Asia. These economies are also the ones suffering
most from terrorism, especially Africa, which has been
identified as being among the top three continents
affected by terrorism, with the Horn of Africa and East
Africa 4 where I come from - being identified as
the region in sub-Saharan Africa most threatened by
indigenous and international terrorism.

Traditional providers of financial services are
banks, microfinance institutions, credit unions and
cooperatives. However, in developing economies, due to
the lack of adequate traditional banking channels, new
delivery channels have been at the forefront of financial
inclusion, the most notable being mobile money-transfer
and mobile-banking services. In this regard, the lack of
access to financial services in these regions, combined
with the increasingly widespread use of mobile phones,
has given rise to a mobile-phone-based economy
whereby mobile platforms are used as an alternative
to traditional banking systems. Indeed, when M-Pesa
was launched in Kenya in 2007, only 1 billion of the
world's 6.5 billion people had bank accounts, yet at
least 3 billion had mobile phones.

Today, mobile money-transfer services are
arguably the single most effective contributor to
global financial-inclusion initiatives, and, particularly
in the developing countries, have facilitated access
to cheap and reliable financial services to an ever-
increasing formerly unbanked population segment.
Recent innovations in mobile transfer services in
various jurisdictions coupled with a favourable
regulatory environments have heralded unprecedented
success in financial-inclusion initiatives, which have
morphed today into an entire digital financial-services
ecosystem offering savings, insurance, both local and
international money transfers, payments and credit
services on mobile-money platforms to both individuals
and corporate entities.

Today, there are over 270 mobile-money-transfer
systems globally, and 866 million mobile-money-
accounts transacted $1.3 billion daily in 2018 alone,
45.6 per cent of which were in sub-Saharan Africa
and 33.2 per cent in South Asia. As an example, ifI
forget my phone at home today, I have to go back home;
otherwise, I will be severely financially handicapped.
But ifI forget my debit or credit card, I am not worried.
That is the power of mobile money and digital financial
services in those countries.

Every good thing, however, must come with an
element of risk, as aptly captured by the Paris Agenda
adopted at the high-level International Conference
on Combating the Financing of Da'esh and Al-Qaida,
held in Paris on 25 and 26 April 2018, on the theme
"No money for terror", which recognizes that
the products and services provided by innovative
financial technologies may offer significant economic
opportunities but also present a risk of being misused
by criminals for money laundering and other criminal
activity, including terrorist financing.

Mobile money and other digital forms of
payments will be attractive to criminals due to their
speed of delivery and their anonymous nature. Other
factors include porous borders and a lack of adequate
identification regimes in some of the jurisdictions
where these payment channels are in use. In addition,
important users of such services are illiterate rural
populations, for whom identity verification, know your
customer and customer due diligence procedures may
be difficult to carry out.

The diversified product ranges offered through
these payment channels, including cross-border
and international remittances, can also be used by
criminals for money laundering and terrorist financing.
Criminals, including terrorists, will also use mobile
networks as a primary means of communication to plan
and coordinate terrorism and other criminal activities. It
is therefore of critical importance that Governments in
those jurisdictions put in place anti-money-laundering/
combating the financing of terrorism and financial
regulations, which will facilitate financial inclusion
initiatives while ensuring the integrity of the systems
used to deliver such services so that they are not used
for money laundering and financing terrorism.

Such regulations will ensure that financial
institutions and other non-bank-designated institutions
have anti-money-laundering/combating the financing
of terrorism programmes with appropriate controls
that comply with Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
standards and United Nations conventions on customer
due diligence, transaction monitoring, sanction
screening, record-keeping etc. In particular, we will
also adopt the risk-based approach recommended in the
guidelines note on new payment products and services
issued by FATF in June 2013.

Much has already been done in those jurisdictions
to put in place relevant legislative and private-sector
controls. However, more remains to be done and in
that regard I wish to highlight the commitments made
by the Paris Agenda to put in place measures such as
the strengthening of information-sharing frameworks
among the private sector, regulatory authorities and law
enforcement agencies, as well as to work with financial
institutions and designated non-financial businesses
or professions to ensure that they fulfil obligations
under domestic anti-money-laundering/eombating the
financing of terrorism legislation.

Such measures should also include capacity-
building, training and infrastructural support.
Resolution 2462 (2019) under debate today also affirms
the importance of improving national frameworks and
inter-agency coordination, cooperation with the private
sector, international cooperation and the need to explore
ways in which the United Nations can better support
Member States in implementing those initiatives.

Accordingly, I wish to conclude by noting that
the need to balance financial inclusion with financial
integrity cannot be overemphasized. As the Security
Council debates resolution 2462 (2019), it is my hope
that such debates will take cognizance of the need for
member States to promote initiatives that will assist
jurisdictions in financially excluded areas to put in
place the necessary measures to combat the financing
of terrorism and money laundering without stifling
financial inclusion and hence to promote sustainable
development in those countries.

