Dr. Piot: I thank the Council for this opportunity to
address it today on what is, I believe, one of the most
important issues for this century. Twenty years ago the
global community had not even heard of AIDS. Over 50
million people, cumulatively, have become infected since
then. Today it is discussed in the Security Council because
AIDS is not a health or development problem like any
other. As we have heard, it has become, in Africa at least,
an issue of human security in all senses of the word.
Comprehending the full scale of the epidemic is
almost impossible. We have heard the Secretary-General
talk of 11 million orphans. We would be short-sighted to
underestimate the long-term impact of their personal
tragedies on the development and stability of Africa.

War is one of the instruments of AIDS, as rape is
one of the instruments of war. Conflict and the resulting
movements of people fuel the epidemic. Refugee men,
and particularly women, become highly vulnerable to HIV
infection. Humanitarian aid workers and military and
police forces that are well trained in HIV prevention and
behaviour change can be a tremendous force for
prevention as long as this is made one of their priorities.

But there is also good news, and I would like to
concentrate on that this morning. We are far from
powerless against this epidemic. In countries where strong
political leadership, openness about the issues and broad,
cross-cutting responses come together, the tide is turning,
and clear success is being demonstrated. We have heard
about Uganda, where the rate of new infections is falling.
But so it is in several communities in Africa. In Senegal,
HIV infections have stayed at a very low level as a result
of successful prevention campaigns. We know now what
works: two decades of experience have identified the
essential elements of effective strategy. Let me mention
six of them: first, as Vice President Gore mentioned,
visibility, openness and countering stigma, without
compromise; secondly, addressing core vulnerability to
HIV through social policies; thirdly, recognizing the
synergy between prevention and care efforts; fourthly,
targeting interventions on those most vulnerable; fifthly,
encouraging and supporting strong community
participation in the response; and lastly, focusing on
young people, the future of the continent.

Over the last 12 months, many, many African
leaders have spoken out in unprecedented ways, breaking
the silence and the stigma of the epidemic.
Internationally, too, the tide is turning. This meeting is an
illustration of that. This past June, the General Assembly
special session established a new development target for
2005, based on demonstrated success in a number of
countries, of reducing new infections by 25 per cent in
young people.

Members of the Council, the challenge is formidable
but so too are the technical, financial and political
resources of the international community. However, in
financial needs alone, we are a long way short of meeting
our mark. The most recent available figures, from 1997,
indicate that the international community mobilized only
$150 million for AIDS prevention for the most affected
countries in Africa. This has been put into context by
Mark Malloch Brown. To sustain and expand the
prevention success stories of Uganda, Senegal and other
countries, we need to mobilize between $1 and $3 billion

 

per year. It is worth pondering how hundreds of billions of
dollars were successfully mobilized over the last few years
to minimize the impact of that other virus, Y2K.

Over the last year, African Governments, the United
Nations system, international donors, civil society and the
private sector have come together to form a new
international partnership against AIDS in Africa. As the
Council heard, last month the Secretary-General tasked us
in this very building with formulating a response
commensurate with the epidemic.

In closing, let me give a few examples of what each
constituency of this partnership is committed to do. First,
African Governments bring the commitment to create the
environment for effective decentralized action and to be
aggressive in protecting and promoting human rights so that
stigma can be reduced. Jim Wolfensohn and Mark Malloch
Brown have already emphasized that in the United Nations
system, the epidemic has already brought us together in
unprecedented ways.

But there is still much more to be done. We will
mobilize additional and reorient existing resources to
respond to the epidemic, to demonstrate concerted action in
support of Governments and civil society, including such
actions as involving people living with HIV in the response
and supporting efforts to reduce mother-to-child
transmission of HIV.

T hirdly, we expect donor Governments to take
concerted action, under nationally developed strategic plans,
to mainstream AIDS in setting priorities and to accept the
challenge to urgently treble assistance for HIV/AIDS in
Africa as a first step for more rational financing of the
international response. Several Governments have recently
substantially increased these commitments, and with this
latest step announced by Vice- President Gore half an hour
ago, the United States is the first to have trebled its level of
commitment during the last six months.

Fourthly, and as also stressed by Vice-President Gore
and Mark Malloch Brown, we agreed that the private sector
must become involved in a substantial way to act
immediately to strengthen workplace and community
outreach interventions and, further, to work in concert with
Governments to balance the difficult issues of intellectual
property rights with the urgent need to develop and make
available life-saving drugs and other commodities.
Finally, the non-governmental organizations,
including religious organizations, have a key role to play
in intensifying their work at the front line of the epidemic.

Members of the Council, the message that I bring
you this morning is therefore one of urgency, but also one
of opportunity. The resources are beginning to be
mobilized, and the world is responding. But we are now
only at the 10 per cent mark. Shifting to 50 and then 75
per cent and upwards must be the commitment of all of
us here.

In the response to the epidemic, there are two
bottom lines. The bottom line for the future is that we
must develop and make available affordable vaccines
required for preventing HIV infections. That is the bottom
line for the future. However, the bottom line for today is
that we must do everything in our power to apply what
we know works: reducing vulnerability, preventing HIV
infection through behaviour change and supporting wide-
scale implementation of efforts to provide care and access
to the drugs and services required to prolong and improve
life.

At the start of this new century, I believe that there
are no development problems that more urgently
command a collective response from the international
community. This is a global problem. It is not and
African problem or an Asian problem, but a global
problem. The fact that in the first month of the
millennium the Security Council sees fit to discuss AIDS
in Africa is surely symbolic. I believe that it signals our
collective will to stop this epidemic and our pledge to
history that we will not turn our backs and let AIDS
devastate another generation of young African women and
men.

