Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Recently,
the conflict in Syria has continued to escalate, causing
a serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
some areas and plunging the Syrian people into deep
suffering. China expresses its deep concern about
the situation in Syria and feels for the Syrian people
in their suffering in the conflict. Under the current
circumstances, it is all the more necessary for the
international community to remain committed to the
political settlement of the question of Syria. It must
work together to push the Syrian issue back on the track
of seeking a solution through peaceful negotiations
and dialogue and to find a fundamental way out of the
conflict as soon as possible.
Security Council action on the question of Syria
should be conducive to the work on the four tracks,
namely, a resumption of the ceasefire, political
peace talks, cooperation on counter-terrorism, and
humanitarian relief. The situation in Syria is complex,
sensitive and grave. The parties concerned, such as the
Russian Federation and the United States, are making
diplomatic efforts to ease of the situation in Syria.
The Security Council's actions should support and
cooperate with the those diplomatic initiatives.

The draft resolution (S/2016/ 1026) that the Security
Council just voted on includes concrete measures for
easing the humanitarian situation in Syria. Council
members, including the co-penholders, made great
efforts to seek consensus. Those efforts could have
continued so that the Council could speak with one voice
to the outside world and avoid the politicization of the
humanitarian issue. Action on the draft resolution while
there were still serious differences was not conducive to
the diplomatic efforts by the countries concerned, nor
is it helpful for improving the situation in Syria. The
situation in Syria is the result of multiple overlapping
factors. The only way is take an integrated approach to
seek a comprehensive, fair and appropriate settlement.

The international community needs to work
together to ease the humanitarian situation in Syria. It
equally needs to set its sight on the overall situation
and continue to support the United Nations role as the
main channel of mediation and push the Syrian parties
to find an agreement that is acceptable to everyone
through peaceful negotiations, under the principle
of being Syrian-owned and Syrian-led. The Security
Council should maintain unity on the question of Syria
and speak with one voice. It must work together to play
a constructive role for an early political settlement of
the question of Syria.

Finally, I would like to ask the representative of
the United Kingdom what right he has to distort the
position of other countries. The Security Council is
a solemn forum; it is not a place where groundless
attacks can be made against the serious positions of
other countries. Taking a responsible approach and
abiding by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations are the minimum requirements for
each and every Member State when participating in the
Council's work. I would like to request that the United
Kingdom representative put an end to such a practice of
poisoning the atmosphere of the Security Council and
abusing the solemn forum of the Council. Today is not
the first time he has done that, and I hope that such
abuse will not be repeated in the future.
