Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/201l/634*) and for presenting it to us.

We believe there has been considerable
conceptual and practical progress in strengthening the
rule of law, particularly since the Secretary-General's
watershed report in S/2004/616, in the clarification of
concepts such as justice, the rule of law and
transitional justice, as well as the manner in which they
interact with each other at the national and
international levels.

From our national perspective, the strengthening
of the rule of law and of our democratic institutions is
a priority derived from the Peace Accords signed at the
end of 1996, which are State commitments. In fact,
only five days ago a new Administration took office in
my country. In his inaugural speech, the new President,
Otto Perez Molina, said:

"Our commitment to the rule of law in all its
aspects will lead us to accede to the Rome Statute
in order to join the International Criminal Court
as a sign of our desire to transition to a future that
is governed by law and by respect for human
rights of all peoples and all nations."

In this regard, our position is not only based on ideals;
it responds to specific considerations that condition our
future as an inclusive and democratic society.

As is known, Guatemala emerged from a
protracted internal conflict after we signed our Peace
Accords. We were left with fragile institutions,
particularly in the security and justice sectors. The
Accords incorporated concrete proposals to tackle
those deficits.
In addition to the conflict, we also inherited a
culture of impunity that to this day has not been
entirely overcome. On the contrary, one might argue
that the situation has deteriorated following the
appearance in the country of cartels linked to
transnational crime, which have infiltrated those weak
institutions with officials who are willing to break the
law.

A novel response, first conceived in the Peace
Accords, is the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala. It is an important partnership
between the United Nations and the Government of
Guatemala, launched in 2007 and generously supported
by various donor sources. In the four years of its
existence, the Commission - which is referred to in
paragraph 30 of the Secretary-General's report - has
attained tangible successes in its areas of competence.
Those areas include the criminal prosecution of
emblematic cases, technical assistance and promotion
of laws to strengthen the State's ability to fight
impunity.

The Guatemalan experience is consistent with the
assertion of the Secretary-General in the 2004 report
indicating that the main role of the Organization is not
to create international mechanisms to substitute for
national structures but to help build domestic
capacities for justice. This brings me to the
considerations proposed by the Secretary-General in
his latest report as the next steps to promote the rule of
law. I refer particularly to the contents of part A in
section IX of the report. I have five observations.

First, we believe that the matter of national
ownership, which is key to any successful transition, is
not sufficiently taken into account. Concerning the
provision of assistance, we support looking into ways
to enhance rule of law capacities whenever so
requested by the State in question, in close
coordination with local authorities and with the aim of
fostering national capacities. In relation to transitional
justice, this does not pertain exclusively to any
particular type of community, and therefore any
measure must reflect the unique needs of the affected
communities. Avoiding the importation of external
models is not a mere policy, but should reflect one of
the lessons that have been learned by the international
community.

Secondly, we believe that the peaceful settlement
of disputes is the main guarantor of international peace

and security. In fact, the Council should further
develop its institutional capacity further to prevent the
emergence of situations that threaten peace and, in
particular, it should strive to help concerned parties
settle their differences in accordance with the means
set forth in the Charter. Further efforts should be made
to ensure that legal disputes are referred to the
International Court of Justice.

Thirdly, situations must be considered on a case
by case basis. While we certainly expect progress and
effectiveness through rule of law indicators, we wonder
how these would contribute to reflecting the rule of law
in conflict and post-conflict societies. What are the
objective criteria to develop and assess them? How can
such indicators be reconciled with the overall
objectives and parameters of the performance of a
peacekeeping operation that has other mandated tasks?

Fourthly, we must continue to promote the strict
observance of international law and accountability for
those responsible for the gravest violations of human
rights. The question of amnesty continues to pose a
great challenge and creates obvious sensitivities. On
the one hand, it is not possible to start with a clean
slate or to simply ask for forgiveness. The right
balance must be found between the excess of memory
and responsibility - factors that could prevent the
reconciliation necessary to sustain peace and
strengthen democracy. In all cases, we acknowledge
that this matter presents legal, moral, ethical and
practical dilemmas that are difficult to resolve.

Finally, and as was recalled by the Secretary-
General, this year the United Nations will hold a high-
level meeting on the rule of law. We believe that this
will be a unique opportunity for Member States to
strengthen the rule of law as a fundamental
contribution to consolidating peace and justice and
ending impunity. When reviewing the status of this
issue, we find that much remains to be done, and we
recognize the timeliness of elaborating a declaration of
guiding principles on the rule of law. Undoubtedly, if
the Charter had been drafted today, the rule of law
would lie at the heart of the principles and purposes of
the Organization.
