Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to commend Japan's consistent and fruitful efforts
during its previous and current memberships of the
Security Council to streamline the work of the Council.

In recent years, we have seen some positive trends
within the Council in the area of its working methods.
First, taking into account the upcoming election of a
new Secretary-General, it is important to make the
election process in the Security Council as transparent
and democratic as possible in order to facilitate the
election of the best candidate who will advocate

uncompromisingly for the full and unconditional
implementation of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, Ukraine is encouraged by the approach
introduced through General Assembly resolution
69/321, as well as by the joint letter of the Presidents
of the Security Council and the General Assembly of
15 December 2015. Keeping in mind the importance of
the selection result and the political responsibility for
it, we believe that preserving the practice of making
ad hoc decisions on many aspects of the process is not
an option.

We also welcome the adoption of President's
note S/2016/l70, aimed at providing newly elected
non-permanent members of the Council with sufficient
time to get properly acquainted with the Council's work
before joining the Council. In addition, it is important
that the document has introduced more concrete
guidelines on the process of appointing Chairpersons
of the Council's subsidiary bodies.

The question of the veto is another subject that
I would like to touch upon. Ukraine belongs to the
group of States that supports both the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action in response to
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, and
the French-Mexican initiative on suspending the use of
the veto in cases of mass atrocities. At the same time,
we are convinced that the very existence of the veto is a
significant impediment to the Council's work. I should
like to give just one telling example of that. Two days
ago we marked the second anniversary of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7. Ajoint attempt was
made last year for the Council to establish a tribunal to
prosecute those responsible for that heinous crime. Had
it not been for the veto, the Council would have sent a
strong message that there was no place for impunity
today. While we are fully aware that a veto-free
Council is a distant and uncertain reality, we would
like to draw attention to the existing provision in the
Charter of the United Nations that would prevent abuse
of the right of the veto by the permanent members of the
Council. It is a disgrace that paragraph 3 of Article 27
of the Charter - that a party to a dispute shall abstain
from voting - continues to be blatantly ignored. It
is imperative that clear proceedings be introduced
for operationalizing and properly implementing
this Article.

From an unbiased and objective position, it is
clear that the Council should not face unsurmountable
obstacles, especially internally, in organizing a field
mission in response to a situation that warrants the
Council's engagement on the ground. In that regard, we
welcome the first steps taken, back in 2010, to introduce
certain formal guidelines related to utilizing this
important tool of the Council. We are ready to continue
discussions within the Council to further develop and
improve provisions on Security Council missions.
We believe that the following important elements
have to be clearly defined by the Council: mission
planning and decision-making on its dispatching; the
mission's composition; the reporting period and form of
reporting; as well as the Council's decision-making on
the mission's outcome.

The membership of the United Nations can
definitely count on my delegation's support during the
Council's work on the implementation of the outcome
of today's discussion. For us it is obvious that this
body, entrusted by the entire membership to maintain
international peace and security, needs a substantial
infusion of predictability and transparency to preserve
and strengthen its credibility.

