The Secretary-General: I thank Argentina for
organizing this important meeting. As members
know, I returned last week from Egypt, Israel and
Palestine, which included my first visit to Gaza since
this summer's conflict. In Egypt, I attended the
International Conference on Palestine, which focused
on Gaza's reconstruction. I would like to thank the
co-chairs, Egypt and Norway, for their leadership. The
event surpassed expectations, with pledges from some
50 countries amounting to $5.4 billion. It is important
that those promises quickly materialize into concrete
assistance on the ground.

The clock is ticking. Some $414 million are
immediately needed for humanitarian relief,
$1.2 billion for early recovery needs and $2.4 billion for
reconstruction efforts. More than 100,000 residents of
Gaza remain homeless, with over 50,000 still sheltering
in school buildings belonging to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. Many still lack access to the municipal
water network. Blackouts of up to 18 hours per day are
common. Meanwhile, Winter is approaching. I urge the
international community to move quickly to deliver
much-needed assistance.

Nothing could have prepared me for what I
witnessed in Gaza. I saw mile after mile of wholesale
destruction. I visited a United Nations school in the
Jabaliya refugee camp, which was shelled during the
hostilities. Civilians had sought protection under the
United Nations flag. Parents and children shared heart-
wrenching accounts of suffering and pain. I met a
young man whose brothers and sisters perished in the
blasts. He is now confined to a wheelchair, having lost
his legs.

I look forward to a thorough investigation by the
Israel Defense Forces of this and other incidents in
which United Nations facilities sustained hits and
many innocent people were killed. I am planning to
move forward with an independent board of inquiry
to look into the most serious of those cases, as well
as instances in which weaponry was found on United
Nations premises.

Israelis also suffered during the conflict. I
travelled to a kibbutz where I met the grieving family
of a four-year-old child named Daniel who was killed
by a Hamas rocket - another innocent victim of this
mindless conflict. As I said in Gaza, firing rockets is
unacceptable, and the rockets have brought nothing but
suffering. I also visited a tunnel built by militants to
launch attacks. I fully understand the security threat
to Israel from rockets above and tunnels below. At the
same time, the scale of the destruction in Gaza has left
deep questions about proportionality and the need for
accountability.

Despite the harsh reality on the ground, I left Gaza
with a measure of hope. During my visit to Gaza, the
first supplies of urgently needed construction materials
entered Gaza under the temporary mechanism brokered
by my Special Coordinator. Ifimplemented in good faith,
that mechanism can help bring stability to Gaza. I also
welcome Turkey's offer of a ship to serve as a temporary
power plant, and Israel's positive consideration of that
arrangement. That is the kind of action and cooperation
needed now to alleviate the situation in Gaza.

Palestinians are taking critical steps to forge a united
path to the future. That includes an intra-Palestinian
reconciliation agreement, followed by a historic
meeting in Gaza of the Cabinet of the Government of
national consensus. A united Palestinian Government
is beginning to take shape. During my visit, I met
with Prime Minister Hamdallah and his Cabinet in
Ramallah, and Deputy Prime Minister Abu-Amr and
several Ministers in Gaza to further underscore United
Nations support for a unified Palestinian leadership.

The national consensus Government must be
consolidated so it can assume its rightful responsibilities
in Gaza, including deployment to the border crossings.
That is crucial, as effective management of Gaza's
borders will facilitate the flow of construction
materials into Gaza and allow the restoration of
trade between Gaza and the West Bank. Civil and
administrative reform and other related issues must
also become a priority to help unify the two separate
strands of administration for the Gaza Strip. I welcome
the generous contribution of the Government of Qatar
and the Emir, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad
Al-Thani, towards a one-time humanitarian payment
by the end of this month in Gaza for a number of civil
service employees.

Notwithstanding the immediate needs in Gaza, the
situation in the West Bank demands renewed attention.
In my meetings in Jerusalem, I reiterated my deep
concerns about plans to construct residential housing
units in occupied East Jerusalem. International law is
clear - settlement activity is illegal. It runs totally
counter to the pursuit of a two-State solution. I urge the
Israeli Government to reverse these activities.

I also remain deeply concerned by unilateral
actions, restrictions and provocations at the holy
sites in Jerusalem. I take note of Prime Minister
Netanyahu's personal assurance to me in Jerusalem
of his Government's commitment to refraining from
altering policies with respect to the holy sites that have
been in place over many decades.

I am also concerned about mounting numbers of
attacks by settlers and others, as well as Israeli plans to
relocate some 7,000 Palestinian Bedouins, the majority
of whom are refugees, from their current locations in
the central West Bank, including in the strategic El area.
Such an action, if implemented in a forcible manner,
would be contrary to international human rights and
humanitarian law.

The cycle of build-and-destroy must end. The
international community cannot be expected to
continually pick up the pieces of another war and then
pick up the bill. As I said in Cairo, let this be the last
Gaza reconstruction conference. I welcome the planned
resumption of indirect ceasefire talks between Israel
and the Palestinians, under Egyptian auspices in Cairo.
I also recognize the positive steps taken by Israel to
ease restrictions on movement and trade in the West
Bank and Gaza. These must be further expanded.

But, as I repeated throughout my visit to the region,
there is no hope for long-term stability in Gaza without
addressing the underlying causes of the conflict: an end
to the occupation that has grinded on for nearly half a
century, a full lifting of the blockade on the Gaza Strip,
and effectively addressing Israel's legitimate security
concerns. Ultimately, long-term stability will require a
comprehensive peace agreement leading to a viable and
independent Palestinian State. Leaders on both sides
must overcome their differences and dispense with
unilateral initiatives that serve only to fuel mistrust and
polarization. The two-State solution is the only viable
option for a durable peace. It is time for courage and
vision to make the tough compromises that are needed
now. I challenge both sides to rise to the occasion.

Allow me to take this opportunity to also say a few
words about Syria and Lebanon, neither of which can
be considered in isolation from the broader context.
On Syria, last week I called on all parties to step up to
protect civilians in the town of Ayn al-Arab/Kobani.
Ayn al-Arab/Kobani is just one of many places across
Syria where civilians are under imminent threat.

In addition to the barbarity of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, or Daesh, the Syrian Government
continues to brutally and indiscriminately attack
populated areas, including with barrel bombs. Our
long-term strategic objective in Syria remains a
political solution based on the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). A purely military response to the
vicious new threat posed by Daesh could ultimately
contribute to the radicalization of other Sunni armed
groups and spark a cycle of renewed violence. I urge the
Council to lend its full support to my Special Envoy's
efforts to reduce the suffering of the Syrian people and
contribute to a political solution.

In Lebanon, I am troubled by a dangerous
escalation since the August attacks by Daesh and
Nusra Front on Arsal, and the latest fighting earlier
this month between the Nusra Front and Hizbullah
outside the town of Brital. I welcome the efforts of
Prime Minister Salam and Lebanese leaders to uphold
national unity. The Lebanese parties should urgently
demonstrate flexibility to open the way for the election
of a president of the Republic without further delay. In
this context, the challenge of the refugee presence in
Lebanon has become ever more complex. I welcome the
upcoming meeting of the International Support Group
for Lebanon in Berlin on 28 October.

Finally, I would like to underscore the importance
of ensuring that calm continues to prevail along the
Blue Line. This is vital to the stability of Lebanon
and the region. I welcome the recommitment of both
Lebanon and Israel to their obligations under resolution
1701 (2006), and to cooperating fully with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

I thank the members of the Council once again
for their attention. Let us work together to bring long-
sought peace and lasting stability to the people of the
Middle East.

