The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of October, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Ertugrul Apakan,
Permanent Representative of Turkey, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
September 2010. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Apakan and his delegation for the great
diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Let me take this opportunity to welcome the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
to this meeting.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/518, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Turkey.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1943 (2010).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
10-57824

