Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for today's update on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We appreciate the efforts
of the United Nations over 18 years to help Kosovo build
multi-ethnic democratic institutions that uphold the
rule of law and respect human rights. We are pleased
that those efforts have largely been accomplished. The
situation in Kosovo today is very different from when
UNMIK was first created, and also different from
2008, when the Secretariat last restructured it. Given
how Kosovo has progressed and has developed over
the years, the United States and a growing number of
Council members have urged the Secretariat to continue
the work ofwinding down the mission, recognizing that
it has fulfilled its mandate.

While UNMIK should go down in history as a
model of the value of the United Nations, it increasingly
risks being memorialized as an example ofa programme
lingering beyond its relevance and a bureaucracy not
sure of how to deal with closure. Seemingly, without
regard to the realities on the ground, UNMIK continues
to be overresourced and overstaffed in comparison with
its limited responsibilities. Even more puzzling, the
Mission is requesting new funding for programming
that is largely redundant: $2 million dollars in additional
resources, primarily for human rights and rule-of-law
programming, despite the leading role of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in that area, and despite
a demonstrated ability of the Government of Kosovo
to effectively govern and administer those and other
functions with complete independence.

In response to those realities, the United States
supports considering the phasing out of UNMIK to
better reflect the significant progress and development
made in Kosovo. Any proposed alternative would need
to reflect the reality on the ground and reduce the
footprint of the United Nations in Kosovo. The United
States repeats its call for the Council to adjust the
reporting and briefing period for UNMIK from three
to six months, or even longer, which would reduce
the burden on the Secretariat and the Council, both of
which face competing priorities of far greater urgency.

The United States greatly appreciates and supports
the vital role the European Union (EU) as facilitator
of the Brussels dialogue, in particular EU High
Representative Mogherini's personal leadership of the
process. We call on leaders in both Belgrade and Pristina
to continue taking the needed steps to revitalize the
talks and to exercise restraint as provocations arise. We
also call on both Serbia and Kosovo to fully implement
dialogue agreements without further delay and to work
more actively towards the normalization of relations.

In relation to the comments about the events at
Racak by the Minister of Justice of Serbia this morning,
I would just say that the bodies at Raeak are testimony
to the atrocities and violence that took place there. The
forensic work produced by international observers at
the time was clear and unambiguous on that. All the
countries in the Balkans must undertake a full, honest
accounting of the events that transpired during the
break up of Yugoslavia and the conflicts of the 1990s
and refrain from that type of historical revisionism
that sows distrust and fear. Rather then attempting to
relitigate the past with falsehoods, leaders need to focus
on the hard work necessary to promote dialogue and
reconciliation and pursuing more stable, prosperous
and secure Balkan region on the road to Euro-Atlantic
integration. We call on all leaders in the region to avoid
careless inflammatory rhetoric that incites backlash and
instead, focus on addressing the fundamental political
and economic reforms necessary to advance their
further integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions. The
borders of the Balkan countries are defined and firm.

The United States reaffirms its support for Kosovo's
efforts to develop into a prosperous and peaceful
multi-ethnic democracy. We continue to strongly
support the full international recognition of Kosovo
and Kosovo's membership in all relevant international
organizations, including the United Nations. We
encourage States Members of the United Nations that
have not yet done so to join the more than 110 United
Nations Members that have already recognized Kosovo
as an independent State.

