I would like to thank the Dominican Republic, in its presidency of the Security Council, for organizing this timely briefing on an issue that is very pressing in many conflict situations. I would also like to thank His Excellency Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic, for his statement. I also thank Mr. Qu Dongyu, Mr. Beasley and Mr. Egeland for their informative briefings today. Almost two years after the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), the link between armed conflict and violence and conflict-induced food insecurity and the threat of famine has become increasingly evident. Yet the vicious cycle between armed conflict and food insecurity remains in place. According to the 2020 Global Report on Food Crises, the number of people in the worst food-insecurity crises in the world has risen by tens of millions. That increase has been due to worsening situations in conflict-driven crises. A total of almost 77 million people suffering from acute food crises come from such countries. Many other recent reports also show that approximately two thirds of the worst food-security crises are in countries that are experiencing armed conflict and are on the agenda of the Security Council. Women, children, refugees, internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups are suffering from the impacts of a multiplicity of threats, including conflict, hunger, malnutrition and disease, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Conflict continues to be a major driver of food insecurity, causing the displacement of people from their farming and pastoral lands and the disruption of their livelihoods, leading to devastating humanitarian consequences. At the same time, food insecurity and famine can create social tensions, exacerbate existing conflicts or breed new ones, undermine peace efforts and provide incentives for men and even children to be recruited into armed struggle. And so, the cycle continues. It is therefore high time that we direct all our efforts at breaking the vicious cycle between armed conflict and food insecurity. In this regard, I would like to offer the following ideas as food for thought. First, we stress the importance of ensuring the full implementation by all parties to armed conflicts of their respective obligations under international humanitarian law and resolution 2417 (2018). Civilian infrastructure that is critical to ensuring food security, as well as objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population, must be protected. We join others in condemning the use of starvation as a method of warfare in a number of conflicts and in rejecting the unlawful denial of humanitarian access and all other actions in violation of international humanitarian law. Secondly, in responding effectively to humanitarian needs in armed conflict, we need to adopt a consistent, people-centred and sustained approach by the United Nations system and the world community. We commend the untiring efforts of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme in providing food to millions of people. Adequate funding and support from international donors are essential to meeting the needs of global humanitarian assistance. Assistance should be prioritized to address the worst situations, where it matters the most, and to find ways and means to navigate in this time of the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, we must work together in supporting affected countries to enhance long-term recovery, improve livelihoods, build resilience and guarantee the availability, marketability and accessibility of food, thereby averting the risk of relapsing into food insecurity. We take this opportunity to stress the importance of the full, equal and effective participation of women in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and, particularly, in achieving food security. Thirdly, the best way to prevent conflict-induced hunger is undoubtedly to prevent armed conflicts altogether. There is a lot of wisdom and plenty of lessons learnt around the world in preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding that we can benefit from. The Secretary-General's contextual reports on humanitarian situations and response, as well as the reports of relevant United Nations agencies on the situation of armed conflict and food security, are good reference points for the Council to closely monitor and respond to situations of conflicted-related famine and starvation. Last but not least, the COVID-19 pandemic threatens further food insecurity in conflict situations due to disrupted production and distribution and other disease- control measures. We continue to urge all parties to armed conflicts to respond to the Secretary-General's call for humanitarian ceasefire and to facilitate the timely delivery of food and other basic humanitarian aid to affected people so that they can have equal opportunity to respond to the pandemic.
