Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Assistant Secretary-
General for Africa Bintou Keita for her briefing on the
current situation in Libya.

The reason for our meeting today is very sad. We
listened with deep regret to the information that we
received from Libya pertaining to the terrorist attack
in Benghazi, which according to reports led to the
deaths of two staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya. We offer our condolences to
the United Nations and the families and friends of the
victims. We condemn this and other terrorist attacks
that have resulted in the deaths of Libyan civilians.

Furthermore, I must note that, over the past two
to three weeks, several hundred migrants travelling to
Europe from Libya and other countries have drowned
after their boats capsized in the Mediterranean Sea.
Those arejust some ofthe most recent among a multitude
of catastrophes that have befallen Libyans and other
Africans who have abandoned all hope for stability and
peace in their countries. During the minute of silence
that you declared, Madam President, our thoughts were
also with them. After all, all lives matter.

It is clear that the worst-case predictions that we
have made on many occasions are becoming a reality;
as a result of the strife, terrorist groups are becoming
increasingly active, in part, owing to the fact that
jihadists from other Arab States, especially Syria and
Iraq, are infiltrating Libya. All of that only further
reaffirms the urgency of our calls to join efforts in
the uncompromising fight against this universal evil.
At the same time, it is imperative to set aside double
standards and avoid fraternizing with radicals in order
to use them to opportunistic ends.

We are also concerned about the situation
concerning illegal migration, but the solution to that
problem hardly resides in imposing sanctions. The true
causes underpinning the mass movement of people
lie primarily in socioeconomic distress and conflict
situations. However, it is not the migrants that must be
dealt with, but rather the root causes of the problem.

All of the tragic events that I just mentioned only
underscore the instability of the internal situation in
Libya. What is happening there is a direct consequence
of the destruction of Libyan statehood during the
well-known events of 2011, as a result of which the
country has found itself in a catastrophic situation.
We would like to believe that those who were behind
that risky geopolitical adventure fully understand their
responsibility for the collapse of this State and the
terrorist chaos that African countries neighbouring
Libya continue to experience to this day.

It is also clear to us that the continued fighting in
Libya is only exacerbating the situation. The number
of people killed, injured and internally displaced is
increasing, and urban infrastructure is being destroyed.
Humanitarian organizations are sounding the alarm.

There are simply no alternatives to a political and
diplomatic solution to the issue ofnational reconciliation
and the re-establishment of unified and effective State
institutions. We regret to note that trust has eroded
among the warring parties. We draw the attention of
all the Libyan parties to our principled position based
on support for political outcomes and United Nations
mediation efforts. As we have repeatedly stressed, the
United Nations must play a central role in such efforts.

We support the immediate cessation of military
operations and the rejection by all parties of aggressive
statements. It is important that the Libyan parties
demonstrate calm and restraint. Calls to that end
should be made in a balanced manner on all parties to
the conflict. In that regard, we learned with optimism
about the ceasefire agreement reached among the
opposing Libyan parties thanks to the mediation efforts
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salame. We hope that the ceasefire will
last, and we express our support for the efforts of the
Special Representative.

The problem of the illicit proliferation of weapons
in Libya, the flow of which is destabilizing the security
situation both in the country and in the Sahara-Sahel
region, remains pressing. In that regard, we believe that
it is important to refrain from taking steps, including
with regard to the arms embargo on Libya, that
could hinder the process of establishing dialogue and
cooperation among key Libyan political forces.
In conclusion, we remain convinced that ascribing
guilt to members of the warring Libyan parties is
counterproductive. Attempts to selectively attribute
responsibility will only fuel passions and make it
difficult to resume the political process in Libya.

