Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, and to echo the
sentiments of other speakers in saying how delighted
we are to see you presiding over the work of the
Council. We would like also to extend congratulations
to your predecessor, the Ambassador of China, who did
outstanding work. We hope that the work entrusted to
you today will continue to be done, until its
completion, following the approach that you have
endorsed; it is an excellent approach. We reiterate our
cooperation and support for you.

(spoke in English)

I wish to thank all of the members of the Council
for their continued work in the search for peace and
security in the world. We hope that work will go on
improving day by day. The Council has the full support
of my delegation now and in the years to come.

We have among us today an eminent personality
who means a lot to Rwanda and to international justice.
The Prosecutor for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda symbolizes the search for justice
and international peace, to which we all aspire. From
the outset, let me express my Government's sincere
thanks to Ms. Del Ponte for her visits and for the work
she has done since she took office, especially from the
day we and the rest of the world expressed dismay at
deliberations by the Appeals Chamber in The Hague on
releasing the infamous Barayagwiza without putting
him on trial at that time.

You were not here yet, Mr. President, but your
colleagues and I will tell you how much diplomatic
activity there was in New York and outside United
Nations Headquarters to address the issue of justice
denied to genocide victims in the recent past. It is sad
to recall that intimidation and all sorts of pressure came
from this Council and the various capitals, aimed at
bringing the Government of Rwanda to its knees,
asking us to cooperate with the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda or else. That was the message. We
politely listened to those threats, weighed the words
and the truth embodied in them, and found that once
again Rwanda was going to be failed forever. My
Government and I stood firm, and, as always, we told
the Council the truth and only the truth. Thank God,
the Council realized that we had a point, and Ms. Del
Ponte understood us right away.

The personal and professional stand she took and
the silence this Council subsequently kept went on to
prove that no matter what suit we happen to be
wearing, we remain human beings. We can be
mistaken, and mistakes are made. We commend the
efforts made by the Prosecutor and salute the results
achieved thereafter, for the sake not only of Rwanda
but also for the credibility of this body and what we all
stand for: international peace and security through
justice for all.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
has done a great deal, although there could be
improvements, of course. It certainly could have done a
lot more. We thank all present for what they have been
able to do and urge them to do more now, instead of
postponing it until later. That later may be too late.
But, as I said before, it is never too late to do well and
good.
The Prosecutor has done a tremendous job by
visiting Rwanda and Arusha and remaining there
longer than her predecessors did. This alone shows that
she means business, and we thank her for that. It has
made, and is making, a big difference. We encourage
her to continue in that vein, and we will collaborate
fully with her.

We are pleased to note that she has recruited a
new chief investigator, whom we wish well. However,
we would like to see better-qualified investigators
recruited right away to match the highly qualified
defence lawyers, who simply have a free ride over an
underqualified prosecuting stafff though not always.

Talking of recruitment - and this has already
been communicated to the Prosecutor's Office - we
wish to see Rwandan nationals recruited from all walks
of life and different social groups; this is a diplomatic
way to say that so far those recruited are Rwandan
refugees based in Europe and elsewhere, some of
whom have already had files opened on genocide
charges or are relatives and friends of those jailed in
Arusha, especially the group of interpreters and
witnesses. A translator can be a traitor. I have lots of
examples, without any prejudice. We had a case of
somebody who asked, "Can you translate
gukataijosi7". This means to cut the throat or the neck
of somebody. Somebody translated it as legitimate
defence. I have names but I cannot mention them
because this is not the appropriate time or place to do
it, and the Prosecutor has those examples, I am sure.
We hope to see that reversed as swiftly as possible.

There is more to this. Those in jail have
successfully managed to call for witnesses, not genuine
independent witnesses, but their families and relatives
who, once shipped out of Rwanda, go into exile and
never go back to Rwanda. We have lots of cases of this
group. Bound as we are to cooperate with the ICTR, we
equally feel cheated, and a solution has to be found
immediately. There also exist what are known as
"tracking teams". We welcome them. However, the
ICTR has been taking people out of Rwanda, allegedly
protecting them from revenge killings, and relocating
them in other countries. Again, this is the same group
of people: parents or relatives of those injail in Arusha
or elsewhere, in northern Europe, other parts of Europe
or Canada. We have examples.

The ICTR staffing has new types of
shortcomings: 1994 Rwandan refugees and former
human rights monitors expelled from Rwanda for
inciting hatred and for failing in the work they had to
do. They are exclusively people who have their own
bias against Rwanda and people inside Rwanda, dead
or alive. This network of recruitment should be broken
before things get worse. Once again, the Prosecutor is
aware of this situation, and we hope members will urge
and help her Office to change things, but we have to
help her to do so.

Members recall witnesses who were killed after
their return from Arusha. The families and relatives of
those victims have not been compensated for the loss
of their loved ones or relocated in the same way as the
families of killers are systematically being taken out of
Rwanda for alleged reasons of safety. There are double
standards everywhere, and this is immoral, I think.
That should be reversed, and protection for all and
compensation should be the words on members' lips
and in their notebooks from now on, as was also
suggested by Ms. Del Ponte. I hope that members'
regrets expressed after the Carlsson report will not fade
away, so that each country will think about what to do
for the victims of our failures.

The sentences rendered by the ICTR are also,
interestingly, following a funny trend. When former
Prime Minister Kambanda was judged, he was
sentenced to life imprisonment, Serushago to 15 years,
and, yesterday or today, Ruggiu to 12 years. As the
years go by, the sentences diminish and yet
responsibilities remain blatantly the same. How can
Ruggiu enjoy only a 12-year sentence after what he
admitted he did and said? We should think twice.

Last but not least, while bearing in mind the
neutrality of the judges, everyone wishes to jealously
preserve, Rwanda included, how can one explain that
no single judge from the ICTR has taken the liberty to
visit Rwanda either individually or in a group to
become acquainted with the place of the crimes on
which the judges are deliberating? Can we be given a
good reason why they have not visited the country? Do
we have reasons why the ICTR does not have priests
and nuns arrested? The ICTR knows of the one in
France, the one in Italy who actually changed his name
as a cover-up, the two nuns in Belgium, and lots more
in Canada and elsewhere. We know them. We know
where they are.

I could go on, but to conclude, the excellent
relations existing between the ICTR and the
Government of Rwanda should continue and require
members' support and understanding. The Prosecutor
has done an excellent job in addressing real issues, and
that is what we argue in favour of. We trust that she can
devise ways to solve existing problems referred to
earlier to make sure that we are all on the right track.
But she needs members' assistance, too. Justice does
not discriminate. Discrimination should be tackled in
dealing with recruitment and witnesses. This will help
all of us work hand in hand and minimize failures that
are still haunting us.

