Mr. Rivard (Canada): Afghanistan is entering
into a pivotal period, and it is likely that its long-term
transformation into a secure and stable democracy will
be greatly influenced by events and decisions made in
the near term.

An improved security situation remains
paramount to our efforts in Afghanistan. While
counter-insurgency efforts have been successful in
reversing insurgent momentum in southern
Afghanistan, violence is increasing in areas that were
previously considered secure. Security will need to
improve significantly in order to provide the space
needed for Afghanistan to grow and develop.

All civilian deaths resulting from the violence are
tragic, and we take every step possible to avoid civilian
casualties due to the operations of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). However, the
overwhelming majority of those deaths are caused by
the insurgency. Indeed, civilians are often the primary
targets of insurgents. That was tragically illustrated in
the recent attack on the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul
and the recent use by insurgents of an 8-year-old girl as
a suicide bomber. We condemn these tactics of
desperation, which contravene international law, and
we demand that they cease.

The Government of Afghanistan and ISAF have
recently begun the process of transitioning lead
security responsibility from the international
community to Afghan authorities. Canada, through the
NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan, is committed to
increasing the number and improving the quality of
personnel of the Afghan National Security Forces, who
will be crucial to maintaining peace in the country. To
that end, Canada will provide up to 950 Canadian
Forces personnel and up to 45 civilian police from
2011 to 2014 to help train the National Security Forces.
We may be drawing down in Kandahar, but we remain
committed to supporting Afghanistan.

(spoke in French)

Stability and security in Afghanistan cannot be
achieved by military means alone. There is a need for a
process of political reconciliation between the
Government of Afghanistan and the insurgency. For
lasting reconciliation to be possible, it will be
necessary for insurgents to renounce violence, sever
ties with Al-Qaida and recognize the Afghan
Constitution. While we agree that the time for peace
talks is now, there are Afghans who are genuinely
afraid that the gains made over the past 10 years in
democratization, human rights and the delivery of
basic services could be lost. The ongoing discussions
must be cognizant of this concern and ensure that
peace will benefit all Afghan citizens.

Canada shares the view of many Afghans and
members of the international community that, over the
longer term, lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan
will require an inclusive healing process. This must
involve all parts of Afghan society, including Afghan
women, in long-term efforts that seek to rebuild
relationships and resolve historical grievances that, if
left unaddressed, could undermine durable peace in
Afghanistan.

Canada, alongside our international partners, is
working closely with the Government of Afghanistan
to ensure that the civilian aspects of transition -
strengthening governance and development - are
coordinated in such a way as to support the success and
irreversibility of the overall transition. Successful
transition will depend on concerted effort and the
serious political commitment of Afghanistan's
leadership to ensure effective, inclusive and
accountable governance.

Afghan Government capacity to provide services
and opportunities to ordinary Afghans must continue to
be built and nurtured. In that respect, the Afghan
Government-led Kabul process and the national
priority programmes continue to be important tools for
both the Afghan Government and the international
community. Now, we must facilitate implementation of
the national priority programmes, linking them to the
security transition and ensuring that they provide
tangible benefits in areas such as access to health care
and education for ordinary Afghans. It will now be
important for the programmes to be fiscally sustainable
and realistic. In that regard, the international
community will need to help Afghanistan increase its
capacity to generate revenue during this period. The
private sector will also have an important role to play
in the country's development.

It is also crucial that Afghans be able to trust their
elected officials to represent their interests at the
district, provincial and national levels. Corruption
erodes confidence in democratic institutions and
undermines efforts to stabilize the country. It remains a
serious issue and could be a major obstacle to
successful transition in the coming years. The Afghan
Government must therefore take concrete and visible
actions to combat corruption and prevent it from
derailing the transition agenda.

(spoke in English)

Countries of the region also have a significant
role in Afghanistan's success or failure, as well as in
the overall stability of South and Central Asia. It is
crucial for Afghanistan and its neighbours to overcome
the deep-seated historical distrust and conflicting
interests that are often at odds with regional stability
and economic logic. Political differences continue to
block progress on what could be win-win initiatives on
the economic front, which could contribute enormously
to lasting stability and prosperity in the region.

We look forward to the Afghan-led Afghanistan
conference in Bonn in December, which will focus on
issues of importance to the transition process. There
are several such conferences on Afghanistan scheduled
for 2011 and, while it is of absolute importance that we
continue to have an open and candid dialogue, we need
to muster real political will to see tangible progress.

In the past 10 years, significant, quantifiable
progress has been made in Afghanistan in key areas.
We are all focused on the same goal - the transition of
responsibility for security, governance and
development to the Government of Afghanistan. The
Afghan Government and the international community
are united in their determination to meet this objective,
and Canada will continue to play its active role.

