Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Thank
you, Madam President, for your presence and for
convening this debate on the protections of civilians
in armed conflict, an issue at the heart of the Security
Council's charge to maintain international peace and
security.

First, I would like to join the Secretary-General,
the briefers and Council colleagues in paying tribute
to fallen United Nations personnel and humanitarian
workers on World Humanitarian Day and the tenth
anniversary of the Canal Hotel bombing in Baghdad.
We owe humanitarian workers our deep gratitude for
the work they do and the risks they take.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay, Under-Secretary-General Amos and
International Committee of the Red Cross Director
Spoerri for focusing our attention today on the many
challenges facing civilians caught or targeted in
conflicts.

We see the horrific consequences when access
to those in need is blocked, as in Syria, when the
Government's armed forces and armed rebel groups
traumatize civilian populations, as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and when impunity prevails and
the perpetrators of atrocities are not held accountable,
as in the Central African Republic. Those devastating
situations are particularly acute when community
leaders, journalists, activists, religious figures and
scholars are targeted for the critical work they do to
sound the alarm, protect the vulnerable and foster
peace and reconciliation.

Today's discussion is of great importance to the
United States. We have made the protection of civilians
a priority, and indeed President Obama has made it clear
that, for the United States, the deterrence of genocide
in atrocities is a core national security interest and core
moral responsibility. Too often, warring parties fall
short or blatantly disregard their obligations altogether.
In truly appalling cases, including the ongoing tragedies
in Syria and the Sudan, parties to armed conflict
deliberately target civilians. It is clear that we must
strengthen our commitment in the three key areas that
Argentina has rightly highlighted for this debate, that is,
enhancing compliance with international humanitarian
law, improving humanitarian access to areas in conflict
and ensuring effective accountability mechanisms for
suspected war crimes.

Despite a strong body of international humanitarian
law dedicated to protecting civilian populations in
armed conflict, the Secretary-General notes that most
victims in recent armed conflicts have been civilians.
In Syria, more than 100,000 people have tragically
lost their lives. Among them are innocent civilians,
including women and children, who should have been
safe from violence. We must use the tools at hand to
improve compliance with international humanitarian
law in order to prevent the loss of innocent lives. In the
context of the Council's work, that means supporting
and advancing the tools we have, including action
plans for children in armed conflict and the naming
and shaming of perpetrators of sexual violence. It also
means supporting the work of organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which helps
to promote compliance with international humanitarian
law and respect for legal and moral norms. And for
each of our Governments it means raising awareness,
especially through military training about international
humanitarian law and supporting the work of internal
accountability mechanisms in our own Governments
and in those of other countries to which we offer
assistance. That is why the international community's
military training work, including in countries such
as Afghanistan, is a critical component in fostering
international peace and security while also ensuring
the protection of civilians.

Humanitarian access is critical to protecting
civilians. Timely, full and unimpeded humanitarian
access to populations in need of assistance must be a top

priority for everyone. That is as true in Syria as it is in
the Sudan, where millions of vulnerable civilians lack
access to food, water, shelter and medicine. In addition
to access, personnel engaged in humanitarian activities
should be free from targeting and attack. As we have
heard today, attacks on humanitarian personnel have
continued unabated around the world. Attacks like the
one on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu in
June prevent humanitarian agencies from undertaking
their lifesaving work and should be condemned
wherever and whenever they are committed.

Finally, without accountability, the cycles of
violence continue. The United States strongly rejects
impunity and supports the international community's
efforts to foster stability and sustainable peace through
justice. In that regard, we have worked with national
authorities to strengthen domestic judicial systems
in conflict and post-conflict situations, including by
funding militaryjustice efforts in the eastern part ofthe
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where rebel groups
and the military have used rape as a weapon of war,
among other atrocities. We have also strongly supported
international justice mechanisms and endorsed efforts
to expose and document human-rights abuses, including
through international tribunals and commissions. In
Syria, the United States is helping Syrians prepare
for accountability by supporting the documentation of
violations committed by all sides in the conflict and
bolstering the capacity of civil society organizations to
build the foundations for lasting peace. In addition, we
cooperate with the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on its current cases, consistent with United States law
and policy, including through the recent expansion of
our rewards-for-justice programme to include foreign
nationals indicted by international criminal tribunals,
including the ICC.

As we have seen from Syria and the Sudan to the
Sahel and the Great Lakes, the failure to protect civilians
threatens regional stability, as conflicts escalate and
populations stream across borders. Protecting civilians
is the primary responsibility of States, but it is clear that
the international community must keep its attention
focused sharply on the practical steps we can take to
improve the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We must redouble our efforts to ensure that the Council
is not sitting on the sidelines when civilian populations
are in grave danger.

