Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): France regrets that Iraq did not wish to rescind
its unacceptable decision to limit its cooperation with the
Special Commission. We were among the first to express
our disapproval of this decision, which violates
resolutions of the Security Council. We very quickly
agreed to a strong, unanimous statement by the President
of the Council condemning Iraq's attempt to dictate the
conditions of its cooperation with the Special Commission
and demanding total cooperation from Iraq. In the days
that followed, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of France
and Russia recalled, in a joint statement dated 1
November, that resolutions of the Security Council are
mandatory for all States and must be fully implemented.
No discrimination with regard to any Member State can

 

be tolerated. We must remain firm on this principle, which
is in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations.

Persistent diplomatic efforts were made to seek a way
to end the crisis. From the start, France supported the
initiative of the Secretary-General to send a mission to
Baghdad to persuade Iraqi leaders to reverse their decision.
Here I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
courageous initiative, as well as the members of the
mission, whose work was commendable, but unfortunately
without success. We ourselves made repeated efforts in our
discussions with the Iraqi authorities to convince them to
rescind their decision. Until the last minute, we believed
reason would prevail. Unfortunately, that was not the case.

So today we require a strong and unanimous reaction
from the Security Council to send a clear signal to
Baghdad. This reaction will not take place in a vacuum.
Resolutions 1115 (1997) and 1134 (1997) have already
urged Iraq to cooperate fully with the Special Commission.
These words were not heeded, much to our regret.

The reaction of the Council that we will be expressing
must, however, be balanced and commensurate with the
realities of the situation. The nature of the sanctions - that
is, travel restrictions - was already covered in resolutions
1115 (1997) and 1134 (1997). In fact, these sanctions will
not worsen the situation of the Iraqi people, who are
already sorely tried by seven years of economic embargo.
The search for a peaceful solution to end the current crisis
will in no way be hampered by the travel bans covered in
the text we will be voting for. Bona fide diplomatic
activities are authorized and do not, unlike other missions,
require prior authorization of the Committee established
under resolution 661 (1990).
The mechanism for lifting the sanctions is clearly spelt
out: as soon as Iraq again complies with the Special
Commission's right of access, sanctions will be lifted.

The Council's authority is maintained. The Council is
still master of its judgements and future actions. That in
particular is the thrust of paragraph 8. As was spelt out in
the French-Russian joint declaration, we continue to
advocate strongly that any action with regard to Iraq be
considered and led strictly within the framework of the
Security Council. The language of the draft for which we
shall be voting has therefore been carefully weighed. It
does not encourage or justify any escalation. In the coming
days we must persevere in our active search for a
diplomatic solution, and we must avoid any counter-
productive attitude. We must bear in mind our basic goal:
the continuation, under favourable conditions, of the work
of the Special Commission on the ground. Nothing would
be worse than to call into question the main strength of
resolution 687 (1991) and United Nations relations with
Iraq. The system of ongoing verification and monitoring
cannot be suspended; the security of the region is at
stake.

It is a good thing that the draft we will be voting on
commands unanimity in the Council. For France, this was
a very important condition, since we must in crisis
situations maintain the unity of the Council. This
consensus lends more weight and force to the message to
be sent to Baghdad. The clear will of the authors of the
draft resolution to take into account the views of all
States members of the Council was decisive in this
respect, and should be commended.

We still hope that this message will be heeded. We
reiterate the urgent appeal we have constantly addressed
to the Iraqi authorities for reason to prevail, urging them
to rescind their decision and refrain from any action
incompatible with Security Council resolutions.

Then, and only then, will it be possible to discuss
their concerns regarding the working methods of the
Special Commission and the manner in which it
discharges its responsibilities. Then, and only then, can
discussions be undertaken in a positive climate to explore
prospects for resolving the crisis and to take into account
the significant progress that has been made on the
substance, notably in the nuclear and ballistic areas.

Only complete and effective cooperation with the
Special Commission will make it possible to implement
paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991) regarding the
lifting of the embargo and to ensure the reintegration of
Iraq into the international community. The Iraqi
population is not responsible for the current situation, but
it is suffering terribly. It is worth recalling the figures that
appear in the United Nations Development Programme's
annual Human Development Report. Over the past seven
years, the average calorie intake has fallen by a third,
infant mortality has increased by 124 per cent, and life
expectancy has dropped from 65 to 57 years.

The exorbitant price paid by the Iraqi population
cannot go on rising indefinitely, amidst general
indifference. Only compliance by Iraq with its
international obligations can put an end to this situation.

 

