Mr. Mialkovskyi (Ukraine): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin, for
his briefing. It clearly outlines the political challenges
in Kosovo following the early legislative elections, as
well as the number of issues relevant to the stability
and well-being of Kosovo residents. I am also grateful
to His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacic, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, and to Ms. Vlora Citaku, for
their statements.

Ukraine regrets that the political situation in Kosovo
remains a matter of concern due to the inability of
political groups to reach an agreement on the distribution
of posts, which is a necessary precondition for setting
up an effective Administration. This stalemate creates
unnecessary tensions and could undermine efforts
aimed at preserving peace and stability in the region.
We call on the leaders of Kosovo to show unity and to
prove their readiness to meet the immediate and long-
term challenges, including economic development,
addressing the energy situation, strengthening the rule
of law, relations with Serbia and so forth.

Ukraine also hopes that new authorities will give
priority to the implementation of the agreements
concluded in the framework of the European Union-led
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, including on
the establishment of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities. We encourage the leadership
in Belgrade and Pristina to show responsibility and to
re-engage in a constructive dialogue to achieve progress
in the normalization of their bilateral relations, which is
essential for both, but first and foremost for the residents
of Kosovo. No nationalistic or divisive discourse will
do any good for the region.

Ukraine welcomes the resumption of the high-level
European Union-facilitated dialogue and the meeting
of Serbian President Vueic' with Mr. Thaci, hosted by
the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy in July. We hope that the
agreement reached to start a new phase of dialogue for
the normalization ofrelations and reconciliation will be
implemented in the short term. In that regard, we took
note of President Vucie's initiative to launch an internal
dialogue on Kosovo. We hope that it will soon translate
into tangible measures.

We share the concern of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General at the incidents of violence
and desecration in various parts of Kosovo. Those
crimes point to the importance of intensified efforts
aimed at improving the rule of law and the execution of
justice. We appreciate the valuable work carried out by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and other international partners in
Kosovo in strengthening security and stability. We also
commend UNMIK for engaging with local authorities,
civil society, youth and other stakeholders in Kosovo to
promote intercommunity cooperation, and for building
trust and fostering societal reconciliation.

The Mission's support in terms of addressing the
issues of protection of human rights, vulnerable groups
and cultural heritage, as well as the problems related to
missing persons and violent extremism, is both needed
and appreciated. Ukraine is convinced that those
and other important tasks should remain among the
priorities of the reconfigured UNMIK. In that regard,
we unreservedly join the calls for starting focused
discussion on the reduction of the Mission and for
reconsidering the regularity of the Council's briefings
on Kosovo.

