Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I thank the
High Representative and Special Representative Klein
for their briefings. We congratulate them on what they
have achieved both individually and, as the High
Representative pointed out, jointly. We would also like
to take this opportunity to applaud the achievements of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and the leadership of UNMIBH by Jacques
Klein.

The United Kingdom supports the remarks to be
made by the presidency of the European Union (EU). I
will therefore not attempt to be comprehensive. I have
a couple of comments and a couple of questions under
three headings. The first is the rule of law, the second
is economic reform and, finally, I have a point or two
on the recent elections.

On the first point, it seems to us that the rule of
law is and must be the international community's
number-one priority in Bosnia. The High
Representative was therefore right indeed to reform the
immunity laws following the elections. It is proper for
the Bosnian courts to decide whether an individual is
fit to serve in the Government, and we must see war
criminals brought to justice through the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The smooth transition so far from the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) to the European Union Police
Mission (EUPM), as described by Jacques Klein, is
very welcome. We need to continue to ensure that that
transition process continues to run smoothly, and we
agree with both the High Representative and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that
the international community needs to continue to
provide practical support for the rule of law.

On reform, we completely agree with the High
Representative that the reform agenda must now speed
up. The future Government, whatever configuration it
eventually takes, will need to be fully committed to the
reform process, and must sign up to the "Jobs and
Justice" agenda agreed by the previous Administration.
The High Representative is right that the international
community must support that agenda and stay with the
process through appropriate practical support. The
United Kingdom remains committed to that both
nationally and through the European Union.

The High Representative has our strong support
for the "making Bosnia work" reforms. In particular, it
is essential to increase State funding though State-level
value-added tax (VAT) and the creation of a State-level
customs agency. Clearly, for that, both reform of
justice and economic reform will be essential.

Finally, on elections, we agree with the High
Representative that the Bosnian Electoral Commission
did a superb job organizing the elections. This is
indeed a good sign that democracy is taking root in the
country.

The low turnout and the comparatively strong
showing by nationalists against moderate parties is, of
course, disappointing. But, as both Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Klein and the
High Representative have spelt out, the low turnout
will be reversed only if the future Government proves
it is capable of making progress on the reform agenda.

On the election results, the international
community needs to continue to hammer home the
message that this was a protest vote against the slow
progress of reform made by the moderate Government
and not a vote per se for the nationalists. The High
Representative and his Office have done well to convey
this message so far.

To conclude with a few questions, does the High
Representative or Jacques Paul Klein think it possible
still to form a moderate coalition in the Republika
Srpska? There have been rumours that Ivanic has done
a deal to enter into coalition with the Serb Democratic
Party (SDS) and the Socialist Party of Republika
Srpska (SPRS). How much does the shape of the future
coalition, in fact, matter to implementation of the
reform agenda set out in "jobs and justice"?

