Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, and the European Free
Trade Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Norway, declare that they align
themselves with this statement.

Today's meeting gives us the opportunity to
reaffirm the European Union's policy of unequivocal
condemnation of all acts of terrorism as criminal acts.
We remain deeply convinced that no act of terrorism is
justifiable, irrespective of its motivations, objectives,
form or manifestation. The European Union, together
with all its member States, is strongly committed to
defeating that threat, and recognizes and supports the
central role of the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism everywhere.

Since 1999, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) has
proved to be one of the main instruments at our
disposal to fight against terrorism by imposing targeted
sanctions designed to focus specifically on the
individuals and entities belonging to or associated with
the Taliban and Al Qaeda. After the terrorist attacks of
11 September 2001, resolutions 1390 (2002) and 1455
(2003) imposed and strengthened targeted sanctions
designed to focus specifically on individuals and
entities that, in connection with the Taliban or Al
Qaeda, were responsible for such threats to and
breaches of international peace and security. Under the
authority of the Security Council and with the active
support of the international community, the scope of
the sanctions regime has been enlarged, its tools have
been extended and improved, and its working methods
have been progressively adapted to the new
circumstances. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) has played an important role in
that process, and it will continue to do so. Likewise, we
appreciate the important work of the Monitoring Group
and its regular reporting to the Committee and the
Security Council.

The European Union and its member States
immediately responded to that effort by strengthening
their cooperation with this Committee. A unique
regulatory framework directly applicable in all EU
member States has ensured proper and timely
implementation of all the relevant Security Council
resolutions in this field. The result was amplified by
the voluntary alignment to that framework of all
countries acceding to the EU. A wide range of legal
instruments has been adopted with the aim of
strengthening the restrictive measures imposed by the
United Nations, notably to combat the financing of
terrorism.

Furthermore, the European Union and its member
States entered into close cooperation with the
Committee and the Monitoring Group, which assists it
in the fulfilment of its tasks. That cooperation has
already produced satisfactory results, although it can be
further improved, and has ensured a remarkable flow of
information, which proved extremely useful in
enhancing the effectiveness of our overall strategy
against terrorism. The European Union firmly supports
the continuing efforts of the Committee to improve its
working procedures, thus increasing efficiency,
transparency and scope.

Respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law is essential in all efforts to combat
terrorism. In that respect, the European Union deeply
shares the approach followed by the Security Council
with the adoption of resolution 1452 (2002) of 20
December 2002, aimed at defining criteria for the
granting of exemptions, in specific cases, based on
humanitarian needs.

The European Union remains convinced that
every effort must be made to promote due process in
the proceedings of the Committee. In that respect, the
Union welcomes the adoption by the Committee, on 7
November 2002, of guidelines for the conduct of its
work, which were further revised and expanded on 10
April this year.

Sanctions must be implemented on the basis of
transparent technical criteria in order to create
maximum legal certainty in the matter. The European
Union stands ready to work to further improve the
Committee's guidelines, as appropriate. It also
welcomes the improvement of the format and content
of the consolidated list of individuals and entities
belonging to or associated with the Taliban and Al
Qaeda, as well as the adoption by the Committee of a
guidance document to assist Member States in the
preparation of their implementation reports.

Terrorism must and can be defeated, in
accordance with the Charter and international law, by a
sustained comprehensive approach involving the
participation and the collaboration of all States and
international and regional organizations, and by
redoubled efforts at the national level. Therefore, the
European Union shares the need for improved
coordination and increased exchange of information
between the 1267 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), and the Terrorism Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. While appreciating that
that cooperation is on the right track, the European
Union is fully aware that much work remains to be
done, and therefore it is fully committed to
contributing to such an effort with its expertise and
best practices in the fight against terrorism.

The European Union and its member States
reiterate their determination to cooperate fully with the
1267 Committee and with the Monitoring Group both
by supplying information as may be requested and by
facilitating, to the extent possible, the proper
identification of all listed individuals and entities
targeted by restrictive measures. In that respect, the
European Union encourages all States that have not yet
done so to provide all possible information in response
to resolution 1455 (2003).

