I thank all the briefers for their statements. Allow me to extend my special thanks to our Belgian colleague and his team for their diligent work in facilitating the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) for the past two years. Five years ago, persistent diplomatic efforts produced an agreement to ensure that Iran's nuclear programme remained exclusively peaceful in nature. Estonia has repeatedly stated its support to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We continue to consider the JCPOA a key element in the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture and as crucial for regional and wider international security. Owing to the strict limits and international monitoring mechanisms set by the Plan, the Iranian nuclear programme remains under tight scrutiny and verification. We believe that these transparency measures remain crucial in averting the prospect of a nuclear- armed Iran. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the important role of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in verifying and monitoring Iran's nuclear commitments under the JCPOA. Estonia commends the impartial and professional work of the Agency. We encourage Iran to continue its constructive engagement and cooperation with the IAEA. The JCPOA has faced a number of challenges over the past few years. Estonia deeply regrets Iran's decision in 2019 to start reducing its nuclear-related commitments under the Plan. As a result, Iran has again accumulated worrisome levels of enriched uranium and acquired new knowledge through its research and development activities. We note with concern the latest report of the IAEA informing us of Iran's intention to install additional advanced centrifuge machines at the Fuel Enrichment Plant in Natanz, contrary to the JCPOA commitments. We also note with great regret the recent laws adopted by the Iranian Parliament with the purpose of further expanding Iran's nuclear programme and restricting [AEA inspectors' access to key nuclear sites. Those steps are counterproductive to preserving the agreement. We strongly urge Iran without delay to reverse those and other measures contrary to its commitments and to refrain from taking further escalatory steps. Besides the nuclear domain, Iran's other actions are cause for concern. The taking by Iran of steps inconsistent with the restrictive measures set out in annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), along with other Security Council resolutions and with international obligations, makes it difficult to consider Iran a responsible actor. I refer here to Iran testing and developing ballistic missiles and technologies related to them, attacking commercial shipping in the Gulf of Oman, damaging Saudi oil facilities and transferring arms to its proxies in Lebanon, Iraq, Syria and Yemen. Such weapons-proliferation activities have a highly destabilizing effect to the region. They only increase mistrust and feed into the escalation of tensions. Such activities are unacceptable and need to stop immediately. Despite the challenges, we remain hopeful that there is a way to preserve the JCPOA and ensure its full implementation. Estonia welcomes the JCPOA participants' commitment to the JCPOA and efforts to address and find a viable solution to the issues of non-compliance. We believe that, once the participants engage constructively and substantively in the dispute resolution mechanism and return to full compliance with the deal, it will serve as a way to build confidence and create opportunities to address other regional security concerns.
