Mr. Samukai (Liberia): It is a privilege for me
to participate for the second time in a meeting of the
Council on the activities of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL). Let me begin by expressing the
profound gratitude of President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
and the Government and people of Liberia to the
Council for its continued support of peace and stability
in Liberia. We also want to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month.

We are meeting at a time when Liberia is facing a
serious threat to its national existence. The deadly Ebola
virus has caused a disruption of the normal functioning
of our State. The disease, which early this year was
identified in the remote villages of our country, has now
reached urban centres, including the capital, Monrovia.
It is now spreading like wild fire, devouring everything
in its path. The already weak health infrastructure of
the country has been overwhelmed. Health workers,
including doctors and nurses who are at the front
line of the fight to control the disease, have been
highly affected, with several - including some of the
country's most prominent doctors and nurses - have
lost their lives.

The rapid spread of this virus has created a health
crisis, requiring the President to institute measures
aimed at containment. These measures include
establishment of the National Task Force on Ebola,
headed by the President herself; the creation of an
incident management team, led by the Ministry of
Health and Social Welfare; and the declaration of a
state of emergency for 90 days. Additional measures
include a one-month compulsory leave for non-essential
Government employees, now extended for a second
month, to limit human to human contact. Communities
with a high incidence of infection have been contained
and, in specific cases, quarantined in order to limit
movement. A nationwide curfew is currently in place,
with adjustments having been made only yesterday.

The Government of Liberia launched an awareness
campaign with the full support of UNMIL, the Liberian
media, civil society organizations, the business
community and other bilateral and international
partners. The Government, through the national
legislature, also provided an initial allocation of
$5 million to support the national strategy against the
spread ofthe deadly virus. A subsequent appealwas made
to the international community to provide financial,
logistical and material support for the implementation
of the national strategy, which prioritizes the following
actions: the personal protection and safety of health-
care workers, providing better health-care services for
all Ebola virus disease cases, and providing general
health care for the population, among other measures.
In spite of all these measures, continued denial,
traditional practices, religious rituals, fear and
community resistance still constitute obstacles to
progress. Government is using all available means to
overcome these obstacles and minimize mob violence
and other infractions of peace and security. From
the few cases registered in March, the pandemic has
mushroomed into a health emergency exceeding the
Government's response capacity. As we speak, this
deadly disease continues to spread and cause havoc in
many communities. Nine of the 15 counties in Liberia
are currently affected. Liberia lacks the infrastructure,
logistical capacity professional expertise and financial
resources necessary to effectively address this disease.

To be candid, the response of the international
community to the appeal of our Government and
partners, in particular the World Health Organization
and Medecins Sans Frontieres, was initially less than
robust. However, we are thankful to the Secretary-
General for his leadership and initiative in focusing
global attention on the virus, including his appointment
of a United Nations System Coordinator on Ebola in the
person of Mr. David Nabarro. We are very encouraged
by the current efforts of the United Nations to mobilize
resources and coordinate the scaling up of interventions
to bring surge capacity to bear in response to the tragic
situation. We are equally appreciative of the action
taken by the African Union yesterday in dispatching
a technical team and making funding available to
support national efforts. Even today, the African Union
has issued a call to all its member States to urgently
lift all travel bans imposed on countries affected by the
ebola outbreak in Africa. We ask all Council members
to use their good offices to support that call.

The health emergency is affecting every sector of
our society. Our economy has been seriously disrupted.
Local economic activities such as domestic food
production, mining and transport services, just to name
a few, have been undermined. Moreover, the slowdown
in domestic food production, particularly in affected
areas of the country, has had a negative impact on food
supply, thus triggering increasing demand for imported

commodities at higher prices. The hospitality industry
has also been seriously affected by the epidemic. Today,
only two international airlines - Brussels Airlines and
Royal Air Maroc - are flying to and from Liberia. The
suspension of flights has accentuated the difficulties
we are facing and exacerbated the constraints of
humanitarian delivery.

Until today, there have been no reports of infections
among either national or international UNMIL staff.
The Government is aware that the stakes are high,
as troop- and police-contributing countries harbour
concerns for the health and safety of their citizens. We
extend our appreciation to those countries and appeal
for their solidarity by allowing their forces to continue
their assignment in Liberia. The United Nations plan for
scaling up the international response needs to benefit
from the use of military assets as well. We thank those
countries that have provided these assets and encourage
others to do the same.

The Government of Liberia fully supports the
Secretary-General's request for a technical rollover
of UNMIL's mandate for the next three months.
Our attention and focus need to be directed towards
containing and eliminating the ebola virus from
Liberia and other countries. We encourage continued
flexibility on the part of the Council in these very
difficult circumstances for Liberia. We also hope that
the deliberations will take into account the imperatives
of protecting the investment and gains made in Liberia
over the years for peace and stability. I thank the
Council for its continued support.

