Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia takes this
opportunity to congratulate the Government of
Afghanistan on President Ghani's 16 June decision to
extend the unilateral ceasefire for the remainder of
the holy month of Ramadan and for Eid Al-Fitr. The
Afghan people overwhelmingly supported the cessation
of hostilities, and the ceasefire has given hope that a
lasting peace may be possible.

Australia has also welcomed President Ghani's
invitation to the Taliban at the 28 February meeting of
the Kabul process for peace and security cooperation
to engage in negotiations without preconditions and
without the threat of violence. President Ghani's offer
and the ceasefire in June are bold steps that reflect the
aspirations of the Afghan people. Australia underscores
its disappointment that the Taliban thus far has chosen

not to match President Ghani's bold thinking.

We deeply regret the continuing violence outlined
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/539) and
the role of the Taliban and other insurgent groups in
engaging in a series of heinous and cowardly attacks
targeting Afghanistan's civilian population. We
condemn the brutal attacks by insurgent groups and the
actions of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and ISIS-inspired groups, Al-Qaida, its affiliates and
other terrorist groups in Afghanistan. Together with our
allies and partners in the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission, Australia remains committed to supporting
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces to
meet the challenges presented by those groups.
Throughout the years of conflict, the Afghan
people have demonstrated their steadfast commitment
to building a better society in which the voices of all of
its members can be heard. The parliamentary elections,
now scheduled for October, will be another important
step in that process. We are encouraged that, despite
ongoing violence and intimidation, voter registration
has been increasing. Conducting parliamentary
elections in October will be crucial for political
credibility. We encourage the Afghan Government to
maintain its efforts to hold inclusive elections, and
we welcome the commitment of the United Nations to
supporting those elections.

We also look forward to further discussing
the Afghan Government's plans for the upcoming
November ministerial conference in Geneva to advance
Afghanistan's economic and social prosperity.

In addition to its many other challenges, we note
Afghanistan is facing a crisis, an imminent drought that
could affect two thirds of the country. An estimated
1.4 million people are likely to need emergency food
and nutrition assistance. Australia will continue to help
respond to that challenge.

International efforts in Afghanistan are supported
by a strong United Nations presence. Australia values
the role that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, ably led by Special Representative
Yamamoto, plays in guiding and coordinating
international support in Afghanistan.

