Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I would like to welcome your
Excellency and to congratulate your friendly country
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We thank you for convening this important
meeting to discuss an important and vital topic in all
its dimensions. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Mousa Faki Mahamat,
for their valuable briefings on this phenomenon, which
is threatening the sovereignty, security and territorial
integrity of countries and the right of peoples to
self-determination. I would also like to welcome the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire and
Rwanda at this meeting.

There is no doubt that the phenomenon of using
mercenaries in conflict is a threat not only to the
security and safety of States but also to regional and
international peace and security. It also constitutes a
gross violation ofthe purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. This phenomenon
becomes more complicated when it is linked with other
serious issues, some of which are on the agenda of the
Security Council, such as terrorism, foreign fighters,
illegal migration and transnational organized crime.

The activities carried out by mercenaries in
various conflicts violate international law and lack
ethical, human and legal foundations. Mercenaries are
clearly completely indifferent to international treaties
and conventions in time of war. That is manifested
through the intentional targeting of civilians, prisoners
and civilian facilities, as well as by committing war
crimes. It is deplorable that some Governments and
non-State actors continue to use mercenaries with a
view to spreading chaos, conducting military coups and
waging wars.

Reports issued by non-governmental organizations
involved in this issue indicate that the high level of
poverty and unemployment as well as the fragility of
State institutions are all factors for joining the ranks
of mercenaries, particularly since, according to those
reports, payments given to mercenaries range from
$500 to $1,000 or sometimes $2,000 per day. The
number of such mercenaries is almost 20 million, which
is very ominous, as their numbers are nearly equivalent
to uniformed armies. While historically it is not a
new issue, spending on this phenomenon has reached
almost $100 billion, and it is expected to double by the
year 2020.

There are Central and West African countries that
have unfortunately become fertile ground for mercenary
activities, since they have rich natural resources. That
has disrupted the political and development processes
in those countries, while their Governments incurred
large sums of money in order to reduce and eliminate
such activities. There is also a close link between
mercenaries and natural resources. The number of
mercenaries increases in areas rich in natural resources
with a View to controlling those resources in order
to fund their illegitimate activities. There are many
examples, including your friendly country, Sir, and the
attempted coup that you suffered a few weeks before
joining the Security Council.

The questions contained in the concept note
(S/2019/97, annex) should draw our attention because
our responses would lead us to realistic visions in order
to address this phenomenon and reach common ground
on an international instrument that incriminates and
addresses this phenomenon. If we consider the existing
legal instruments, the international commitment to
abide by them and the international efforts to eliminate
that scourge, we will see that they are not commensurate
with the threat to the international community posed by
the phenomenon.

Many are aware of the reluctance of the international
community to address that very dangerous and
significant threat and to implement legal instruments to
deter international networks that rely on the recruitment
of mercenaries and their deployment in conflict areas
despite the fact that the phenomenon has long existed.
It is clearly defined by international humanitarian law
and in article 47 of the 1977 Protocol additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating
to the protection of victims of non-international armed
conflicts, as well as the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries.

The recommendations issued during the current
session of the General Assembly by the Working Group
on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination are important, including with
regard to Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which promotes
peaceful and inclusive societies, while focusing on the
importance of "strengthen[ing] democracy and good
governance, economic, social and cultural rights and
development" (A/73/303, para. 79 (a)).

In conclusion, given the serious consequences of
this phenomenon for international peace and security,
the Security Council should focus more on addressing
it. It is not enough to discuss this serious issue only in
the General Assembly or the Human Rights Council.
We also support the role of the Working Group on
the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right ofpeoples
to self-determination and the implementation of its
recommendations. We urge States to adopt strict
measures against the perpetrators of such atrocities and
crimes, which violate human rights and international
humanitarian law. Such perpetrators should be held
accountable without exception or impunity. We reaffirm
that respect for human rights, development, peace,
equal opportunities and the rule of law act as safeguards
against young people becoming mercenaries.

