The Russian delegation abstained in the voting on resolution 2533 (2020), on the extension of the cross-border mechanism for the delivery of humanitarian aid to Syria. Our vote reflects Russia's principled position on the cross-border mechanism. The mechanism was established in 2014, when the aid to certain parts of Syria could not be delivered from within the country. Since then, the situation has changed. The Government of Syria has restored its control over most of the country's territory. It means that humanitarian assistance can, and must, be delivered in accordance with the principles of General Assembly resolution 46/182 and international humanitarian law. At the same time, we were guided by the intention to help the Syrian population, who are in a difficult humanitarian situation due to the long-lasting conflict in this country. Due to our consistent position, another important step has been taken towards the gradual phasing out of the cross-border mechanism. It excludes the Bab Al-Salam crossing point, which covered only 14 per cent of all cross-border deliveries from outside Syria. At the same time, the Security Council extended the work of the cross- border mechanism through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing-point for another 12 months. Regular and uninterrupted provision of humanitarian aid to this area of Syria will be continued. We have repeatedly underscored that the cross-border mechanism in Syria does not reflect the minimal requirements of international humanitarian law. The United Nations still has no presence in the Idlib de-escalation zone, which is controlled by international terrorists and fighters. Therefore, it is impossible to monitor in order to control how humanitarian assistance is delivered and who are its final beneficiaries. It is not a secret that the terrorist groups listed as such by the Security Council control certain areas of the de-escalation zone and use United Nations humanitarian aid as a tool to exert pressure on the civil population and openly profit from such deliveries. There is increasing direct and indirect proof of these acts. Moreover, the cross-border mechanism has been used by some external players as a tool to consolidate the dividing lines in Syria, thereby jeopardizing the integrity of Syria by breaking apart its regions. That contradicts the principle of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, which has been repeatedly affirmed in Security Council resolutions, including this resolution. We remember how vehemently a number of our colleagues tried last January to oppose the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, which provided humanitarian deliveries to the north-east of Syria within the framework of the cross-border mechanism (see S/PV.8700). They consistently misled the international community that there were no other ways to help the civilian population in that area. As itturned out, this was just a political game. After the closure of Al-Yarubiyah, the Syrian Government expressed its readiness to promptly coordinate the deliveries of United Nations humanitarian aid from Damascus. After lengthy delays by the humanitarian agencies, on 4 July the World Health Organization carried out another cross-line road delivery of humanitarian aid to Al-Hasakah governorate. In total, since the beginning of 2020, when Al-Yarubiyah was closed, more humanitarian aid has been delivered to the north-east of Syria than in previous years, including through the above-mentioned border crossing. It is a fact that speaks for itself. At the same time, the humanitarian deliveries approved by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic go both to the areas and to the medical facilities under its control as well as to those managed by the Kurdish authorities. It proves that the Syrian Government observes the non-discriminatory principle of humanitarian assistance delivery. The Syrian Government has affirmed its readiness to provide cross-line humanitarian supplies to the Idlib de-escalation zone. However, these efforts are hindered. We urgently call on the United Nations to arrange and increase the deliveries to all parts of Syria from within the country, including Idlib. Coming back to the text of the adopted resolution, we cannot but note how desperately our Western colleagues opposed reflecting in the resolution the negative impact of the unilateral sanctions they have imposed on Syria. These coercive measures not only seriously undermine the socioeconomic situation in Syria but also impede the activities of many humanitarian non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that are ready to help the population in territories controlled by the Syrian official authorities. The so-called humanitarian exemptions from sanctions regimes do not work. This is confirmed by the humanitarian workers themselves. Sanctions have a paralysing effect, as NGOs and third countries are scared of being sanctioned if they join efforts with the authorities in Damascus. We proposed that the resolution request the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the assessment of the impact of Western sanctions on the Syrian economy and how much they affect ordinary citizens and the provision of humanitarian assistance. Our Western colleagues were ready to sacrifice the entire cross-border mechanism to prevent this amendment from being adopted. Despite this hypocrisy, they cannot sweep the truth under the rug. Blocking our amendment once again revealed their double standards. We also want to note that the co-penholders of the resolution ignored our principled concerns from the very beginning. That forced us to block the German- Belgium draft resolution twice and present our alternative texts. If not for this, we could have avoided the eleventh-hour adoption of the resolution after the technical expiration of the cross-border mechanism. We want to remind the authors of this resolution, as well as the penholders of other dossiers in the Security Council, that the so-called penholdership is not a privilege but rather a special responsibility vis-a-vis other members of the Security Council, as well as the whole international community. Nonetheless, the result has been achieved. The Russian Federation intends to follow the provisions of the resolution consistently and in a transparent manner. We hope that our Western colleagues will stop ignoring the evolution of the situation in Syria and will encourage international humanitarian workers to cooperate with official Damascus. Notwithstanding the fact that a part of the civil population of Syria is still in need of humanitarian aid channelled through the cross-border mechanism, it is high time for a transition to humanitarian assistance provided in line with international humanitarian law.
