The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
April, I should like to pay tribute on behalf of the
Council to His Excellency Mr. Mamady Traore,
Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the difficult month of March 2003. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Traore for
the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Belarus, Brazil,
Cambodia, Colombia, Fiji, Greece, India, Israel, Japan,
Norway, Peru, the Philippines and the Republic of
Korea in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. Ivanou (Belarus), Mr. Sardenberg
(Brazil), Mr. Sun Suon (Cambodia), Mr. Giraldo
(Colombia), Mr. Savua (Fiji), Mr. Vassilakis
(Greece), Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Gillerman
(Israel), Mr. Haraguchi (Japan), Mr. Kolby
(Norway), Mr. De Rivero (Peru), Mr. Manalo
(Philippines) and Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Sir Jeremy Greenstock to take a seat at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. At this meeting
the Security Council will hear a briefing by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, Sir
Jeremy Greenstock.

At this particular juncture, I have the honour and
privilege to state the following as President of the
Security Council and on behalf of all its members.

The members of the Security Council wish to
express to Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock their deep
gratitude for his work chairing the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). His leadership and great diplomatic skills,
together with his firm conviction that the United
Nations must play a central role in the fight against
terrorism were all components of his successful
chairmanship. Ambassador Greenstock has built a solid
basis for the future work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. He has also had the vision to initiate and
promote a dialogue with other international, regional
and subregional organizations.

We pay tribute to his outstanding performance,
and we wish Sir Jeremy the very best.

I shall now give the floor to Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee of the Security Council.


