Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate on
Somalia, which comes at the very start ofthe new era in
Somalia. I would also like to extend our gratitude and
appreciation to His Excellency the Secretary-General
for having convened a mini-summit on 26 September.
That timely summit once again demonstrated the
unified support and commitment of the international
community to assisting Somalia in its peacebuilding
efforts.

On this occasion, let me congratulate His
Excellency Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on his election to
the presidency and His Excellency Abdi Farah Shirdon
for his designation as Prime Minister. I also would like
to thank the former President, Sheikh Sharif Ahmed;
Speaker Sharif Hassan; and Prime Minister Mohamed
Ali for the strong statesmanship that they displayed
throughout the most difficult times in Somalia.

Somalia has entered a completely new
era - an era of peacebuilding, institution-building,
national reconciliation and economic recovery. This era
is going to be an era of normalization.

The new, more legitimate and representative
Somali Government now has many tasks that need to
be completed in order to ensure that the normalization
process progresses successfully. We believe that all
of those tasks should be well systematized in a new
programme. Such a new programme and the new era
must be Somali-led and must also address the unfinished
tasks of the former road map. In that sense, the six-
pillar plan outlined by President Mohamud is a positive
first step and sound evidence of Somali leadership.

We commend the efforts of the African Union
through the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and acknowledge the remarkable sacrifices
made by the troop-contributing countries. Without
AMISOM's efforts and sacrifice, we would not have
been as optimistic about the future of Somalia.

The international community has developed
a common understanding on the need to support
professional and capable Somali National Security
Forces. They will eventually replace AMISOM. and
assume full responsibility for securing and stabilizing
the whole country. The rebuilding and restructuring
of the Somali security sector is an indispensable
precondition for State-building. An efficient and
robust Somali security sector that represents Somalia's
diversity is also essential to realizing the goal of a
united, secure and prosperous Somalia. There will be
no sustainable peace and prosperity without security.

At this point, I would like to draw attention to the
fact that Turkey's efforts to establish a fund for the
restructuring and rebuilding of the Somali National
Security Forces is well under way. The political support
of the Somali authorities, neighbouring countries and
some international partners has been obtained. We
will soon start restructuring and training the Somali
National Security Forces. I would like to underscore
that all our efforts in that area will be coordinated with
the international community.

Turkey believes that at this critical period in
Somalia, the United Nations is the most important actor
in coordinating all international assistance, promoting
the political reconciliation process and providing
the necessary support in rebuilding State structures
in Somalia. We welcome the Secretary-General's
ongoing strategic review process to determine how
the United Nations can be most helpful to Somalia in
this new era. We strongly believe that a comprehensive
United Nations presence that integrates all elements
of State - and peacebuilding support should be the
new United Nations structure in that country. Turkey
stands ready to cooperate with the United Nations in
that process.

In the efforts of the Somali people to rebuild
their country, we, as the international community, are
responsible more than ever for supporting them. While
providing our political, technical, humanitarian and
financial support, we must be aware that the Somalis
want to see our physical presence on the ground as a sign
of solidarity. We believe that opening new embassies in
Mogadishu at this historic moment in Somalia will give
the Somalis a proper signal that we, the international
community, will stand by them in their struggle for
their future.

