Mr. Koishybayev (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Poland and the Polish Minister for Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, for
putting the spotlight on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and the Secretary-General for his
insightful recommendations. We also express warm
appreciation to the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Yves
Daccord, and the civil society representative from Iraq,
Ms. Hanaa Edwar, for their comprehensive briefings.

Statistics show that about 75 per cent of all war
victims are civilians. The impact of conflict on civilians
is particularly severe due to the hostilities in urban
areas, excessive use of explosive weapons and increased
use of improvised explosive devices by non-State
armed groups. Such fatalities and gross violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law are
accompanied by large-scale forced displacements that
have led to a global protection crisis.

My delegation supports the recommendations on
the three protection priorities set forth in the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2018/462) and would like to
make the following observations for consideration by
the Security Council.

First, ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law and enhancing accountability are
critical for strengthening the protection of civilians.
All serious violations of international humanitarian law
must be investigated, and perpetrators must be brought
to justice, in order to end all forms of impunity. The
United Nations, the Council and the global community
should actively advocate enhancing respect for
international humanitarian law, including on provision
of impartial medical care and unimpeded access to
humanitarian aid. Improved data collection also needs
to be promoted.

Secondly, the survival of injured victims depends
upon operational medical facilities and medical
personnel. Kazakhstan co-sponsored resolution 2286
(2016), the unanimous adoption of which reflected
the Council's unity in committing to the protection of
humankind in war. However, health-care personnel and
facilities remain under fire in a number of conflicts,
and the effective implementation of resolution 2286
(2016) becomes even more necessary. In that regard, in
October 2017, we signed the French-led declaration on
the protection of humanitarian and medical personnel
in conflict.

Thirdly, United Nations peace operations should
give priority to the protection of civilians. A whole-of-
system approach, close cooperation among all
components, operational clarity on the formulation and
implementation of mandates and forging relationships
with local populations are all important. Our delegation
also believes that, in order for them to be sustained,
mandates to protect civilians must be linked to
a comprehensive political strategy. We therefore
underscore the importance of implementing the relevant
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. Peacekeeping operations also
need to implement the recommendations of the Santos
Cruz report aimed at changing how the United Nations
works in high-risk peacekeeping operations. We
must also actively use non-military protection tools,
including unarmed civilian protection.

Fourthly, the protection of civilians is primarily
the responsibility of the host country. Member
States therefore need to develop national compliance
frameworks, which should include capacity-building,
strengthening the rule of law, comprehensive security
sector reforms and good governance, as well as the
adoption of legislation that conditions the export of
arms. Kazakhstan acceded to the Arms Trade Treaty
in December 2017, and calls on others to do the same.
We also call on the United Nations system, regional
organizations, the international community and donors
to provide the necessary technical and financial support
to Member States.

Women, children, internally displaced persons
and persons with disabilities continue to be
disproportionately affected by armed conflict and
need our special attention. All humanitarian responses
therefore must address the needs of vulnerable groups,
including access to essential medical care. Victims
of landmines and other munitions and the indirect
effects of armed conflict, such as disease, malnutrition
and famine, also need special medical care and
specialized services.

Fifthly, as the Secretary-General underscored, the
international community should focus on preventive
measures, including tackling the root causes of
conflict, peacebuilding and economic development. My
country is committed to enhancing regional stability,
using a three-pronged strategy to resolve regional
conflicts through the security-development nexus, a
regional approach and the United Nations Delivering
as One initiative. In our region, we are focusing
on Afghanistan, where more than 10,000 civilians
lost their lives or suffered injuries during 2017. We
provide humanitarian aid, development and technical
assistance to Afghanistan, with special attention to
women, youth and children. We are implementing a
scholarship programme for Afghan students. We also
contribute to reintegration programmes for children
and actively advocate for the gender equality and
economic independence of Afghan women. With that in
mind, this year Kazakhstan will convene the high-level
international conference on the theme "Empowering
women in Afghanistan", aimed at strengthening the
status of Afghan women.

To conclude, Kazakhstan pays tribute to the noble
work of the ICRC and other humanitarian and human
rights organizations. We believe that all the challenges I
mentioned can be effectively addressed only by bringing
together Member States, international, regional and
local stakeholders and humanitarian and civil society
organizations and by building trust among them.

My delegation gives the utmost importance to
the security of civilians and is fully committed to
implementing the provisions of the relevant norms of
international law.

