Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank the French presidency for organizing
today's important debate, as well as all the participants
for their contributions, in particular Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict.

Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statements
made by the Head of the Human Rights and Social
Affairs Section of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict, and the statement to be made by
the representative of Norway on behalf of the countries
that have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration.

For more than 20 years, the United Nations has
worked tirelessly on the implementation of a mechanism
for the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict. Despite the undeniable success achieved
demonstrated by tens of thousands of children's release
and reintegration into their families and schools, year
after year we note that serious violations affecting
children's basic human rights persist at an alarming
level in conflict zones and countries virtually
throughout the world. In his report (S/2017/821), the
Secretary General emphasizes the scale and severity
of Violations committed over the past year, which have
involved an alarming level in the killing, maiming,
recruiting and using of children, and denying them
humanitarian access.

We must continue our tireless efforts aimed at
condemning the recruitment and use of children by
all parties to conflicts, including armed groups and
State actors; the denial of humanitarian access, which
has devastating for children; attacks on schools and
hospitals: the detention of children for their alleged
association with armed groups; and the use ofchildren as
human bombs and shields. We reiterate our unequivocal
support for the mandate of the Special Representative,
who is working tirelessly to protect children in
armed conflict. The independence of her work - in
particular with regard to the listing of all perpetrators
of serious violations identified by the monitoring and
reporting mechanism established in accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005) and included in the annexes of
the Secretary-General's report - cannot be called into
question. We count on everyone to respect it.

We encourage all States Members that have not yet
done so to endorse the Paris Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, and endorse the Safe
Schools Declaration.

In order to confront the trend in the arrest and
detention of children on security charges, which deprive
them of their fundamental rights and guarantees, we
believe that children associated with armed groups,
including those espousing violent extremism, must
be treated as victims who are worthy of the full
protection of the their human rights. The release and
reintegration of children are a continuous, complex
and long-term challenge that is crucial to breaking the
cycle of violence and ensuring sustainable peace and
security. From the very outset of any peace process or
agreement, specific provisions relating to the needs of
children must be ensured. We reiterate our desire to see
child protection advisers continue carrying out their
specific mandates independently in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions. The
necessary resources must be made available to enable
the implementations of the crucial Security Council
mandates aimed at protecting children.

Together with Switzerland, Luxembourg is
supporting a United Nations University research
project, in partnership with UNICEF, that will help
develop tools so as to better guide the work of United
Nations personnel in the field and, consequently, protect
and disengage children from extreme Violence, while at
the same time focusing on prevention. A report on that
research project will be submitted early next year.

Lastly, Luxembourg will continue its financial
and political support for the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General, as well as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

