Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate on an issue of continuing concern
for the international community that requires constant
vigilance and genuine cooperation among Member
States to address the challenge effectively. We also
thank the briefers for updating us on the current trends
that are relevant to this issue.

We are fully cognizant of the catastrophic dangers
that the transfer of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors and terrorists could entail. Clandestine
proliferation networks must be rolled back and their
resurgence prevented. The global community must
join hands in eliminating the risks related to sensitive
materials and technologies falling into the hands of
terrorists and non-State actors. In that regard, India
has enacted a number of effective laws and regulations
and has put in place institutionalized administrative
mechanisms to prohibit access to weapons of mass
destruction by terrorists and non-State actors.

Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), more
than a decade ago, India has taken additional steps to
further strengthen its existing legislative and regulatory
mechanisms for exercising control over weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. India
is committed to maintaining the highest international
standards with reference to the control of nuclear,
chemical, biological and toxin weapons and their means
of delivery. India has strong, law-based national export
controls consistent with the highest international
standards. India has filed reports regarding resolution
1540 (2004) and hosted the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in New
Delhi in 2012. Earlier this year, Indiajoined the Missile
Technology Control Regime and The Hague Code of
Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation.

The focus on non-State actors should in no way
diminish State accountabilityincombatingterrorismand
dismantling its support infrastructure and its linkages
with weapons of mass destruction. India believes that
the primary responsibility for ensuring nuclear security
rests at the national level, but national responsibility
must be accompanied by responsible behaviour, as well
as sustained and effective international cooperation.

India participated in the Nuclear Security Summit
held in Washington, DC, earlier this year. We welcome
the outcome of the Summit and view the Summit process

as having catalysed significant progress on nuclear
security through international cooperation. Our recent
steps taken to strengthen nuclear security include the
setting up of a counter-nuclear-smuggling team and
joining the Joint Statement on Strengthening Nuclear
Security Implementation. India has also offered to
host an event in 2017 as part of an initiative to combat
nuclear terrorism.

The goal of the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons can be achieved by a step-by-step process
underwritten by a universal commitment and an
agreed multilateral framework that is global and
non-discriminatory. That was reiterated by our
Minister for External Affairs, Mrs. Sushma Swaraj,
speaking in the General Assembly last October (see A/70/PV.22), when she stated that India was aware of
its responsibilities as a nuclear-weapon State and that
its support for that goal was undiminished.

All States that possess nuclear weapons can make
a contribution by engaging in a meaningful dialogue
in order to build trust and confidence by reducing the
salience of nuclear weapons in international affairs
and security doctrines. We believe that increasing the
restraints on the use of nuclear weapons is not only an
essential first step, but is also necessary in the current
complex international environment to enhance strategic
trust globally.

The Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological Weapons Convention are examples of
global non-discriminatory treaties for the complete
elimination of the respective categories of weapons
of mass destruction. They also fulfil an important
non-proliferation function. India has fulfilled its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We look forward to a successful eighth Review
Conference of the Biological Weapons Convention in
November. In that regard, India will organize a regional
workshop in New Delhi early next week, from 29 to
30 August.

In conclusion, may I say that all States should
fully and effectively implement the obligations arising
from the disarmament and non-proliferation-related
agreements or treaties to which they are parties.
Furthermore, the essential role of the United Nations on
issues of disarmament must be preserved. In particular,
it is important to enhance confidence in the United
Nations disarmament machinery, consisting of the
General Assembly, the United Nations Disarmament
Commission and the Conference on Disarmament. The
Security Council has a role, as specifically provided
in the relevant disarmament-related instruments and
treaties and in the Charter of the United Nations.

Taking forward disarmament and non-proliferation
issues globally requires a genuine commitment to
multilateralism and to building common ground.
India remains committed to those objectives of
global disarmament and non-proliferation and is
willing to work with other Member States to advance
those objectives.
