Mr. Corman (Turkey): Turkey welcomes this
important open debate on climate change and
international peace and security. We thank the German
presidency for having organized it.

There can be no doubt that climate change
continues to be one of the most pressing and complex
issues facing humankind today. It is vital to find a
global solution to this problem. We have absolutely no
time to lose. The adverse effects of climate change
pose a risk that is simply too serious and too great to
ignore. Complacency cannot be an option.

It is also very clear that the risks posed by
climate change cannot be met by any single State. We
are faced with a common challenge and we must tackle
it with a spirit of shared responsibility. This means that
effective long-term cooperation and sustained
international solidarity will be of paramount
importance.

Turkey is fully committed to contributing to the
global efforts to address climate change. We believe
that the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the central multilateral
instrument to guide individual and collective actions.
In this context, we need to work hard to determine the
elements of a realistic post-2012 regime. The UNFCCC
Cancun Conference was a significant step forward in
this regard.

Climate change and its follow-on effects pose a
severe risk to political, economic and social stability,
in particular in drier, subtropical, overpopulated and
economically underdeveloped regions of the world.
These effects include shortfalls in water for drinking
and irrigation, with concomitant risks of thirst and
famine; changes and possible declines in agricultural
productivity stemming from altered temperature and
rainfall patterns; rises in sea level, which pose an
existential threat to several Member States; spikes in
the rates and extended geographic scope of malaria and
other diseases; shifts in economic output and trade
patterns; changes and possible large shifts in human
migration patterns; larger economic and human losses
attributable to extreme weather events such as
hurricanes; and shortfalls in energy supply. Such
effects would significantly curtail sustainable
development and the achievement of the internationally

 

agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.

Needless to say, small island developing States
and least-developed countries will be hit hardest by
climate change, due to their structural constraints,
limited natural resources and vulnerability to natural
hazards. In this context, we believe that climate change
adaptation merits further consideration.

The international community should continue to
work on how best to overcome the observed and future
impacts of climate change, taking into account the
potential security implications. A key issue is the
identification of cases of successful adaptation in the
developing world, where the greatest risk and physical
vulnerability persists. It depends predominantly on the
capacity to cope with all kinds of threats and impacts,
which is determined to a large degree by the
socio-economic characteristics of communities.
Thorough assessment and effective planning are central
to successful adaptation. This requires sufficient long-
term sources of financing, as well as appropriate know-
how and technology.

It is clear to us that the international community
needs to accelerate its efforts to combat climate
change. This long-term dedicated effort will also
contribute to development, prosperity, peace and
security on our planet. Turkey stands ready to do its
part in this regard.

