Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The following countries align themselves with
this statement: Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania - all
candidates countries to join the European Union; the
country of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2016/218) and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan for his briefing.

Let me start by reiterating the EU's full support
for the continued important role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people,and in coordinating the international
community's assistance. The successful implementation
of the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework is essential to advancing reforms that are
crucial to Afghanistan's development and stability. It
is the results from these reforms that will underpin
the unity of the Government and a continued unity of
purpose and the confidence of the Afghan people in
the country's future. The conference to be convened in
Brussels in October will be an additional step in that
direction. The role of the United Nations continues to
be vital in assisting the National Unity Government in
implementing its priorities.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
tense, as highlighted by the Secretary-General's report.
The EU is concerned that the number of civilian
casualties caused by conflict and attacks by all fighting
parties have reached record numbers, with insurgency
attacks very often indiscriminately targeting the
civilian population and increasingly affecting women
and children. We need to be very clear on this. The
EU condemns these insurgent groups' attacks, which
threaten the stability and progress ofAfghanistan. More
than ever, we need to continue to protect the vital role
of humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the most vulnerable.

The European Union fully supports the efforts being
made towards the start ofpeace and reconciliation talks
between the Government of Afghanistan and insurgency
groups, as sponsored by the United States, China and
Pakistan. The Quadrilateral Coordination Group on
the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process has been
working hard to create the conditions for renewed talks
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban. We
hope that such a first meeting can materialize soon and
become an ongoing process. Afghan leaders should
ensure that any delegation engaging in direct talks is
representative of wider Afghan society. Afghan women
must be able to participate fully in negotiations on the
future of their country.

The EU welcomes the nomination for appointment
of the new President of the High Peace Council in
Afghanistan in the hope that this will help facilitate
future negotiations. The signal of meaningful peace
talks would have a huge positive effect on economic
development and governance in Afghanistan, as well as
international efforts to that end, directly contributing
to a sustainable Afghan State. We call on all countries,
in particular Afghanistan's neighbours, to support such
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. It is
time to invest in Afghanistan's stability and prosperity
and to abandon the tactics of violence, destabilization
and misery. Afghan women and men need to regain
confidence in their future. This would contribute to
reducing the migratory pressures that weigh so heavily
on Afghanistan's neighbours and on the States members
of the EU.

Despite the challenges of cooperation in the
Central and South Asian regions, the recent progress
made through developments in ambitious regional
infrastructure projects is promising. The Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline project, linking
Central and South Asia, could create a new momentum
for regional economic cooperation and connectivity,
particularly in collaboration with a regionally backed
peace process. The EU also continues to be a reliable
partner in regionally owned processes, including the
Heart of Asia process, which has shown encouraging
signs of improving regional dynamics. Credit should
go to President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and other
leaders in the region for their endeavours in this
regard. The EU also encourages the strengthening
of regional cooperation in border management and
anti-narcotics activities.

Electoral reform is crucial for Afghanistan. The
electoral reform process has made some, albeit slow,
progress. The parliamentary and district council
elections, provisionally planned for 15 October, rely
on further electoral reform to ensure a fair, democratic
process. The EU welcomes the nominations of the
Attorney General and the Ministry of Interior in
Afghanistan, and hope that this will renew momentum
to effectively implement reforms in this sector and
overcome vested interests opposed to it. We should
ensure the promotion of the rights and the continued
active and equal involvement and participation of
women in Afghanistan at all levels of society. To this
end, the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the National Unity Government's national action
plan on women, peace and security for 2015-2022
are crucial.

The EU supports Afghanistan through
comprehensive political, security and development
efforts, and will continue to do so. We look forward
to the NATO Warsaw Summit in July, which will
contribute to the reform and sustainment of the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. The
Brussels conference on Afghanistan, to be held on
4 and 5 October, will reaffirm the commitment of the
international community to Afghanistan's economic
and political development over the coming years. This
will include further improving governance and the rule
of law, promoting sustainable development results, and
implementing effective measures on anti-corruption
and counter-narcotics. The fostering of full respect
for human rights, and in particular the human rights
of women and girls, will remain a cornerstone of
our cooperation.

Afghanistan will need the ongoing commitment of
the international community at or near current levels
to continue on the path to sustainability. Concrete
commitments and delivery by both the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community,
including partners in the region, will underpin the
Brussels conference. It is for the Afghan National Unity
Government, the international and the regional partners
alike to maintain the momentum for reform, for Afghan
self-reliance and for peace. The EU would also like to
commend the important work of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict in Afghanistan, and
calls on all parties in Afghanistan to implement the
conclusions adopted by the Working Group on 2 March.

In conclusion, international engagement remains
fundamental to Afghanistan's future. The Brussels
conference aims to facilitate such engagement and
mobilize support, matched by an equally strong
commitment on the part of the Government of
Afghanistan to delivering on concrete reform objectives
and achieving real change. The consequences of
disengagement should not be underestimated, and we
value UNAMA's critical role in promoting peace and
security for all Afghans.

