Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I would like to join
other delegations that spoke before me in extending
our sincere congratulations to you, Madam President,
on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of March. In the same vein, I
wish to thank you on behalf of my delegation for
convening today's open debate on the very important
theme of children and armed conflict.

We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
annual report (S/2013/245), which not only highlights
the progress that has been made in protecting children in
countries affected by conflict, but also documents how
the evolving character of war is creating unprecedented
risks for our children. We are also encouraged by the
Security Council's continued focus on the subject
and wish to emphasize the need for greater and more
systematic attention to be paid to the agenda of children
and armed conflict in the Council's own work.

Recognizing that ending violations of the rights of
children is a moral imperative that we must collectively
commit to achieving, Botswana reaffirms the
importance it attaches to the protection and promotion
of the rights of children, including in the context
of armed conflict. To that end, we strongly support
all efforts aimed at protecting the rights of children,
including the mandate and work of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, among others. My delegation also
welcomes yesterday's launch of the "Children, not
soldiers" campaign organized by UNICEF, the Special
Representative and the Luxembourg Permanent
Mission. We believe the launch was timely and will go
a long way to complementing ongoing efforts to end the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.

Despite the commendable progress highlighted in
the report, we remain deeply concerned that children
continue to be recruited, killed, maimed, sexually
abused and deprived of their childhood and their right
to education and health care, among other things. It
is disheartening to note that in some ongoing crises,
such acts have become systematic and widespread.
In line with the principle of the responsibility to
protect, Botswana believes that States have primary
responsibility for protecting their own populations
from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, including protecting children from
the risk of war.

My delegation also wishes to reiterate that impunity
for violations against children is unacceptable and must
never be tolerated. In that regard, we wish to stress
the urgency and importance of enhancing political
will and commitment in order to address the tragic
plight of children in armed conflict. To that end, a
focus on national ownership and responsibility, and on
engagement with concerned Governments and armed
groups to establish commitments to accountability, as
well as the systematic monitoring of such commitments,
represents the highest possible priority and importance
for my delegation. We therefore call on the Security
Council to continue its efforts to fight impunity and
enforce accountability, including by adopting targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators of violations
against children and their referral to the International
Criminal Court.

Regarding the effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance, we believe that allowing the access necessary
for reaching vulnerable populations, particularly
children in situations of armed conflict, is essential.

Botswana believes that strengthening global efforts
to end the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict should be consistent with and complementary to
wider efforts to promote the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on children and armed conflict
and of other resolutions regarding the promotion and
protection of the rights of children. In that regard, we
welcome several States' significant efforts to implement
those resolutions, including resolution 1612 (2005) and
2068 (2012), and believe that they should continue to
be vigorously pursued. We also share the view that
such efforts should be supported so as to strengthen
national capacities for child protection, investigation
and prosecution and accountability mechanisms, as
well as the establishment of age verification processes
in military recruitment.

As the well-known children's rights activist,
Graca Machel, once said, "The impact of armed
conflict on children must be everyone's concern and
is everyone's responsibility" (A/51/306, para. 317). We
remain optimistic that given our collective will and
responsibility, we can bring an end to the shameful
crimes currently prevailing against children.

To conclude, we welcome the adoption today of
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict.
Its adoption by consensus indicates the willingness of
Council members and, indeed, the general membership
of the United Nations, to move ahead on this agenda and
focus on areas that have not received much attention in
the past.

