Mr. Ramos-Horta: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the floor again. I will not add much to what
the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, has
already said in terms of clarification. I would like to
make just two points, the first in relation to the
political atmosphere - the political divisions and
tensions - and the second in relation to our own
efforts at reconciliation, adding to what I said earlier.

First, I would like to say that we take seriously
the concerns expressed here by almost everyone
regarding the political tensions and divisions. However,
of the several incidents that took place in the course of
2000 and in the first few months of this year, we would
consider only two to be politically related. I speak with
direct knowledge of the facts, because I was called
upon in almost every one of them to go and talk with
those involved in the incidents and help resolve the
problems. To my surprise, contrary to the rumours that
first began to spread after the incident at the New Year,
it started essentially when a group of youths attempting
to enter a New Year's party were barred - they had
not been invited. They began to throw stones at those
at the party, and the situation degenerated into
Violence. Another incident involved a mosque. A group
of drunken youths on their way home saw a car inside
the grounds of a mosque. They entered and asked for
the car, and, of course, the people in the mosque said,
"No". The youths then left and began throwing stones,
and stones soon began flying in both directions.
The most serious incident took place in Baucau,
when a fight between youth groups resulted in the
burning of the local mosque. The United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the East Timorese leadership condemned that
action, and subsequently Sergio Vieira de Mello took
the initiative of mobilizing funds to repair the mosque.
The Portuguese Commissioner responsible for
humanitarian assistance to East Timor, Father Victor
Melicias, accompanied by the most prominent Muslim
leader in the city of Lisbon, travelled to East Timor and
offered financial assistance. Subsequently, we all met
with the Muslim leaders in Dili and Baucau. I
personally went to Baucau to meet with the youths who
burned the mosque to tell them that that was not
enough in terms of our contribution - that we were
not merely going to pay for it, but that they had to
show their repentance by contributing manually to
rebuilding the mosque, a condition which they
accepted. That is what we did.

There was also an ugly incident in Viqueque that
involved youth groups, in particular groups involved in
martial arts. Strangely enough, many of the conflicts
erupt after a soccer match - perhaps our youths watch
too many European soccer matches. They are inspired
by activities on the soccer field, and it is almost
inevitable that after each soccer match the losing side
does not accept the result.

Unfortunately, when violence starts, it sometimes
takes on a political dimension when each faction calls
on its own gangs, its own people. So I would say that
this has essentially been the cause of 90 per cent of the
violence that has occurred in East Timor. Fortunately,
so far the political violence has been confined to one or
two incidents.

Are we going to be able to maintain a relative
level of peace and stability in the months ahead when,
of course, political tensions will increase? That is a big
question. But to answer that, what I said earlier is that
we are putting even greater efforts into the process of
not only reconciliation between the pro-independence
majority and the pro-autonomy group, but we -
Bishop Belo and I - are also starting, with the support
of Xanana Gusmao and Sergio Vieira de Mello, a
comprehensive campaign extending many months into
the future to promote a culture of non-violence, of
tolerance. In this regard, we have discussed with the
United Nations Children's Fund and the diplomatic
missions in Dili how they can assist us by providing
resources. It is difficult to address the issues of a
culture of violence, of a people traumatized and
accustomed to abuse by State law enforcement
agencies for a quarter of a century, and it is difficult to
suddenly drop the temptation to engage in violence.

We are conscious of the fragility of the peace in
East Timor. Peace and tranquillity is a reality, but, as
we have said a number of times, it is still very fragile
because of all the psychological and emotional aspects.

In terms ofjustice, I failed to add in my previous
comments that we have established a regulation
creating a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
However, a new aspect of this Truth and Reconciliation
Commission is that we intend to go back all the way to
1975, because, as I personally have stated on a number
of occasions over the years, as has President Xanana
Gusmao, we, the East Timorese side, cannot blame
only Indonesia for what happened in 1975 and
thereafter. The first acts of violence and the first resort
to weapons in 1975 were by us, the East Timorese,
starting with the civil war in August 1975. The first
weapons used then were not Indonesian weapons. The
first people killed in East Timor were not killed by
Indonesian soldiers. Therefore, we must also have the
courage and the humility to search back into our own
history and to apologize to our own people. Only then
can we have the moral authority and the tranquillity of
mind and of conscience to demand real justice from
others. This, then, is the task of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission that has been set up and is
broadly representative of the Timorese society.

I conclude by referring also to the political
divisions in East Timor. This is what the United
Nations, Peter Galbraith and all diplomatic missions
tell us: multi-party; that we have to have freedom of
expression; and that our National Council has to take it
seriously. President Xanana Gusmao, in the time he
spent in the Council - he went to the Council against
my advice because he wanted to go - experienced a
bit of the new climate of democracy in East Timor.
When Xanana Gusmao resigned I stepped in and
offered to lead the Council. Most of the Council
members spoke against my leaving foreign affairs, and
the next day I had to go back to foreign affairs because
the Council members showed their maturity and their
understanding of the importance of foreign affairs for
East Timor. They said, "This is not your place", so I
dutifully presented my resignation to Sergio Vieira de
Mello. I essentially lasted only 24 hours in the National
Council.

That was my first experience in the National
Council and I began to wonder why the Council was
being criticized. To me it seemed no different from the
many experiences I had had in attending as a guest
many parliaments around the world - the United
States Congress, the Portuguese Parliament, the Italian
Parliament, the British Parliament and a few others that
we do not attend but watch on television. The National
Council has been very constructive. It has adopted
numerous regulations, and it takes its job seriously.
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi also experienced
the National Council in his recent visit to East Timor. I
do not know whether he wishes to repeat that
experience. I also do not think I will readily accept
returning to the Council to participate in debates there
unless it is absolutely necessary. However, it illustrates
the positive developments in East Timor.

The crucial question that has been asked is
whether we are going to be able to handle the debate
and the divisions in a civilized way. We are, of course,
working hard to answer that. I cannot say that we will
succeed 100 per cent, but we are working towards that
goal, so that the divisions, the conflicts and the debate
remain in the realm of civility.

I thank you, Mr. President, members of the
Security Council and the rest of the international
community present today, as well as others that are not
present, for your continued support. It is thanks to your
generous support and thanks to the generosity of the
soldiers of the peacekeeping force, the civilian police,
the international civil servants, the non-governmental
organizations and the United Nations Volunteers who
are there that we have come this far. We have produced
almost a miracle in a year and half. The task ahead is
still great, but with the Council's continued
engagement, as President Xanana Gusmao said a while
ago, we hope to return here in different circumstances
to thank the Council as a sovereign State and to say
that we did not waste or betray your trust or the
resources that you have put into building this new
democratic State.

