Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for convening
this meeting and to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing on this matter.
As the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict stresses,
"the protection of civilians is, and must remain, an
absolute priority for the United Nations, for the
Security Council and, above all, for the Members
States, with which the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians lies" (S/2007/643, para. 3).
Civilians are entitled, in all circumstances, to respect
for their persons, their honour, their family rights, their
religious convictions and practices and their manners
and customs. They are to be humanely treated and
protected at all times, especially against all acts of
violence or threats of such acts.

Against this background, we are following with
profound apprehension the escalation of violence in the
Gaza Strip and express our deep concern over the loss
of the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians. There
must be an immediate ceasefire and an end to military
hostilities to create the conditions necessary to
normalize the situation. We advocate urgent active
engagement of the international community, including
through practical measures in the conflict zone, to
prevent violence and other undesirable actions.
Azerbaijan calls for immediate and unconditional
implementation of Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) of 8 January. The protection of civilians,
especially women and children, who are bearing the
brunt of the deteriorating humanitarian crisis, should
be ensured. All measures must be taken to avoid
civilian casualties and to help people in need.

The international community, acting chiefly
through the United Nations, has proclaimed and set
down in international instruments a compendium of
fundamental values, such as peace and respect for
human rights. The consensus on those values was
reflected in the adoption in 1948 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, according to whose
preamble "recognition of the inherent dignity and of
the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the
human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world".

Regrettably, even more than 60 years after the
adoption of the Universal Declaration, the conspicuous
silence in certain instances serves to accentuate a
deficiency that is characteristic of the international
community today: the gap between the theoretical
values of law and harsh reality. This impedes the
application in practice of the rich potential of the
standards of international law.

The ongoing armed conflict in and around the
Nagorny-Karabakh region of the Republic of
Azerbaijan has resulted in the occupation of almost one
fifth of the territory of Azerbaijan and made
approximately one out of every eight people in the
country a refugee or internally displaced person. Most
serious international offences, such as war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, have been
committed in the course of the conflict.

The Security Council, in its resolutions adopted
in 1993 following the seizure by Armenia of the
territories of Azerbaijan, condemned, inter alia, attacks
on civilians and the bombardment of inhabited areas
and expressed grave concern at the displacement of
large numbers of civilians in my country.

Concern about the extent to which the rules of
international humanitarian law were being observed in
the occupied territories of Azerbaijan was heightened
when the General Assembly, highly alarmed by the far-
reaching implications of continuing illegal settlement
practices in those territories accompanied by serious
and systematic interference with property rights, as
well as environmental and economic damage, decided
to address the matter and adopted two resolutions at its
sixtieth and sixty-second sessions.
As the Secretary-General made clear in his
aforementioned report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict,

"ensuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic
cleansing and offers some measure ofjustice to
those displaced from their homes and land,
thereby removing a source of possible future
tension and conflict" (S/2007/643, para. 55).

It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing the return, be applied
by the Security Council, the General Assembly and
other relevant United Nations bodies with more
systematic regularity.

Particular consideration must be given to the
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts aggravated by population displacements,
foreign military occupation, attempts to change the
demographic balance in occupied territories and the
illicit exploitation of natural resources therein. The
impact of conflict on housing, land and property in
such situations requires a more consistent approach in
order to ensure the safe and dignified return of those
forced to leave their homes.

It is clear that there can be no long-term and
sustainable peace without justice. This requires
consistent commitment by States to meeting their
obligations to prosecute those responsible for breaches
of international humanitarian law or international
human rights law. In cases when such breaches
constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity or even
genocide, for which universal jurisdiction is provided
with regard to alleged offenders, it is important that the
pursuit of individuals be undertaken through the
domestic legal system of involved or third-party States,
while State responsibility be enforced through relevant
inter-State mechanisms.

Ending impunity is essential not only for the
purposes of determining individual criminal
responsibility for serious crimes, but also in the
interests of peace, truth, reconciliation and recognition
of the rights of the victims. To proceed otherwise
would be tantamount to accepting the consequences of
breaches of the rule of law and human rights and thus
legitimizing the results of aggression and ethnic
cleansing or, in other words, would be the illustration
of the prevalence of force over justice.

