Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We welcome and thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Eliasson, and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Al Hussein,
for their comprehensive briefings.

It is our great hope that drawing painful lessons
from the past will enable us to improve our actions
in the present and create appropriate mechanisms to
prevent their recurrence in future. Fundamental to the
prevention of conflicts is addressing the root causes,
promoting inclusive political dialogue and creating an
environment conducive to unity in society-based ethnic
diversity. In that context, in memory of all the victims
of the conflict in the Balkans that came about with the
disintegration of the former Yugoslavia, to whom we
pay tribute, we would like to express our strong support
to the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance with Dayton
Peace Agreement.

We acknowledge the important role that the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, which we
also commemorate today on its twentieth anniversary,
has played in the post-conflict reconciliation process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the broader region.
We recall that States bear the primary responsibility
to protect their own populations from war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. For its part,
the international community has a crucial role to play,
if and when a national Government fails to protect its
own population. In that sense, while celebrating the
tenth anniversary of the concept of the responsibility to
protect, adopted in the World Summit Outcome in 2005,
we encourage Member States to strengthen prevention
efforts in order to end the impunity for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. Empowering
United Nations peacekeeping missions with vlear
mandates to protect civilians is an outstanding task.
Effective peacekeeping requires a clear understanding
of the risk factors and a trigger for mass atrocity crimes.

We encourage the integration of the United
Nations framework of analysis of attrocity crimes into
strategies guiding United Nations peace operations. The
establishment ofthe Human Rights Council, reinforcing
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
the institution of international criminal tribunals,
strengthening accountability and international criminal
law, have been importants gains in upholding human
rights and the rule of law.

Lastly, the international community should provide
support to the countries in region in order to strengthen
the cooperation among them and support the efforts at
reconciliation among Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats.

