Mr. Nabarro: I do not apologize for repeating
some of what Mr. James Morris said at the beginning.
This interest is extraordinary for us, and I wish all our
staff could have been here to witness it. I shall try to
convey to them much of what I have heard.

I would like to comment under six headings.
First, I felt that it was Mexico that fingered the key
issue of the complete vacuum in authority and the
breakdown of the State. Cameroon asked to what
extent there is a problem of leadership in the hospitals.
I would reply that it is not so much that leadership is
lacking but that leaders of the hospitals are not sure
who they are working for. That sense of slight
confusion has caused some problems in these early
weeks.

Again in relation to this vacuum of authority,
Germany asked why people were looting. Our
experience is the extraordinary phenomenon of
Government staff who work in the hospitals: they are
absolutely not those who are looting, even though they
have the best opportunity to do so. In fact, many of
them stayed in their hospitals and themselves stood
guard. They went and pleaded with soldiers to come
and put their tanks or other defences outside the
hospitals. They have also been working for many
weeks without pay, and yet they have been turning up
to work. So, we must recognize that if there has been
looting, it has rarely been the Government workers
themselves who have looted; it is others. I am afraid
we ourselves in the World Health Organization (WHO)
are still quite unable to explain why it has been
happening.

My second heading is the possible stabilizing
influences that we can try to put in place in order to
keep things a bit more under control. Most importantly,
we feel - as has been said by others - that it is
important to restore normality for the time being, to get
the system working again. That means that there has to
be some visible authority, legitimacy and, of course,
security in localities.

We were asked, again by Cameroon, about the
impact of insecurity in the health sector. Basra is one
example. Although it is possible to distribute supplies
inside the city, going out to the more isolated parts of
the governorate is difficult without a military escort.
While it has been possible to negotiate a military escort
for distribution on certain occasions, there are other
priorities facing the military, and regular escorts have
been hard to establish. But there is no doubt that if the
services are back and are working and if there is an
element of security, then this phenomenon of taking
over hospitals and other institutions - which was
identified by Germany, Chile and France - is not so
likely. We have seen this particularly in smaller
institutions in Baghdad. The phenomenon does not
seem to have spread too widely, and our view is that
the more quickly we can get the systems back and
working again as they should, equitably accessible to
all, the less likely we are to have sections of the
community taking over and running institutions
according to their rules. Predictability of life, and
confidence in that predictability, matters.

That brings me to my third heading: restarting the
work of the public service. Many members of the
Council have commented on how that can best be done.
I agree that involving Iraqis in the response is critical.

Secondly, as was said by Mexico, there is the
need to restore institutions that are already there - as
Mark Malloch Brown just said - and are already
strong. But restoring their self-confidence to work
again is so important. That is where I would like to pay
tribute to the role of the Authority, particularly in
recent days, which has explicitly been working hard to
let the Iraqi institutions feel empowered again and to
encourage links between the United Nations and those
institutions.

Thirdly, with respect to salaries - thank
goodness we are going to get salaries paid shortly. That
is going to make such a difference. I heard it said it
was to be in Baghdad. I hope it will be more than
Baghdad as quickly as possible.

Fourthly, with respect to communications,
particularly telecommunications, governorates being
able to talk to Baghdad matters so much.

My fourth heading is coordination. I want to
stress that there have been lots of very valuable
contributions from Governments to the health sector.
Bulgaria, China and Spain described their
contributions. The United States and the United
Kingdom are making many contributions. It is great
that we have many actors involved in the health sector.
It means that there is a lot of innovation and new ideas.
But it has one disadvantage: it is sometimes difficult to
get everybody to work according to common
principles, whether those are common principles on
how we will work with Iraqis or on how we handle
different problems. That leads to a degree of
unevenness in the way in which services are being
provided. So, as we have these multiple actors
involved, let us also emphasize the importance of
working together and making coordination effective.
That is where the role of the Office of Reconstruction
and Humanitarian Assistance, which is working with
different elements of the Government of Iraq, is so
important.

I think that compared with other settings, the
United Nations is doing well, as has already been said.
We have a single work programme under the Office of
the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq (UNOHCI), and
we are very much being encouraged by the Deputy
Secretary-General to stick to that.

We were asked what our relationship to the
Authority was like. All I would say is that it has been
quite challenging, and it evolves. But it is utterly
different now from what it was like a week ago. I
would like to publicly state that I think there is a really
new and exciting spirit of working together, in
Baghdad and in other places. That is something on
which we can all build. I believe that with the
resolution that has been passed today, we will be able
to do more.

Moving to my fifth heading, Syria asked about
the situation with the oil for food pipeline, what it was
like and how had we been working on it. I would like
to give you a quick insight as to what it is like from the
health side. The oil for food pipeline has been used to
bring at least 20,000 different items of medicines and
medical goods into Iraq during the period from 1996 to
the present. They were a mix of urgently needed and
lower priority goods. What we have done is try to tie it
down to a small number of priorities, approximately a
thousand. We have also tried within the short time
available to increase the number of things coming
through that pipeline.

But I want to stress that it is not easy trying to
keep a pipeline going and make it effective in a
situation where the mechanism is being turned on,
turned off and changed at quite regular intervals. We
are very anxious about how we can take full advantage
of the oil for food programme before the 3 June
deadline. We are also quite anxious about how we will
then be able to make the transition to the new
mechanism and get the best out of it before the end of
December deadline. I hope that the Council will look at
the oil-for-food changeover operation and, if it looks
like it needs more time, the Council will say so.

In conclusion, this is an alarming situation, as
some members of the Council have stated. It is very
challenging, but it is fast-moving. Now it looks as
though, with the resolution, we have got solidarity with
the people of Iraq and convergence, together with a
strong commitment from the Authority, expressed here
and in Iraq. There is good consensus on issues and
approaches.

We personally, in the World Health Organization,
predict that because of so many positive factors, things
will greatly improve in the foreseeable future. We will
have in place a system that delivers services to people
in the way they need them well before the end of the
year. We will continue to provide regular briefings on
the health situation on the WHO web site. I hope that
this will enable members of the Council to keep up to
date with what is happening. I am sorry for rushing
those words. Thank you very much for the opportunity
to be here.

