Mr. Bencosme Castafios (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their briefings. We would also like to express our gratitude to Ms. Wafa'a Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi for their very enlightening personal accounts. We cannot fail to express our serious concern at the fragile situation in Yemen. First, hostilities have increased and the situation in Ma'rib has worsened considerably in recent weeks. Shelling in civilian areas with a large concentration of displaced persons is completely unacceptable. We emphatically condemn the air strikes that took place on 12 and 15 July, killing 17 civilians, including 10 children. On that point, we believe that the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict is a fundamental tool that should fully reflect all the evidence. None of the parties to the conflict must be prematurely delisted while serious violations against children continue. We cannot leave children exposed to danger. Given the humanitarian situation, the coronavirus is blazing in Yemen like an uncontrollable forest fire. We have received reports that close to 100 health workers have died from the coronavirus - one of the highest numbers of deaths among heath workers worldwide. The pandemic, compounded by the nearly paralysed economy and the potential closure of vital humanitarian and development projects, could trigger a famine by the end of the year, as Mr. Lowcock warns. That cannot be allowed to occur. With regard to the environment, we regret to learn that the Houthis have not yet given the United Nations access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. During the extraordinary meeting held mid-July to discuss the situation (see S/2020/721), participants reiterated the grave environmental and humanitarian consequences that would ensue in the case of an oil spillage to the sea. We urge the Houthis to allow the United Nations access to the tanker without further delay. The locust plague is another crisis that is affected by the current crisis. There are currently several control operations on land in Yemen, but aerial operations, which are the most effective way to curb the plague, are not possible. If large-scale action is not taken, it is probable that a growing locust population will lead to a new re-invasion in the Horn of Africa and, possibly, India and Pakistan. The crops and pastures of millions of vulnerable people are being destroyed. The challenges and hardships facing the Yemeni people seem almost impossible to overcome. The country is reaching a limit. If the situation on the ground does not soon show signs of improving, the Council should evaluate more drastic measures to send a stronger message to resolve the conflict and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. In addition to the recent positive developments with regard to the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, we urge all parties to adopt, without delay, the joint declaration presented by the Special Envoy. Before concluding, allow me to stress the importance of ensuring an inclusive peace process that fully takes into account the voices of all Yemeni people - whether in the country or in the diaspora- and those in vulnerable straits. In that regard, we wish to ask Ms. Alsaidy if the organizations that work with the disabled in Yemen have been given an opportunity to express their concerns directly to the parties to the conflict. If so, what has been the response?
