Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Allow me
first to thank you, Mr. Minister, for having organized
this very important public debate on the progress report
of the Secretary-General on ways to combat
subregional and cross-border problems in West Africa
(S/2005/86).

It hardly needs to be said that those problems
exacerbate the region's chronic instability. Their
persistence threatens to undermine ongoing efforts to
restore peace in countries in conflict situations and to
build peace in countries that have recently emerged
from conflict. Hence, we must attach great importance
to these key issues for peace, stability and development
in the subregion.

This annual gathering gives us the opportunity to
take stock of the strategies agreed to and the means
mobilized for their implementation. From that
standpoint, the report of the Secretary-General is a
valuable analytical tool which enables us to assess
actions that have been undertaken so as to draw the
necessary conclusions and make the needed
adjustments.

It seems to us that significant progress has been
achieved in the area of the diagnosis and understanding
of cross-border problems which, as is well known, fuel,
and are fuelled by, instability and conflict. Also, much
progress has been made in preparing and refining
strategies and programmes in response to those
scourges.

As the Secretary-General's report indicates,
however, there are shortfalls in the means available for
action. Our future efforts therefore need to be directed
towards strengthening the capacities of national and
subregional organizations involved in the struggle and
towards the mobilization of the significant necessary
resources. In that regard, the report outlines a plan of
action for achieving those objectives by promoting
partnership.

It must be recognized that commendable efforts
have been made by the United Nations system, among
others, to build the capacities of subregional
organizations, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Mano River Union,
States and civil society, so as better to prepare them to
play a lead role in action to address those problems.
The launch of regional policies - in the context, inter
alia, of ECOWAS, in coordination with and the with
the support of United Nations agencies and
institutions- in the areas of humanitarian affairs,
conflict prevention, the free movement of goods and
peoples, the phenomenon of roadblocks, child
protection and support for civil society are bold
projects deserving of the international community's
support.

Institutional capacity-building and strengthening
the means of subregional organizations must go hand
in hand with a similar effort on behalf of States that
assume the responsibility of implementing policies of
cooperation. One important aspect of such assistance
is, quite clearly, reform of the security sector, which
bears the difficult and delicate task of combating illicit
trafficking in weapons, the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, the monitoring of arms embargoes, and border
control and security, among other things.

Support for local actors also involves the
provision of technical assistance in the harmonization
of the legislative framework at the subregional level,
which is vital in order to address cross-border issues
effectively and in a coordinated manner. It goes
without saying that harmonization should also involve
United Nations-sponsored missions and programmes.
Significant efforts have already been made to improve
cooperation and coordination among the United
Nations peace missions in the subregion. Moreover, the
strengthening of the United Nations Office for West
Africa has allowed it to play its full role in designing
policies and coordinating their implementation on the
ground.

Much has been said of the importance of
addressing the problems associated with disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement programmes in the context of a regional
perspective. While the relevance of such an approach is
self-evident, its practical implementation is no easy
matter. We must therefore pursue and expand our
thinking about the possibilities of designing and
implementing regional plans of action.

Cross-border problems are complex in nature and
must be tackled as part of an integrated and
multidimensional approach. While the struggle against
those evils is certainly the primary responsibility of the
States of the region, it nonetheless presents a challenge
to the international community as a whole. The
countries of the region cannot win their battle against
the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons or the
use of mercenaries without the assistance of external
partners. The problem of refugees, the reintegration of
former combatants, the resettlement of displaced
persons and youth unemployment all require
significant resources, and their resolution is bound up
with the establishment of conditions conducive to
sustainable economic development.

The challenges facing West Africa are difficult,
but they are not insurmountable provided the
development partners demonstrate political will. The
conditions are, in fact, in place to create partnership
relations with the organizations and States of the
subregion and the representatives of local
communities. Such partnership can be established if we
base our action on the priorities set by ECOWAS or
within the context of the goals of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development.

