Mr. Soares (Portugal): Portugal fully supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA) until 15 September 1998.
It endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to extend the mandate for one month, taking into account
the stalemate in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol and the situation on the ground.

The peace process in Angola is at a particularly
critical juncture, marked by the absence of sustained
dialogue and the deepening of mutual mistrust. As a
result of UNITA's irresponsible activity, the military and
political situation has continued to deteriorate and the
peace process has been pushed to the brink of collapse,
raising the danger of the resumption of civil war. Indeed,
the full implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is at stake
due to the failure of UNITA to demobilize fully its forces
and to facilitate the extension of State administration
throughout the country. This behaviour is delaying peace
and stability in Angola. Moreover, the continuation of
UNITA's attacks against Government-controlled areas and
United Nations personnel and other attempts to destabilize
the country, as reported by the Secretary-General, are of
particular concern to Portugal.

 

In the last few months, UNITA missed several
deadlines for compliance with the remaining tasks of the
peace process. This persistent pattern of non-compliance by
UNITA with its obligations under the terms of the
"Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
resolutions of the Council must end. UNITA must take
decisive and irreversible steps for the peaceful resolution of
the crisis on the basis of the Lusaka Protocol.

We deeply regret that since the adoption of resolution
1180 (1998) almost no significant progress has been made
in the remaining key tasks of the peace process, even after
successive attempts in the most recent weeks to put the
process back on track through dialogue and diplomacy. In
this context, I want to commend the Secretary-General for
the expeditious manner in which he responded to the
crisis - which was aggravated by the death of Maitre
Beye - and his decision to dispatch Under-Secretary-
General Miyet and Ambassador Brahimi to Angola. We are
sure that the Secretary-General will continue to follow this
matter with the attention it deserves and will not hesitate to
intervene personally if and when that is necessary. We
welcome the recent appointment of a new Special
Representative, Mr. Issa Diallo, which we hope will bring
new momentum to the peace process. Portugal also calls
upon the Government of Angola to continue to exercise
patience and restraint and to persevere in its effort towards
the full completion of the peace process.

The draft resolution before us has been designed to
show the Government of Angola and UNITA that the
United Nations and the international community are willing
to continue to help the Angolan people achieve peace and
stability, and we urge its full implementation.

