Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French): I would like, first of all, to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month and to wish you every success in the
accomplishment of your important task. My
congratulations go also to your predecessor, Ambassador
Alfredo Lopes Cabral of Guinea-Bissau, who carried out
excellent work last month.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
presence here of the ministerial delegation of States
members of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). SADC's considerable efforts for the
restoration of peace in Angola will strengthen all actions
taken in this regard, whether by the troika countries, by
the United Nations, or, particularly, by the Organization
of African Unity (OAU).

In February 1994, the Organization of African Unity
took the initiative to dispatch a ministerial mission in
which Tunisia took part in its capacity as the then
president of the Organization. Its objective at the time
was to make the members of the Security Council aware
of the need to establish the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). The OAU has
continuously followed developments in the situation and
has engaged in many actions aimed at achieving peace in
Angola. The last OAU summit meeting, held at Yaounde
in July 1996, which considered this question, illustrated
the concern and ongoing interest of African Heads of
State in a speedy and permanent settlement of the
Angolan conflict.

The peace process in Angola unfortunately continues
to experience delays in the implementation of the final
stages of the Lusaka Protocol. This has created a
disturbing situation in terms of consolidation of the
progress achieved thus far and of the continuation of the
actions necessary for the country's return to normalcy.

 

The quartering of UNITA troops has not yet been
completed. Moreover, desertions from the ranks of
quartered UNITA soldiers have recently increased,
destroying in part what had been achieved. It goes without
saying that the prolongation of the quartering period
increases the financial burden incurred in housing the
people involved. The completion of the establishment of the
Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) through the incorporation of
UNITA soldiers also continues to experience delays,
arousing suspicion and doubt. It is clear that such a climate
is hardly conducive to progress in the peace process.

Other problems persist, with regard, for example, to
the extension of State administration throughout the
territory, the unimpeded continuation of mine clearance,
humanitarian activities and the operations of UNAVEM. III,
and difficulties connected with the demobilization and
reintegration of troops.

It is unnecessary to underscore that the political will
of the two parties to make progress in the implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol is a fundamental element in this
process, and that the strengthening of trust between them is
more necessary than ever for the earliest possible
implementation of the stages yet to be completed.

We welcome the efforts of the SADC countries, which
tried to arrange a meeting between President Dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi on the occasion of the summit of Heads
of State of southern Africa, held on 2 October. We regret
that Mr. Savimbi did not feel obliged to attend that summit.
This meant that another valuable opportunity to find
solutions to pending problems was lost.

Despite the observance of the of the ceasefire, the
delays in the peace process in Angola only add to the
suffering of the people and increase the expenses involved
in the implementation of the agreements reached and in the
economic and social recovery of the country. This is all the
more disquieting and alarming as we near the end of the
UNAVEM. III mandate.
It is particularly urgent for UNITA to demonstrate a
sincere and resolute willingness to fulfil all its
commitments, especially with regard to the immediate
dispatch of all its generals to Luanda for their incorporation
into the Angolan Armed Forces, the return of deserters to
the quartering areas and the speedy selection of the soldiers
to be incorporated into the Angolan Armed Forces.

In this connection, a meeting as soon as possible
between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi would be

 

of great help in ironing out difficulties and dispelling any
doubts which continue to impede the complete
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

My delegation can only support the action taken by
the SADC countries and hopes that the Security Council
will take the measures needed to compel UNITA to
honour its commitments so as to ensure the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and the
establishment of lasting peace in Angola and stability in
the region.

The pursuit and intensification of diplomatic and
humanitarian efforts are also prerequisites for an
improvement in the situation and the relaxation of
tensions in Angola. Similarly, the international community
has been called upon to increase assistance to that country
in View of the urgent needs related to its recovery and
reconstruction.

Humanitarian organizations should also be strongly
encouraged and supported in their efforts in this regard.

Finally, I cannot but commend the personnel of
UNAVEM. III and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, for their
devotion and the sacrifices they have made in the interests
of restoring peace in Angola.

