Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We also
wish to commend Ambassador Pleuger and the other
members of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 661 (1990) for their
accurate and direct work. I wish to join other Council
members in expressing condolences to the families of
staff of humanitarian agencies, particularly the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), who
lost their lives in the attacks on international personnel.
We fully condemn those unacceptable attacks.

Allow me also to express our gratitude to
Mr. Benon Sevan, Executive Director of the Iraq
Programme. I wish to express our appreciation, through
him, for the efforts made by the Programme's entire
staff, who have carried out their work with
professionalism, integrity, sincerity and dedication.

Ambassador Pleuger, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
661 (1990), commented in his brief but comprehensive
and accurate statement on all aspects of the ordered
and streamlined termination of the work of the oil-for-
food programme. We echo all the concerns he raised
regarding that process. We believe that that is a very
complex and important process that involves two
elements: the rights of companies, contractors and
suppliers and the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
people - which are our central concern. But we must
uphold and respect the rights of the companies that
have worked with the programme and have helped
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Consequently, we believe that what preceding
speakers have said about the need to establish clear
criteria is very important, so that contractors and
companies can know how priorities have been
determined and why some contracts have not received
priority or been accepted. Those companies must be
informed of the status of their contracts and be given
any information relevant to the authentication of goods
entering Iraq, points of entry, contact points at ports,
and the changes to take effect after 21 November. It is
only natural, in this respect, to emphasize that we need
to continue the amendment of contracts until the 21
November deadline and to consider flexible
mechanisms to deal with these matters after that
deadline.

We believe that it is also important to show
flexibility with respect to the deadline. For example,
contractors whose contracts have received priority are
not to blame if their contracts have not been amended
before 21 November. Several other important points
were addressed by preceding speakers, and they should
all be considered seriously. The companies and
contractors who have been working with the
programme since 1996 deserve our respect,
cooperation and all due truthfulness and
scrupulousness until the end of the Programme.

In conclusion, I am confident that those in charge
of the Office of the Iraq Programme, led by Mr. Sevan,
will deploy all the efforts necessary to attain its noble
objectives.

