Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates France and the United Kingdom's initiative
in convening today's meeting, and we would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, and
Ambassadors Momen and Blanchard, of Bangladesh
and Canada, for their briefings.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
important component of the Organization's efforts
to maintain international peace and security. Since
peacekeeping forces operate on the ground under the
Council's mandates, enhancing their ability to deploy
rapidly, strengthening peacekeepers' capabilities and
improving their mandates are critical to their greater
efficiency and effectiveness. In that context, I would
like to make the following points.

First, we should consistently uphold the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations. The purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the three peacekeeping-operation principles - the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use
of force except in self-defence or defence of the
mandate - constitute their foundation and remain
irreplaceable in guiding operations in a new context.
The sovereignty of host countries should be fully
respected and their input and views taken seriously in
order to help them scale up their security capacities.
When a host country requires the withdrawal of a
peacekeeping operation and the circumstances permit,
the Council should give the Secretariat guidance on
drawing up a clear exit timetable, to ensure that the
mission will not remain in the host country indefinitely.
Secondly, we must fully recognize the role of
troop-contributing countries (TCCs). Ultimately, it
is peacekeepers who ensure the success of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and the TCCs and
police-contributing countries (PCCs) are the main
actors in implementing those operations, carrying
out their mission on the front lines in support of the
Organization's fulfilment of its responsibilities as
mandated under the Charter of the United Nations and
making great sacrifices through their contribution. The
long-term development of peacekeeping operations
also depends on the efforts of TCCs and PCCs, and they
must be acknowledged and respected. In that regard,
we should strengthen the triangular communication
between the Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations should
play its full role as a policy review body and give TCCs
more say on peacekeeping issues.

Thirdly, we should increase efforts to help TCCs

with capacity-building. For peacekeeping operations to
be able to implement their mandates, full and focused
predeployment training and reliable provision of all the
necessary resources, including equipment, are essential.
Operations must therefore be provided with the training
and resources they need. It is important to pay close
attention to the real needs of TCCs from developing
countries and the challenges they face, as well as to
encourage bilateral and multilateral cooperation in
strengthening their peacekeeping capacity-building.
We should also give particular attention and support to
regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union, so that they can play a bigger part in
maintaining peace and security in Africa and help the
continent improve its peacekeeping capacity-building.

Fourthly, it is essential to define a clear, actionable
and targeted mandate for every peacekeeping mission.
Mandates instruct and guide every mission in its
operations and are an important determinant of their
effectiveness. The priority needs and realities of host
countries, as well as the TCCs' capacities, should be
considered together in order to keep operations focused
on the core task of peacekeeping. Priorities for the
different phases of an operation can be modified as
and when any change is needed, while keeping the host
country in the driving seat for the sake of effective
mandate implementation.

F ifthly, the Secretariat should provide better support
and assurances for peacekeeping forces in terms of
both efficiency and quality. Where its role in managing
peacekeeping operations is concerned, the Secretariat
should look at the big picture for peacekeeping
operations and their long-term development, as well as
working to make them more effective and better able to
address complex situations with concrete measures. The
Secretariat and missions should pay close attention to
peacekeepers' security and medical service capabilities
and should guarantee them. Systems for tracking and
assessing the security situation on the ground must be
set up and early-warning capabilities for security threats
and intra-mission information-sharing improved. Every
mission should commit to strengthening its training
in the deployment phase, which should be tailored to
the realities of the mission's area of operations. For
its part, the Secretariat should improve management
standards and efficiency, optimize logistics support
mechanisms and ensure that peacekeeping resources
are utilized effectively.

At the United Nations peacekeeping summit in
September 2015, China's President made an important
commitment to supporting United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and China is currently pressing ahead with
the implementation of that commitment across the
board. In the past two years, we have trained more
than 800 peacekeepers for the United Nations and
some countries concerned and have dispatched a first
helicopter squadron to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Africa. We are now in the process of
delivering $100 million in free financial aid pledged
to the African Union and have made support for the
peacekeeping capacities of TCCs, especially those
from Africa, a priority of the United Nations Peace
and Development Trust Fund. In September, China
officially completed the registration of its 8,000-strong
standby peacekeeping force as a United Nations
standby mechanism. We had already generated two
standing peacekeeping police units and registered them
under the United Nations Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System. Our first batch of personnel and
equipment has been certified by the United Nations
as rapid-deployment-ready. Those efforts demonstrate
China's active support for the United Nations PKO
and its commitment to assuming more responsibility
internationally while meeting its obligations as a major
player, and we believe they will make a constructive
contribution to global peace and regional stability.

As the biggest TCC among the permanent members
of the Council and the second biggest donor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, China will continue
to make a firm and honest commitment to maintaining
worldpeace andjoining the rest ofthe world in advancing
the noble cause of United Nations peacekeeping.

