Judge Meron: It is an honour to appear before
the Council once again to report on the work of the
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals.

(spoke in French)

But first I wish to congratulate you, Sir, as
Ambassador of France, on your country's accession to
the presidency of the Security Council. As a permanent
member of the Council, France plays a key role with
respect to issues of international justice, and I convey
my heartfelt wishes for success to the Security Council.

(Spoke in English)
I also wish to express my gratitude to the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals and to offer my particular thanks to Uruguay,
which has assumed leadership of the Group. I very
much look forward to working with His Excellency
Ambassador Rosselli and Minister Patricia Benitez
going forward.

I would be remiss ifI did not once again express
my sincere gratitude for the assistance provided to
the Mechanism by the Office of Legal Affairs, and in
particular by the Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, a tremendous ally for international
justice; by the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias; and by their whole team.

Finally, I wish to acknowledge both President
Carmel Agius of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the new Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, who is also the long-serving ICTY
Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz. It is a pleasure to
appear before the Council with both of them today.

I had the privilege of appearing before the Council
six months ago as the Mechanism was undergoing the
first review of its work by the Council. We appreciate
the direction and guidance of the Council as to our work
going forward as set forth in resolution 2256 (2015)
and have paid attention to those matters, as my written
report (S/2016/453, annex) demonstrates.

The past six months have seen a number ofimportant
developments at the Mechanism. On 15 December 2015,
the ICTY Appeals Chamber delivered its judgement
in the case of Stanisie and Simatovic', ordering a
retrial. Consistent with the transitional arrangements,
the Mechanism is responsible for this retrial. I have
assigned the case to a three-judge panel, and pre-trial
proceedings are already well under way.

The month of March saw the delivery of two
important trial judgements at the ICTY, in the cases
of Karadeic' and Seselj. The pre-appeal proceedings in
these cases are already under way in the Mechanism,
where I have assigned the cases to two panels ofjudges
in the Appeals Chamber.

During the pre-appeal proceedings in these
cases, as in the pre-trial proceedings of Stanisie and
Simatovic', the full panel of judges is called upon to
take part in addressing requests only if and as needed,
a practice that produces substantial reductions in the
costs ofjudicial activities.

In addition to the three cases I have just mentioned,
the Mechanism's judges continue to address a wide
array of requests for various forms of relief, working
on matters ranging from requests to provide assistance
to national judicial authorities, to applications alleging
contempt of court, and issuing nearly 200 decisions and
orders during the reporting period. From the Republic
of Korea to Portugal and from Madagascar to Uruguay,
the Mechanism's judges have been active throughout
the reporting period, working remotely from their
homes and offices around the world and carrying out
their judicial functions carefully, diligently and to the
highest possible standards.

The reporting period saw a number of important
advances in other areas of Mechanism responsibility
as well. With the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in December 2015, the
Mechanism assumed responsibility for the remaining
functions ofthe ICTR as ofl January 2016. Once again,
the transfer of these functions occurred seamlessly.
Preparations are under way for the Mechanism to
relocate to the new premises of the Arusha branch later
this year as the construction project nears completion.
We remain deeply appreciative of the support of the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania and
the sustained assistance from various offices of the
Secretariat in connection with the construction of the
new, minimalist facilities designed to house the Arusha
branch.

Important progress continues to be made in a
number of other areas of the Mechanism, from the
transfer of the Tribunals' records to the Mechanism and
continued efforts to enhance access to the Tribunals'
records, to the improvement of processes related to
the provision of assistance to national jurisdictions.
The legal and regulatory framework of the Mechanism
has been strengthened and augmented during the
reporting period, with a recent amendment to the rules
of procedure and evidence and the issuance of a number
of new practice directions and policies.

The Mechanism has also continued to benefit
from regular audits by the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, and I have been personally involved, and
invested, in the ongoing study related to governance
and institutional culture. I am confident that, as was
the case with the review process, we will gain valuable

insight into how the Mechanism can become even better
as a result ofthis process. In the meantime, we continue
to seek to maximize efficiencies and apply innovative
new approaches to our work, such as by exploring
ways to deploy cloud computing and telecommuting
to facilitate the work of the judges carrying out their
functions remotely.

As many members of the Council may recall, when
last I appeared before the Council in December (see S/PV.7574), the then-Prosecutor of the Mechanism,
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, reported that one of the
remaining fugitives indicted by the ICTR, Mr. Ladislas
Ntaganzwa, had been arrested. That was a significant
achievement, not just for the Mechanism, but for
international justice and for all of us who seek to
ensure accountability. In March, and consistent with
the referral of his case to the Republic of Rwanda for
trial by the ICTR, Mr. Ntaganzwa was transferred to
Rwanda. In accordance with its statute, the Mechanism
is already monitoring the proceedings in Rwanda with
regard to Mr. Ntaganzwa, thanks to the assistance of
monitors from the Kenyan section of the International
Commission of Jurists. The monitoring of the other
cases referred for trial to Rwanda and France is ongoing.

With eight fugitives remaining - of whom three
are to be tried by the Mechanism - the Mechanism's
fugitive-tracking activities continue under the able
leadership of the Mechanism's new Prosecutor,
Mr. Serge Brammertz. However, we cannot do this
alone. The sustained support and involvement of
Member States in relation to those tracking activities
is essential if we are to ensure that the remaining
fugitives are apprehended and thereby carry out one of
the essential functions entrusted to us.

The Mechanism is also reliant upon and deeply
grateful to those States that have agreed to enforce
sentences imposed by the ICTR, the ICTY or the
Mechanism itself. I am very pleased to announce that
a new agreement on the enforcement of sentences was
recently concluded with the Republic of Mali. That new
agreement reflects best practices in the field of detention,
including the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners, adopted by the General
Assembly last December (resolution 70/175). I sincerely
hope that as we move ahead, additional States will step
forward and enter into such enforcement agreements,
thereby helping to expand the Mechanism's critically
important enforcement capacity. In the meantime,
I wish to acknowledge the important cooperation
and support received from the Government of the
Republic of Senegal as the final steps are being taken
to commence enforcement of sentences in Senegal.
The Mechanism continues to explore options to
address the increasingly urgent situation of the small
number of individuals in Arusha who have been
acquitted by the ICTR or who have completed their
sentences imposed by that Tribunal. However, despite
our best efforts, we are, as the Council is well aware,
dependent on the international community to help
resolve this long-standing humanitarian challenge.
Pending such resolution, the Mechanism has carefully
reviewed the broad array of support that has been
provided by the ICTR to those persons in Arusha, and is
implementing a more limited, cost-effective approach.

As we move ahead into the next two-year period of
our operations - one that will see the historic closure
of the ICTY and the transfer of all remaining functions
to the Mechanism - the Council has my pledge that
we will continue to encapsulate and promulgate best
practices, to innovate wherever possible and to seek
ever greater efficiencies, while never forgetting our
fundamental role as a court or the terrible atrocities that
led to our establishment. In doing so, I am confident that
the Mechanism will not only fulfil its responsibilities
to its predecessor tribunals, to affected communities
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, to courageous
Victims and witnesses and to the Council, and do so
to the highest possible standards, but that it will also
serve as an emblem of what an international court and
a United Nations institution can and should be - an
embodiment of the international community's profound
commitment to justice and the rule of law.

