I thank the President of the Security Council for this opportunity to address the Council on this important topic of protection of civilians in armed conflict. In 2003, the General Assembly designated 7 April as the International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda. On this day, we the international community remember and pay our deepest respect to the victims. This day also serves to remind us that the United Nations and the Security Council must act with unanimity, determination and speed if such tragedies are to be avoided in future. The Secretary-General's 2019 report (S/2020/366) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict shows that civilians continue to suffer the most from armed conflict. The report highlights that "more than 20,000 civilians had been killed or injured in 2019 as a result of attacks in conflicts in 10 countries" (S/2020/366, para. 7). The trend lines highlighted in the report are tragic and alarming. On 23 March, the Secretary-General called for an immediate global ceasefire. He did so because he understood the scale of the impending crisis. If armed groups were to stop fighting, authorities in some of the most challenging environments might be able to focus their resources and efforts to responding to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has led to far-reaching challenges for authorities with regard to protecting civilians in regions affected by armed conflicts. Fiji supports the Secretary-General's call to silence the guns. A substantial part of the responsibility for making that happen falls on the Security Council. The Council is underpinned by an architecture of international frameworks and has the political legitimacy to bring ceasefires into effect. The Charter of the United Nations and its Member States have placed that huge responsibility solely on the Council and nowhere else. As a proud troop contributor to United Nations peace operations for more than 40 years, Fiji would like to respond to one specific area where the Council has requested guidance. How can peacekeepers be better prepared for deployment in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic? Fiji welcomes the Secretary-General's Action for Peace initiative, which aims to strengthen the role of peacekeepers in protecting civilians in armed conflict. Fiji also welcomes the efforts of the United Nations and the Department of Peace Operations to protect peace missions and host countries from the COVID-19 pandemic and to prevent its spread. Fiji notes that the outbreak of the virus within peace operations is still small, even if it is broader in the communities in which they operate. Allow me to make three proposals. First, COVID-19 preparedness should become a core part of training for peace operations - not only to protect peacekeepers, but also to allow them to operate in contexts where the virus has spread significantly. Secondly, the budgets of peace operations should properly reflect the additional resources and equipment they need to fulfil their mandates in the context of COVID-19. Thirdly, the predeployment expertise and experience of forces should be considered when deciding the composition of any new deployments. Several forces already have extensive hands-on expertise in managing and responding to COVID-19 in their national settings. The COVID-19 pandemic, like climate change, has transformed peace operations. In climate catastrophes, civilian lives are lost when armed groups weaponize food and water. In the COVID-19 pandemic, access to health care and essential medicines is being increasingly weaponized by armed groups. Both phenomena are rapidly transforming conflicts. Protecting civilians and reducing civilian deaths and casualties requires expanded skill sets, repurposed capabilities and new ways to structure peace operations. Fiji reminds the Council of the Rwandan genocide, which we have commemorated on 7 April every year since 2003. It is a reminder of the need for timely interventions, the need to deter and prevent. This year, 7 April occurred during the peak of the pandemic in our host city. I take a moment to remember the thousands of deaths in this great city, New York, in the most powerful country in the world. I now ask the Council to imagine, by comparison, the scale of challenges faced by authorities in conflict-affected areas in order to protect their civilians from COVID-19. As Fiji pays tribute to all peacekeepers and to all those involved in protecting civilians in armed conflicts around the world, we urge the Council to find consensus, harness goodwill and act with the utmost urgency to protect civilians during the COVID-19 pandemic.
