Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me start by
thanking Ambassador Meza-Cuadra for his briefing
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-
terrorism.

As we said last year when adopting resolution 2341
(2017) (see S/PV.7882), objects of critical infrastructure
have long been attractive targets for terrorist attacks,
with potentially devastating consequences. Attacks on
so-called soft targets have also been a highly visible
feature of the tactics of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. For that reason, we welcomed the initiative of
the Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council to put
this item on our agenda last year. It is appropriate that we
now take stock of where we are in the implementation
of resolution 2341 (2017).

We live in a period marked by rapid change. Our
modern societies are complex, interconnected and
technologically advanced. However, the advances
that are making our societies better able to meet the
needs of our citizens also render them vulnerable. In
interconnected societies and an interconnected world,
the consequent effects of a terrorist attack are hard
to predict.

We must therefore recognize the need to build
resilience into our thinking on critical infrastructure.
The protection of critical infrastructure in Sweden
is based on two pillars: first, to improve awareness,
build resilience and prevent, respond to and recover
from incidents and crises; and, secondly, to increase
cooperation, including public-private cooperation, as
well as international collaboration.

Connected societies require connected system-
wide perspectives when it comes to the protection
of critical infrastructure. The sheer range of actors
alone necessitates robust legislation and platforms for
cooperation. The Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency
developed the Action Plan for the Protection of Vital
Societal Functions and Critical Infrastructure in
order to raise awareness, build resilience and prevent
attacks, as well as increase cooperation among the
relevant stakeholders.

We also need to ensure day-to-day cooperation
among the various entities that are responsible for
vital societal functions. Sweden's Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation Council brings together more than a dozen
national agencies, from a wide range of areas, with
the aim of jointly increasing our national capacity to
counter terrorism. Exercises and scenario-training are
one important way of ensuring effective coordination
across the different agencies. We are currently
conducting a large-scale multisectoral cooperation
exercise to clearly identify areas of responsibility,
reporting lines and processes for coordination in the
event of a civil crisis.

Determining what constitutes critical infrastructure
is a national matter, but it cannot be treated in isolation.
Interconnectedness across borders, jurisdictions,
systems and networks is a fact of life. The ongoing
threat from terrorism underlines the need to continue
the interaction between counter-terrorism actors
and those working on crisis management. Within the
United Nations, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and the members of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force play important roles in such
efforts. CTED's country visits are an important tool to
help Member States to address such issues together and
to inform capacity-building needs.

In addition, it is important to enhance dialogue
with international organizations, such as the
International Maritime Organization, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, INTERPOL,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the World
Customs Organization and others whose work
is important to the maintenance of international
critical infrastructure.

The approach of the European Union may offer some
examples of how to approach the issue from a regional
perspective. The European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection provides a framework for
cooperation. It establishes a procedure for identifying
and designating European critical infrastructure and for
a common approach to assessing the need to improve
their protection. The tools and assessment within the
European Programme could be duplicated in other
sectors and regions.

In coordination with other members, including
through the global partnership of the Group of Seven
and other multilateral initiatives, Sweden is also
engaged in international cooperation to reduce the
threat of terrorists gaining access to weapons and
materials of mass destruction. In the field of nuclear
security, Sweden and the Swedish Radiation Safety
Authority have implemented numerous projects since
1992 in order to secure nuclear power plants and other
facilities in Eastern Europe and Central Asia that store
and use nuclear and radioactive materials.

By definition, terrorist attacks are unpredictable.
The increasingly decentralized nature of the terrorist
threat and the increased incidence of attacks using
simple means that create widespread disruption,
including of critical infrastructure, call for increased
vigilance, preparedness and cooperation.

