Mr. Craxi (Italy) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President of the
Security Council, Vice-President and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Samuel Lewis-Navarro of Panama, for
having organized this debate, which provides us a
valuable opportunity to discuss the issue of children
and armed conflict. We believe that the Security
Council has a particular responsibility in combating
this reprehensible phenomenon.

Allow me to express Italy's support for the work
of the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, the Committee
on the Rights of the Child, the Human Rights Council
and all non-governmental organizations working to
protect children around the world.

The statistics before us are appalling. They
require immediate action by the international
community. In the past 10 years, armed conflicts have
been responsible for the deaths of more than 2 million
children and the maiming of another 6 million.
Likewise, millions of children are today refugees.
Others have been taken hostage or trafficked illegally.
The international community cannot remain idle.

Italy has always been deeply involved in
promoting the rights of all children. Under Italy's
presidency in 2003, the European Union (EU) adopted
its Guidelines on Children and Armed Conflict. Thanks
to that instrument, the European Union is taking
concrete steps in multilateral forums and as regards its
relations with third countries to protect children caught
up in armed conflict. Similarly, we have made this
issue one of the priorities vis-a-vis our candidacy for
the Human Rights Council.

We believe that there is a very close link between
development and protecting the rights of children. We
need to act in societies afflicted by conflict in order to
provide children with prospects for a different future.
We need to take up specific projects in health,
education and labour and to offer children real, clearly
defined options to help them reintegrate into civilian
society. In that respect, Italy is using its development
cooperation efforts to confirm its commitment to
protecting children as we develop new assistance
strategies in this area.

We support the United Nations in all its
programmes for children. Italy has funded UNICEF
projects in the specific and special case of Afghanistan,
where there are some initiatives focused on education
and school agencies. Italian assistance to Iraq includes
a contribution to UNICEF to improve the condition of
children who have suffered the consequences of
conflict. We are determined to pursue that specific
effort.

We support and actively participate in the
Council's Working Group, hoping that its role will
become greater and that its recommendations will be
implemented quickly.

Today, I would like to welcome the submission of
the report of the Secretary-General for 2007 and
express our support for its content and, in particular,
for its recommendations. We share the idea that in
order to combat this heinous phenomenon, we need a
comprehensive strategy that is not limited to combating
the recruitment of children. I therefore wish to join my
European colleagues in encouraging the Security
Council to include rape and other acts of serious sexual
and gender-based violence against children among
those violations that would cause a party to a conflict
to be included in the annex of the report of the
Secretary-General. Italy therefore supports the
recommendation by the Secretary-General to submit to
the International Criminal Court cases of violations of
children's rights in armed conflicts that are under its
jurisdiction.

Finally, allow me to recall that Italy endorses the
position of the European Union, which is actively
engaged in efforts for the international community to
adopt a legal instrument to ban submunition weapons,
which cause unacceptable suffering to civilian
populations, in particular to children.

I must conclude by saying that we have the duty
to ensure that this debate will signify an important and,
as someone said, historic moment in combating the
phenomenon of children in armed conflict. For that
reason, I would hope that this debate would represent a
crucial and decisive stage on the path towards a new
Security Council resolution, to be adopted during the
next debate on this subject, which would take into
account lessons learned, situations that can no longer
wait and progress made since the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005).

08-2361]
