Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We also
wish to express our appreciation for the convening
of this meeting and the valuable briefings given by
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Coninsx.

Despite the military defeat of Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) and the loss of its
territorial control, we know that it continues to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security as
it seeks to maintain its global influence through its
network of affiliated organizations, as well as inspiring
attacks through its hate narrative. In that regard, the
fight against Da'esh remains a huge challenge for all
States, including the issue of the return of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families, attacks on critical
infrastructure and vulnerable targets, the use of the
Internet and social networks and the use of sexual
Violence as a strategic and ideological goal.

It is also essential to coordinate the international
community's efforts in support of regional and
international organizations, especially the United
Nations. In that regard, we highlight the efforts of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT)
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), as well as the role of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact. Preventing
and combating terrorism require a holistic approach in
line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the concept of sustainable peace, while
recognizing that peace and security, development
and humans rights are mutually reinforcing. The
transformation of Da'esh into an underground
organization seems to have fostered action by regional
terrorist groups, through which Da'esh has become
a kind of franchise. Without necessarily needing
to develop operational or logistical links, Da'esh is
now able to claim responsibility for attacks by such
local groups.

We believe that it is essential, in accordance with
international law, to combat the abuse of information and
communication technologies, as well as the non-profit
organizations used by Da'esh to raise funds, recruit
followers, justify its actions and continue promoting its
terrorist narrative. In that connection, we agree that the
fight against its financial and logistical capacity must
be a priority. Da'esh retains considerable wealth. Its
financial flows must be limited as we tackle the issue
of money laundering. We highlight the importance
of resolution 2462 (2019) to prevent and combat the
financing of terrorism.

We join other countries in highlighting the
adoption ofresolution 2482 (2019), on the links between
terrorism and organized crime. Criminal activities
such as drug trafficking and trafficking in persons
or cultural property not only represent a source of
financing but also a mechanism for logistical support.
In that regard, we welcome the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the importance
of close cooperation with UNOCT and CTED, as well
as the efforts of the international community, including
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, with a view
to improving our understanding and response to this
global phenomenon.

The challenge posed by the return of foreign terrorist
fighters merits particular attention, especially when
they are incorporated into national criminal justice
systems. It is necessary to develop appropriate policies
for prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration while
fully respecting human rights and due process. Such
strategies should also adopt a gender perspective and
safeguard the rights of children. The addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles and the key principles for
the protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of women and children linked to
United Nations-listed terrorist groups are excellent
tools for this purpose.
While the crimes committed, including those
related to sexual violence, must not go unpunished,
accountability should contribute to strengthening
justice, reconciliation and non-recurrence. We must
prevent prisons from becoming environments that
foster radicalization and recruitment and ensure that
freed combatants can properly reintegrate into society.
Bearing this in mind, we must also recognize the courage
and role of the victims of terrorism in our efforts to
prevent and combat this scourge. We would therefore
like to highlight the initiative of the Secretary-General
to organize the first International Congress for Victims
of Terrorism as part of the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations.

To conclude, I wish to reiterate Peru's wholehearted
commitment to preventing and combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, particularly through
actions that the Council is in a position to take thanks
to our shared consensus.

