Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this public debate on the
situation in Somalia. We would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe and Under-
Secretary-General Susana Malcorra for their briefings
on the most recent developments in that country and
for their related work in the Secretariat. We welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union and thank them for participating in today's
meeting.

China is following very closely the serious
situation in Somalia and in the Horn of Africa. The
protracted problems in Somalia have caused serious
difficulties for the country's people, pose a serious
threat to the situation in the Horn of Africa region and
have now become a serious challenge for the
international community. Stabilizing the situation in
Somalia as soon as possible and achieving peace and
stability in the country would not only meet the
expectations of the people of Somalia but also serve
the common interests of the Horn of Africa region and
of the international community at large.

In addressing the situation in Somalia, the top
priority is to stabilize the security situation in the
country. We condemn the recent armed attacks against
the Transitional Federation Government and against
Somali civilians. We urge all parties in Somalia to
observe a ceasefire throughout the national territory as
soon as possible and to seek a political settlement to

09-3985]
their disputes. We support the early establishment of
robust security forces in Somalia and call upon the
international community to provide support in that
regard.

We commend the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for its important contribution to
stabilizing the situation under very precarious
circumstances. We call on the United Nations to
intensify its efforts to implement the support package
for AMISOM.

The key to achieving peace in Somalia is for all
political parties in the country to forge a consensus for
peace. Only when a genuine political foundation for
peace is laid in Somalia will the international
community's external assistance truly be able to play
an effective role. At this time, it must be pointed out in
particular that all parties in Somalia must reach a
consensus regarding the urgency of resolving the
Somali issue.

The countries in the Horn of Africa must be fully
aware that they are all in the same boat regarding the
question of Somalia, that a win-win situation can be
achieved only through peace and that fighting can only
be disastrous for all. We sincerely hope that all
countries in the Horn of Africa can make full use of
their influence and do their utmost to promote
negotiations to move the peace process forward in
Somalia in order to make swift and substantive
progress.

China has always maintained that the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, should play
a more active role on the question of Somalia. We call
on the Organization to intensify its efforts to fulfil its
commitment to providing assistance to Somalia, the
Somali Government and AMISOM. The Chinese
Government has already provided AMISOM's two
major troop-contributing countries, Uganda and
Burundi, with 5 million renminbi each in logistical
assistance. In addition, it will soon provide the African
Union with another $400,000 in cash for assistance to
support AMISOM.

