Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings. We
welcome the recent appointment of Lieutenant General
Guha as the new Head of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement, to whom we extend
our full support.

Yemen's future is at a historic moment, in which
it is necessary for the parties to demonstrate their
willingness to move forward in the implementation
of the agreements. That is why we once again express
our concern about the current impasse. The situation is
partly attributable to the rigid positions of the parties,
which have considerably diminished the momentum that
this important political process needs. In that regard,
we are pleased that the Redeployment Coordination
Committee has held another meeting to support the
process of implementing the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.

Any small step of progress is constantly disrupted
by continued offensives by the parties to the conflict.
We join in the condemnations for the attack on
oil installations on Saudi territory. Those actions
destabilize the region and further avert the prospect
of reaching lasting peace in Yemen. We also strongly
condemn the attack on a detention centre in Dhamar
earlier this month, which resulted in the deaths of more
than 100 people. We urge the parties to take all the
necessary measures to protect the civilian population.
Tensions must be assuaged. The immediate cessation
of acts of violence committed against civilians and
civilian infrastructure in violation of human rights law
and international humanitarian law is more necessary
than ever.

There is no peace without justice. That is why
we urge the parties to cooperate with independent
investigative mechanisms, such as the Group of
Eminent International and Regional Experts on
Yemen, established by the United Nations Human
Rights Council.

On the other hand, the humanitarian situation
remains catastrophic. The war continues to affect
millions of civilians who depend on the tireless work of
humanitarian workers. That difficult effort is impacted
by the lack of funding for the humanitarian response
plan in Yemen. We therefore call on all major donors to
urgently make their donations. The parties must ensure
respect for humanitarian principles and guarantee safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian workers. It is
unacceptable that severe restrictions continue to hamper
the implementation of projects that are necessary to
save the lives of millions of people.

That grave humanitarian situation is further
compounded by the use of landmines, which have
affected hundreds of civilians. The proliferation ofthose
devices constitutes not only a threat to people's lives
but also one of the factors that jeopardizes agricultural
production and access to water, depriving civilians of
the means necessary to survive.
Food security is particularly relevant in a country
where less than 3 per cent of the land is arable. In 2018,
Yemen suffered the world's most severe food insecurity
crisis, and the multidimensional effect of that scenario
has caused severe conditions for conflict-induced
hunger, which could very well constitute a war crime.

We must not be distracted from the ultimate goal
of those efforts. An immediate and definitive ceasefire
is needed throughout the country. That will be possible
only with the resolute will of the parties to put an end
to a conflict that has already claimed too many lives.

