Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
his briefing and for the important work that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its
partners are doing to support the Syrian people.

Last month, the Security Council renewed key
provisions of resolution 2165 (2014) (see S/PV.8423).
A fundamental principle of those provisions was
ensuring the safe, immediate and sustained delivery
of humanitarian aid to those in need in the most
direct and efficient manner possible. That includes
the approval and facilitation of aid deliveries from
Damascus to the Rukban internally displaced persons
camp. We are aware of reports that the Syrian regime
has finally issued verbal approval for the delivery of
urgently needed humanitarian aid to Rukban, as Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock reported. The preliminary
approval of that convoy is a very welcome development.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that what
is truly needed is unimpeded, sustained humanitarian
access, both in Rukban and throughout Syria.

A second convoy will permit aid workers from the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to
deliver food, medicine and winterization supplies, and
that delivery will save lives. We call on Damascus to
issue all outstanding written approvals and allow that
convoy to move forward without any further delay.
It is critical that the convoy include all the required
assistance, as determined by the United Nations. As
part of that delivery, the United Nations should also
be able to conduct a survey of the Rukban residents'
intentions. The intentions survey will help facilitate
the safe, voluntary, dignified and informed departures
from Rukban of those internally displaced persons
(IDPs) who wish to leave the encampment. We reiterate
that any departures of IDPs from Rukban must be
safe, dignified and voluntary. Residents must not be
coerced by the regime or its allies in any way. It is also
imperative that IDPs be permitted to relocate at the
time of their choosing and to a place of their choosing.

The Syrian regime's continued disregard of the
Security Council resolutions authorizing the delivery
of humanitarian aid is a reminder that we must remain
vigilant and that the Security Council must hold
Damascus accountable. The United States remains
committed to cooperating with both the United Nations
and Russia to alleviate humanitarian concerns in
Rukban and throughout Syria.

The United States and the global coalition to defeat
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) have
provided the necessary security assurances to allow
the convoy to move forward, just as we did advance
of the November convoy. The United States is able to
support that effort thanks to the coalition's liberation
of more than 99 per cent of the territory once held by
ISIS in Syria. Let me be clear. This does not mean the
end of the campaign to defeat ISIS, nor does it lessen
the United States commitment to the enduring defeat
of ISIS. We appreciate the contributions and continued
commitment of our international partners in the global
coalition. Stabilization assistance is critical to ensuring
the lasting defeat of ISIS. We also value and thank our
partners who have worked with us on the ground, and
will continue to work with them on stabilization efforts
in north-east Syria. There is much work that needs to
be done to help those liberated from ISIS to recover and
prevent the latter's return.

The United States continues to closely monitor
humanitarian conditions in Idlib province. United
Nations access to Idlib from Damascus remains virtually
impossible. Cross-border humanitarian assistance is
therefore an essential lifeline, and its delivery to the
intended beneficiaries must be allowed and facilitated.
To that end, it is important that the Council spare no
effort to ensure that the Turkish-Russian ceasefire
agreement in Idlib holds. The United States position on
Idlib is clear. Any military escalation by the regime and
its allies in Idlib would, as Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock said, be catastrophic for the millions of
people there and for the stability of Syria's neighbours.
We must work together to safeguard the Idlib ceasefire
currently protecting 3 million Syrian civilians.

