Mr. Gomez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to greatly thank your
delegation for having convened this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

I would like to begin by reiterating that my
country firmly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Likewise, we are trying to adopt
effective measures against terrorism, at the national,
regional and international levels, while fully respecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms. All States
have an obligation to act in strict compliance with
international law, in particular the Charter of the United
Nations, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and refugee law.

It is crucial that terrorism not be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Political, religious and community leaders must
guarantee that messages issued about terrorism and how
to tackle it promote tolerance, respect and the culture
of peace, avoiding the dissemination of xenophobic and
discriminatory messages.

Since 2002, Mexico has led the initiative on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism (General Assembly resolution 68/178), both in New York and Geneva.
General Assembly resolution 70/148 reiterates the
commitment of the international community to
respect its obligations in that sphere. It also reiterates
the importance of civil society and humanitarian
organizations, as well as the right to privacy and
the participation of women, in formulating counter-
terrorist measures.
In the light of the review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which is to take
place in June, I would like to make the following four
specific points:

First, greater coherence and coordination are
needed among the various United Nations offices
that make up the Strategy. That means reviewing the
Strategy's architecture and the definition of mandates.

Secondly, we must improve communication
and coordination between the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

Thirdly, it is important to guarantee that the
efforts of the Strategy are properly based on the four
action pillars, incorporating a broader agenda in terms
development, security and respect for human rights.

Fourthly, we must always favour a preventive
approach. That means addressing the causes
that lead to terrorism through two main actions:
enhancing the capacity-building of States and
strengthening development.

While it is understandable that we are trying
to prevent violent extremism so as to avoid the
proliferation of terrorism, it is crucial to think about the
implications. Mexico is concerned by the temptation to
merge the two concepts, which could lead to an overly
broad application of counter-terrorist measures and
potentially punish types of behaviour that under no
circumstances can be described as terrorist acts.

