Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for
his briefing to the Security Council today on current
developments. I also wish to express the thanks of my
delegation to you, Mr. President, for your guidance and
for the efforts over the past week throughout a difficult
process aimed at focusing the Security Council's
attention on the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip.

This continued prevailing crisis is the cumulative
result of the illegal, cruel and deliberate policies and
practices of Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza Strip. It has
involved - as mentioned by Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe - the illegal collective punishment of the
population through the total closure of Gaza's border
crossings and the obstruction of access to essential
humanitarian supplies and fuel, as well as military
attacks in Gaza by the occupying forces, which have
caused much death, destruction and widespread
suffering among the civilian population.

The efforts of the Council presidency were
intended to steer the Council towards responding to
this humanitarian tragedy and alleviating the human
suffering of the Palestinian civilian population by
calling upon Israel, the occupying Power, to open the
border crossings of the Gaza Strip and to allow for the
safe passage of humanitarian personnel, urgently
needed food, medicine and fuel and persons in need of
medical treatment outside of Gaza.

Regrettably, however, the Security Council was
once again unable to reach consensus and has thus
been unable to act effectively to address the situation.
Although the draft presidential statement that had been
under consideration fell short of adequately and justly
addressing this situation through lifting the blockade
and thus responding to the humanitarian plight of our
besieged people in Gaza, that draft would nevertheless
have constituted a minimal response by the Council to
that crisis, which continues to this day.

In that regard, we thank those members of the
Security Council that expressed their support for the
draft presidential statement, and we also express our
appreciation for the principled positions taken by the
majority of Security Council members towards this
humanitarian issue and by all those who participated in
the debate last week and conveyed their firm solidarity
with the Palestinian people at this difficult time.

In that context, the Arab Group engaged
constructively in this exercise under the leadership of
the Saudi Arabian delegation, chair of the Arab Group
this month. The Group demonstrated a high degree of
flexibility and remained focused on the humanitarian
situation in Gaza, with the hope of seeing the Security
Council assume its responsibilities and respond in a
timely, practical manner to this ongoing and escalating
tragedy. Unfortunately, this was not the case. We wish
to express our deep disappointment that, although we
turned to the Security Council and appealed for action,
no decisive action was taken. The failure by the
Security Council to deal with this issue will not help to
ameliorate the situation on the ground, it will not help
advance the peace process and, indeed, it will not
stimulate people's confidence in the ability of the
Security Council to effectively address the serious
issues that come before it, such as those we are now
faced with.

As we meet here today, the Palestinian
humanitarian crisis in Gaza continues to unfold and
expand, with both foreseeable and unforeseeable
consequences for the Palestinian civilian population,
for the stability of our region and for the prospects for
peace. The policy of starving and imposing poverty and
imprisonment on an entire civilian population can
never bring calm or contribute to an environment
conducive to the pursuit of peace. Combined with the
Violent military assaults and war crimes relentlessly
committed by Israel, the occupying Power, these
policies will only deepen the despair and hopelessness
of the Palestinian people and further destabilize the
situation. That will then lead to the fomenting of
further resentment and frustration, fuelling the Vicious
cycle of violence we have long tried to break,

including through several unilateral ceasefires worked
out by President Abbas that have been repeatedly
undermined by the occupying Power.

Today, despite our appeals and the international
outcry following Israel's escalation of its siege and
aggression against Gaza, no real action has been taken
and the situation continues to deteriorate. What we
have witnessed in recent days on the Gaza-Egypt
border in Rafah was a troubling and stark indication of
the depth of the desperation and deprivation of the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza. In this regard,
we wish to express our deep appreciation to the
Government of Egypt for the calm and sensitivity with
which it has dealt with this event.

Indeed, most of the thousands of people who
streamed across the border were merely seeking to
satisfy the basic needs of their families for food,
medicine and fuel for survival and, for many, to satisfy
the need for freedom of movement, even if for a short
time, following months of imprisonment in a very
small space in the Gaza Strip.

We reiterate that no pretext, reasoning or logic
can justify such inhumane and brutal treatment of
innocent civilians. Children, women, elderly persons,
disabled people, ill persons and entire families should
not, for any reason whatsoever, be forced into
destitution nor into near-starvation, be forced to do
without the basic necessities of life and be subjected to
constant Israeli military assaults and terror. It is
unjustifiable and morally unconscionable. International
law is supposed to protect civilians during times of
armed conflict, including foreign occupation, from
measures of collective punishment and reprisal, which
are strictly prohibited.

What is happening in Gaza is a deliberate man-
made catastrophe. The international community must
continue to vociferously reject this situation, and
Israel, the occupying Power, should be called upon to
immediately cease the unlawful policies and practices
that have created it. Israel should be compelled to
abide by its obligations under international law,
including its obligations towards the civilian
population under its occupation, in accordance with the
provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention.
Regardless of the excuses put forward by it, Israel
cannot and should not be absolved of its
responsibilities in this regard. Israel must be held
accountable. The situation before us thus requires
urgent humanitarian action as well as political action.

In this regard, we reiterate the need to respond to

the proposal made by the Palestinian Authority that it

should assume responsibility for the Palestinian side of

the Gaza border crossings. The Arab ministerial

meeting of 27 January 2008 endorsed this proposal,

which has already received Quartet as well as broad

international support. It has also earned the support of

the Security Council, as it deliberated on the draft
presidential statement last week and early this week.

President Abbas is in Cairo today, discussing this
matter with President Hosni Mubarak within the
context of previous agreements. This proposal is the
practical, sustainable means of addressing the
humanitarian crisis caused by the collective
punishment of 1.5 million Palestinians in the Gaza
Strip. It will enable the opening of the crossings and
the necessary movement of persons and goods into and
out of the Gaza Strip. Israel is obligated under
international law to ensure such movement and the
safe, unfettered access of humanitarian personnel,
including personnel of the United Nations, at the
forefront of which on the ground is the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), which continues to provide vital
assistance to the Palestinian civilian population at this
time. On behalf of Palestine, we wish to express our
thanks to UNRWA for the noble work it does,
particularly in Gaza.

The picture before us now in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
regrettably bleak. Progress in the newly relaunched
peace process remains elusive, while challenges
continue to be on the rise. Despite the recent
momentum and hopes generated by developments in
the international arena, including the important
Annapolis conference, which led to the resumption of
bilateral negotiations between the Israeli and
Palestinian sides, and despite the Paris donors'
conference and the Visit of President George Bush of
the United States to the region earlier this month, it is
the current developments on the ground, as Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe stated, that are now shaping
our environment and will determine the course of
future events. In this regard, momentum and hope are
being seriously harmed by Israel's unlawful practices
vis-a-vis the Gaza Strip, as well as by its continued
pursuit of illegal policies in the West Bank, aimed
mainly at advancing its illegitimate expansionist aims.

As we have repeatedly brought to Council's
attention in our letters regarding the situation, Israel

continues to carry out its illegal colonization campaign
through out the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem and the surrounding area. It
has been a relentless campaign and, although the
instances are too numerous to recount here, some do
exemplify the severity of the situation. Immediately
after the Annapolis Conference, Israeli officials
announced the continuation of settlement construction
in J abal Abu Ghneim - Har Homa - in occupied East
Jerusalem. Israel has continued its construction of
settlements in the Jordan Valley. Furthermore, last
week Israeli bulldozers razed large areas of the Al-
Quds University campus, in Beit Hanina, for road
construction intended to connect illegal Israeli
settlements.

The fact that the Israeli settlements established in
the occupied Palestinian territory constitute grave
breaches of international law is indisputable, having
been affirmed by the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the International Court of Justice, the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
and, indeed, by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, as stressed by Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe in his statement this morning. The fact that they
constitute a serious obstacle to the establishment of a
physically viable, contiguous independent Palestinian
State, and thus to the achievement of peace, is also
indisputable.

The Road Map, endorsed by the Security Council
in resolution 1515 (2003), clearly calls for an Israeli
freeze on all settlement activities and for the
dismantling of all settlement outposts. The Quartet has
repeatedly called on Israel to abide by that obligation.
Nevertheless, despite pledges to cease those illegal
activities, Israel, the occupying Power, continues its
colonization of the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in and around occupied East Jerusalem,
through its construction of settlements, the wall and the
bypass roads, as well as through all other illegal
measures intended to facilitate its plans for a de facto
annexation. Those measures include, inter alia, the
confiscation of land, the demolition of houses,
restrictions on residency and the permit regime.

In addition to their illegality, such colonization
activities are extremely provocative. They gravely
undermine the credibility of the peace process and
raise serious doubts as to Israel's good faith in
negotiations, since it cannot even cease its illegal
actions and continues to create still more obstacles on
the ground. In that regard, the settlements and the

wall- which are also having a grave impact on the
Palestinians' socio-economic conditions - clearly
jeopardize the prospects of achieving a peace
settlement based on the two-State solution, as they
severely fragment the Palestinian territory and destroy
its unity, integrity, contiguity and viability.

Thus, we reiterate our appeals to the international
community to call upon - indeed, to compel - Israel
to immediately cease all its illegal settlement activities
and its construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory, to abide by its legal obligations
and to immediately undertake confidence-building
measures that indicate its seriousness in addressing this
issue.

Meanwhile, in the West Bank, the occupying
Power continues to impose severe restrictions on the
movement of persons and goods through hundreds of
checkpoints and roadblocks, which have not been
reduced since the relaunching of the peace process and
which continue to have a negative impact on the socio-
economic life and recovery of the Palestinians. In
addition, while several prisoners have been released,
daily arrest campaigns are being carried out by Israel,
and Israel has maintained the number of Palestinians in
Israeli jails and detention centres at nearly 11,000,
including hundreds of children and women, most of
whom are being held in deplorable conditions.
Moreover, Israel continues to conduct military raids in
Palestinian towns and cities, including attacks on
Palestinian security forces, thus deliberately
undermining the efforts, the achievements and the
credibility of the Palestinian Authority with respect to
promoting calm and security for its own people.

These are all serious issues that require attention
and action. They also call into question Israel's true
intentions concerning the peace process, because their
continuation only ensures further deterioration of the
situation on the ground, hampers progress in the peace
process and threatens the entire process.

There can be no balance and no justice in the
continuation of this situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Once again, Israel remains
unaccountable for its human rights violations and its
grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention. Calls
and efforts for action at this critical juncture have been
subordinated to calls and efforts for "balance" in what
is, at its core, an extremely unbalanced situation.
While we are aware that both sides have
responsibilities under international law and

commitments under the agreements reached in the
peace process, to which the Palestinian leadership is
committed, this remains a situation of the foreign
occupation of an entire people, with daily violations of
their basic rights by the occupying Power through
collective punishment, military aggression and other
illegal measures. It is a situation in which the might of
power continues to prevail and to be emboldened, and
in which the forces for peace continue to be weakened.
But it is also a situation that is untenable and
unsustainable and that must be resolved. It is a
situation for which there is no military solution and for
which there must be a courageous and just political
solution based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map
and the Madrid principle of land for peace.

Therefore, we shall continue to look to the
international community for its support in upholding
international law to relieve the current humanitarian
crisis and for the ultimate realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. Despite the difficulties
we encounter, we continue to strongly believe in the
important role to be played by the international
community in promoting calm and stability, addressing
the humanitarian situation and advancing the peace
process. That collective support, encouragement and
commitment to principled positions based on
international law strengthen our resolve as a people to
realize our national rights and aspirations. That is why
we shall continue to highly value the role of the
Security Council as the principal United Nations organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. We shall continue to call on the Council
to actively carry out its duties and its own resolutions
on the question of Palestine until a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace is achieved.

