The President (spoke in Chinese): I welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General at this meeting.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 31 July 2007 from the
Permanent Representative of Ghana, in which he
requests that, in accordance with the practice of the
Security Council, Mrs. Alice Mungwa, Senior Political
Affairs Adviser of the Permanent Observer Mission of
the African Union to the United Nations, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda in accordance with rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Alice Mungwa.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mrs. Mungwa to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2007/468, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Congo, France,
Italy, Peru, Slovakia and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. Members of the Council
also have before them document S/2007/307/Rev.1,
which contains the text of a letter dated 5 June 2007
from the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on the hybrid operation in
Darfur, and document S/2007/307/Rev.1/Add.1, which
contains the preliminary cost estimates for the hybrid
operation.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana, Indonesia,
Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Slovakia, South Africa, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1769 (2007).

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


