At the outset, I wish to congratulate the German State Secretary on his country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this month. We appreciate his efforts and those of his predecessor, the Permanent Representative of France. We also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his comprehensive briefing and valuable efforts. Qatar has consistently stressed the importance of this quarterly debate and has been an eager participant in it, as we are convinced that the United Nations, and particularly the Security Council, has a vital role to play in peacekeeping, security and the resolution of the many crises afflicting the Middle East region - of which Qatar is a part - as they strive to promote security, stability and prosperity. Since the previous debate (see S/2020/341), the world's attention has remained focused on the enormous common challenge of the crisis caused by the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which should serve as an additional incentive to resolve crises in the Middle East peacefully, given the pandemic's health- related, political, economic and social repercussions. Today, three months after the previous meeting, we again underscore the importance of the Organization's calls for a ceasefire in all conflicts in order to focus on the response to the pandemic and the threats that it poses, which do not distinguish among belligerents. The risk of destabilization increases with every day that the fundamental issue in the Middle East, namely, the Palestinian question, goes unresolved. Qatar has always stressed its principled support for efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace and at resolving the Palestinian question. The only way to settle all aspects of the issue is through direct negotiations between the parties, with international support, on the basis of international law, internationally recognized resolutions, the agreed terms of reference, the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, leading to the realization of a two-State solution and the establishment of an independent and viable State of Palestine within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and security. The occupation of all Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan and the occupied Lebanese territories, must come to an end, as must all settlement activity. Illegal settlements must be dismantled, and measures that alter the character, legal status and demographic composition of Jerusalem must be rescinded. The refugee question must be resolved in a just manner, and the Palestinian people's other inalienable rights must also be upheld. The unilateral annexation by Israel of Palestinian territories occupied illegally in 1967 would deal a blow to the two-State solution and to the prospects of a peaceful settlement, not to mention constituting a violation of international law and Security Council resolutions. Qatar reiterates its principled position in support of the Palestinian people's quest to exercise their legitimate rights. Qatar supports all efforts to create conditions conducive to peace, including the provision of humanitarian assistance to improve the difficult living conditions and economic circumstances faced by Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. Over the past eight years, Qatar has provided more than $1.2 billion in humanitarian and development assistance in the areas of education, electricity supply, infrastructure enhancement, housing and funding for employment opportunities. This year, it has pledged a grant of $150 million over six months, including support for the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. With its contribution - the largest of any Arab State - to the core budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Qatar also continues to play a leading role in supporting the Agency's delivery on its indispensable mandate. In addition to the Palestinian question, other regional crises have caused great destruction and suffering. The time has come to bring them to an end. In Syria, the Syrian people have endured enough. They and their country have suffered untold damage, and it is time for them to live in security and dignity. It has been shown that attempts to impose a military solution will not end the crisis. Instead, they will further endanger peace, security and stability, leading to more grave violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law, and to persistent humanitarian need. Qatar renews its call for a solution leading to a political transition that fulfils the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, in accordance with the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), and for the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) in its entirety. It also stresses the importance of accountability for war crimes and crimes against humanity, in order to ensure that justice is done, that the rights of victims are upheld and that the solution reached is sustainable. In Libya, the cause of and the solution to the crisis are clear. The illegal militias have carried out an attack on innocent civilian members of the Libyan population and on the legitimate, internationally recognized Government. They have had no compunction about perpetrating grave violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law, bombarding health-care facilities, laying landmines and systematically carrying out extrajudicial killings. They have undermined progress towards achieving national unity and resolving the conflict in accordance with the Skhirat Agreement, although the latter has been endorsed by the Security Council, which has recognized the Government formed pursuant thereto as the sole legitimate executive authority in Libya. Alarmingly, the militias have acted with external support, yet, despite the documented violations of Security Council resolutions, the international community has remained silent. While such dangers persist in Libya, with serious repercussions for the unity of its people, its territorial integrity and international peace and security, the only way to resolve the crisis is to support the Government of National Accord and commit to implementing the Skhirat Agreement, Security Council resolutions and the outcomes of the Berlin Conference. A political solution will succeed only if there is a clear and effective international mechanism in place to ensure that all agreements are implemented. Accordingly, Qatar calls for a solution to the crisis in Libya that preserves the country's sovereignty and unity and meets the aspirations and interests of all of the country's people, not merely those of certain parties with special interests and personal ambitions. That outcome is to be achieved through a return to negotiations and national dialogue devoid of tendentious external agendas and illegal foreign interference. We also support the efforts of the United Nations and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. Qatar looks forward to the day when the Yemeni people will turn the page on this painful chapter and overcome the current tragedy. There is an urgent need to address the humanitarian and economic needs of the Yemeni people, whose humanitarian crisis has reached catastrophic proportions, is causing further instability and poses a threat to peace and security in the region. The time has come to reach a settlement, to achieve a political solution to the crisis and to attain national reconciliation through comprehensive dialogue, in line with resolution 2216 (2015), while preserving the unity of Yemen and bringing security and stability to the country. In that connection, we reiterate our support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen in his efforts to implement his mandate. Against the backdrop of the multiple grave crises that endanger peace, security and stability in the Middle East, Qatar has for the past three years faced an arbitrary blockade and illegal unilateral measures that contravene the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of international law, international instruments and human rights, in addition to harming the public interest. On the third anniversary of the cyberpiracy crime that initially sparked the crisis on 23 May 2017, the start of illegal proceedings and the imposition of the unjust blockade on 5 June 2017, everyone has realized that the blockading States' justification and cover for those violations was flimsy and false. Nobody is fooled. While the blockading countries have continued to blatantly disregard the principles and the Charter of the United Nations and international law, those very principles have formed the basis of the Qatari approach to the crisis. Qatar has invoked international law to protect the rights of Qatari citizens and residents who have been adversely affected by the illegal actions taken against the country. It has appealed to international forums and judicial bodies, chief among them the International Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. Last week, the court rejected appeals by Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt over the jurisdiction of the International Civil Aviation Organization to consider the complaint by Qatar that the blockading States had closed their airspace to Qatari aircraft, in flagrant violation of international law and the relevant international conventions. The ruling is one of a series in the country's favour, including a court order issued in 2018 and 2019 on the violation by the United Arab Emirates of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. In June, the World Trade Organization (WTO) ruled that Saudi Arabia had violated its obligations under the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights by refusing to take action against, and even encouraging, the complex piracy of beoutQ. These judicial rulings attest to the integrity of the legal position of Qatar and the nullity of the actions taken against the country. Those illegal and unjustified actions and the ongoing malicious campaign notwithstanding, Qatar is committed to seeking to resolve the crisis peacefully and diplomatically, through mediation and constructive and unconditional dialogue, with all States respecting international law and the principle of equal sovereignty. In that connection, we once again express our appreciation for the efforts made by Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the State of Kuwait. In conclusion, given the dire need for peace and stability in the Middle East, all parties must make a serious effort to resolve the crises ravaging the region, which is so vital to the world. Qatar will continue to do everything in its power, in word and in deed, to help to resolve these crises peacefully, serve the interests of the States and the peoples of the region and curb all threats to peace, security and stability in the region and beyond.
