Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Germany on its presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September, and
to thank you, Sir, for convening this important open
debate. I also join previous speakers in congratulating
Ms. Leila Zerrougui on her appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We wish her every success in
discharging her responsibilities under her mandate and
look forward to working closely with her to that end.

Thailand is no less concerned than any other
country when it comes to violence against children in
all forms, not least in situations of armed conflict. We
recognize that the United Nations has an important
role to play in protecting children in such situations
and consider it incumbent upon Member States to help
the United Nations perform this task as efficaciously
as possible. It is in this spirit that I offer the following
Views.

First, we need to strengthen collaboration and
coordination within the United Nations system, as
well as between the United Nations and concerned
Governments. It speaks well of our love for children
that a large number of agencies, committees and treaty
bodies under the United Nations umbrella work on
child-related issues under various mandates. To make
the best use ofour time and resources, we need to ensure
that such mandates are clearly defined and carried out
in a transparent and accountable manner.

Secondly, we urge Security Council members
to consult further to clarify the listing and delisting
criteria. At present, once a country is put on the list, it
is not objectively clear what it must do to be removed.
The list thus becomes a hall of shame, rather than a
potential tool to encourage countries to work with the
United Nations on the shared goal of protecting children
in situations of armed conflict.

Thirdly, Thailand would like to stress the importance
of information used as the basis for the reports of the
Secretary-General and of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Such information needs to be
accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable, as stipulated
in paragraph 17 of resolution 1998 (2011). Inaccurate
information can lead to misdirection of resources and
efforts, not to mention much more serious consequences.

Finally, we must be ever mindful of the risk of
unintended consequences. The road to hell, it is said,
is paved with good intentions. To achieve the intended
results, along with good intentions we must also have
reliable information and a willingness to listen and
learn. As the State has the primary responsibility for
the protection of children, it is important for the United
Nations to at least work with Governments, rather than
against them.

Like any other Government, Thailand has the best
interests of its children at heart. We will continue to
work closely with the United Nations system on this
important issue to ensure to the best of our ability that
they are well protected.

