Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thanks the presidency of Azerbaijan
for having convened today's important open
debate - important not only for the members of the
Security Council but also for the general membership.

Argentina has historically advocated that efforts
to improve transparency, inclusivity, openness,
democratization and efficiency in the work of the
Security Council should be ongoing. Argentina is
therefore honoured to have the responsibility of chairing
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.

It is fundamental to recognize the positive
developments that have taken place in recent years,
including the holding of debates such as today's, which
provide an opportunity to all Members not members of
the Council to make proposals to improve our working
methods and democratize our decision-making
mechanism. Those developments are attributable to
the commitment of Council members, whom we thank,
and to their continuing responsibility to improve the
Council's working methods. However, that shared
responsibility to improve our working methods is also
a response to the ongoing support and initiatives of the
general membership, which appreciate all opportunities
to engage in a more interactive dialogue with the
Council so as to air the concerns of all Member States.

Argentina has engaged with enthusiasm in
its chairmanship the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, as
it has always done during its previous chairmanships
of the Working Group. We acknowledge that the other
members of the Council have consistently supported our
efforts to seek practical ways of making the Council's
work more transparent and of improving its dialogue
with the general membership, the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs), and other bodies.

In August, we adopted note S/20l3/515 on Security
Council dialogue with the broader membership and
other bodies in response to a commitment undertaken
years ago by the Council. Some of its elements are
reflected in note 507 of 2010. The note contains
provisions on open meetings, interactive dialogues,
Arria Formula meetings, invitations to the President
of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Chairs of
country-specific configurations to informal dialogues,
the need for subsidiary bodies to submit substantive
information to the wider membership and to add
momentum to their work, and the modalities of wrap-
up meetings.

The last item on that list must be stressed.
Several members of the Council acknowledge that its
methodology should and must be improved. Argentina
recognizes in particular the commitment ofthe Working
Group to take up the issue of wrap-up meetings so as
to develop them to their full potential for providing
summaries of the Security Council's monthly activities
and for highlighting for the general membership the
varying approaches and priorities of Council members
on agenda items. The wrap-up meetings are very
valuable, and we therefore urge all members to convene
them at the end of their respective presidencies and to
raise in the Working Group the issue of how to enhance
their interactive aspects and effectiveness.

Yesterday, 28 October, we adopted presidential note
8/2013/630, concerning consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries. With respect to the note,
the Working Group was always aware of the fact that
consultations with TCCs and PCCs are critical because
they improve the Council's ability to take effective and
timely decisions in exercising its responsibilities. Like
many other aspects, consultations with TCCs and PCCs
must be improved on an ongoing basis, as reflected
in the fact that in every debate on working methods,
the issue of dialogue with TCCs and PCCs is noted by
many members.

In note 630, the members of the Security Council
acknowledge the need to fully utilize all existing
options and to continue to improve consultations. The
note, which complements resolutions and presidential
notes on this matter, addresses two major aspects:
consultations with TCCs and PCCs and the provision of
information to those countries. It calls for consultations
with TCCs and PCCS, including at their request, with
respect to urgent situations that affect their operations,
in particular regarding the security of their personnel in
the field. It also calls for consultations in other important
circumstances in a peacekeeping operation, such as
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding,
drawdown, an increase or decrease in personnel, and
termination.

I note that in addition to the meetings organized
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Council could convene informal meetings with a view
to engaging in an interactive dialogue with TCCs and
PCCs. With respect to the provision of information, the
note indicates that the Secretariat will provide potential
TCCs and PCCs with all the information they require
to take the decisions to participate in a peacekeeping
operation. The note addresses a variety of issues, and I
reiterate that it answers all of the concerns of the general
membership, which have been heard and heeded. The
note points out that, with respect to the renewal of
mandates, the Secretary-General shall provide a copy
of his reports to the TCCs and PCCs sufficiently in
advance of meetings.

To conclude, as on previous occasions when
Argentina has chaired the Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, we are
convinced that, without impact on its decision-making
abilities, the Council could and must be more transparent
in its its relations with the general membership. I am
grateful for the support I have received from all the
other members of the Working Group, who have without
exception worked in a constructive spirit, which I trust
we will continue to enjoy.
I also thank the group of members that are engaged
in an analysis of the concerns of general membership in
respect of this issue, as well as all members taking part
in today's debate. Their views assist in the ongoing task
of improving our working methods.

