Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the European
Union (EU). The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Liechtenstein, members of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.

In the interests of time, the EU will deliver an
abbreviated statement. The complete and official
statement is being distributed in the Council Chamber.

The European Union welcomes this debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding and agrees that there are
critical gaps in terms of leadership, civilian capability
and speed and flexibility of funding. The European
Union is committed to continue enhancing its own
capacities to address these gaps through its various
sources and to continue working with others, not least
the United Nations, to that end.

Efficient response to peacebuilding challenges in
a post-conflict country largely depends on the capacity
of the international community to come together
behind a nationally owned common strategy in a
coordinated and integrated way, cutting across the
political, security and development fields, including in
the immediate post-conflict phase.

The European Union has been working to
develop its role in this area over the past few years,
based on its ability to draw on a broad range of
security and development instruments and its
widespread geographic presence. The recent period has
seen both the strengthening of each set of tools and
efforts to improve their coordination. Particular
attention is being paid to integrating political, security
and development concerns in the European Union's
overall approach.

Areas of support in which this integration is the
most visible include security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, with
attention to the security-development nexus. For
example, an integrated approach to security sector
reform is being put in practice by the EU in Guinea
Bissau, where all aspects of the reform, civilian and
military, are being addressed by the available EU
instruments.

The European Union underscores also the impact
of climate change, which can significantly increase
instability in fragile States by overstretching the
already limited capacity of Governments to respond
effectively to the challenges they face. The European
Union also underlines the importance of effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, recognizing the vital role of the
active participation of women at all levels in post-
conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding.

The European Union firmly believes that
adherence to the rule of law is critical to conflict
prevention, stabilization of fragile and conflict-affected
environments and sustainable long-term development.
Peace and justice are not conflicting goals. The
European Union strongly supports the International
Criminal Court and its activities and remains
convinced that there can be no sustainable peace
without justice.

The European Union underlines the importance
of the international community coming together behind
a common strategy as often as possible. When dealing
with an immediate post-conflict phase, the
international community needs to have a common
strategy and a common understanding of what the
needs are - what needs to be done, when and by
whom - both at the international level and on the
ground. In both cases there is a need to identify
leadership or agree upon a division of labour. At the
international level, the key is coordination of action.
On the ground, that agreement should materialize
through cooperation by actors in order to consolidate
action and achieve results.

The European Union recognizes the importance
of leadership on the ground and deploys EU special
representatives who, together with the network of
European Commission delegations in the field, work
closely with the Secretary-General's special
representatives and their staff in the field. As part of
the EU crisis response toolbox, European Community
tools were also upgraded to allow for more rapid and
flexible funding of crisis response programmes.

The European Union agrees that effective
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is essential. We recognize the important
role of the United Nations in integrating political,
security and development approaches in stabilization
and recovery contexts. In many instances, post-conflict
stabilization assistance provided under EU instruments
is implemented in support of United Nations operations
or even channelled through United Nations
mechanisms. That cooperation must be pursued.

The European Union remains committed to the
strengthening of United Nations crisis management
capacities, including on the basis of the joint statement
on EU-United Nations cooperation in crisis
management. That will continue to be a priority for the
EU. In particular, there is scope for increased
EU/United Nations cooperation in support of the
efforts of the African Union and African subregional
organizations in establishing the African peace and
security architecture. In that regard, the joint Africa/EU
strategy and its first action plan provide a solid base
for future developments.

The European Union remains committed to
playing an active role in supporting the peacebuilding
efforts of the United Nations. In that regard, we
recognize that the Peacebuilding Commission is a
valuable international instrument that can help post-
conflict States to overcome challenges to sustainable
peace. We commend the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission to date in promoting peace in Burundi,
Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau. We hope that the
Commission will incrementally be able to consider
countries that are more immediately post-conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
constructive debate. Let me reaffirm that it is a priority
for the European Union to continue to provide its
expertise and resources to post-conflict peacebuilding
around the world as a partner of the United Nations.

