Mr. Miiftiioglu (Turkey): As this is the first
Security Council open debate on the Middle East
since the historic General Assembly meeting of
29 November 2012 (see A/67/PV.44), allow me to start
by expressing once again our sincere congratulations
to the Palestinian leadership, represented today by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the observer State
of Palestine, on the long-awaited and well-deserved
international recognition of Palestinian statehood.

Turkey considers the overwhelming support of the
international community to be an initial step towards
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. Yet
it is unrealistic to expect that the peace can prevail
when the fundamental pillars of the two-State vision
are undermined time and again by the settlement
policies of Israel. Since the previous open debate
(see S/PV.6847), we have learned of the intention of
the Israeli Government to build on the so-called E-l
area. Invitations to tender for the construction of
new buildings in Kiryat Arba and Efrat, approval to
construct 1,500 new units in Ramat Shlomo and the
initiation of the planning process to build in Givat
Hamatos and Gilo are policies and actions that show the
clear intention to render impossible a realistic and viable
two-State solution. We also call for the resumption of
the transfer of tax and clearance revenues that Israel
owes Palestine, in line with the Paris Protocol.

Not only Turkey, but also the vast majority of the
international community is seriously worried about such
acts. The Secretary-General has also repeatedly voiced
his concerns regarding the ongoing illegal settlement
activity. As such, statements by the Israeli leadership
indicating that no settlements in the West Bank will be
removed are regrettable, as is the announcement that no
harm to the contiguity between Jerusalem and Maale
Adumim will be allowed.

The peace process is going through a crucial period.
Amid reports that the prospect of a two-State solution
is diminishing every day, the international community
should provide its full support and motivate the parties
towards results-oriented negotiations. We welcome the
recent meetings between President Abbas and Khaled
Mashaal as a very important step towards long-overdue
Palestinian reconciliation. There is no doubt that a
united Palestinian voice will bring further support to
the Palestinian cause.

As the elections in Israel are just completed, we
sincerely hope that the results will facilitate a way to
peace. Turkey will continue to support the peace process
and the rightful aspirations of the Palestinian people
to internationally recognized statehood, in accordance
with United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Turkey therefore welcomed the Palestinian appeal
for membership in the United Nations, submitted by
President Mahmoud Abbas on 23 September 2011
(S/2011/592, annex I), and continues to support the right
of Palestine to be represented under this roof among its
international peers.

The ceasefire achieved with the able mediation of
Egypt following Israel's latest military operation into
Gaza required steps to be taken regarding the lifting
of the illegal blockade on Gaza. Yet another two
months have passed, adding up to more than five years
of collective punishment of the Palestinians living
in Gaza. We call on the international community to
continue to pursue its efforts to help end that illegal
blockade once and for all.

Last week, the Council heard from Ms. Navi Pillay
and Ms. Valerie Amos about the humanitarian dimension
of the Syrian crisis and the latest developments on the
ground. Today, we have listened to the briefing of
Special Coordinator Mr. Serry. With more than 60,000
dead, 2 million displaced and 4 million in need ofurgent
humanitarian assistance, the crisis in Syria is the most
rapidly growing humanitarian crisis in the world. The
Syrian people are desperately waiting for action from
the international community, especially from this very
Council. The total number of asylum seekers hosted
in 15 active camps in Turkey has reached 158,000.
Five more camps are under construction to meet the
increasing demand.

We have said many times before, and I repeat
once again, that we will continue, with the help of the
relevant United Nations bodies and other international
actors, to extend our helping hand to the Syrian people
during this dire period. That said, we categorically
refute the allegations that were unfairly directed at my
country earlier today by one of the previous speakers.

It is a fact that crises in the Middle East are not easy
to confine. Their ramifications have the potential to
threaten regional peace and stability, and even beyond.
Things become even more complex when different
crises become intertwined. That is exactly what we see
in the case of Palestinian refugees in Syria.

Through its overwhelming majority vote,
the international community sent a message on
29 November 2012 (see General Assembly resolution 67/19). We hope that the message is read correctly and
followed ambitiously. While welcoming the efforts of
the Secretary-General and the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Serry, we call on the international community to give
its decisive support to the resumption of comprehensive
peace negotiations between the parties for a just and
lasting solution based on international recognition of
Palestine, with the 1967 borders and East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side in peace with Israel.

