Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Today more than ever,
the Middle East is a cauldron of conflict. War and
suffering have steadily spread from their epicentre,
the Palestinian-Israeli dispute in the Holy Land. The
prospects for peace between Israel and the Palestinians
are abysmal. The current Israeli leadership is fast
closing off the possibility of a two-State solution,
formally accepted by the parties and the international
community. It is doing this willfully, through its policy
of expanding settlements, demolitions and incitement,
accompanied by the refusal to engage in a meaningful
dialogue to implement the internationally agreed two-
State solution.

Violence by the occupation forces against
Palestinian children, women and other innocent
Palestinians continues. Illegal Israeli settlements in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem increased by 250 per cent
during the first three months of this year as compared
with the last.

A report of the Office of the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process last week rightly
acknowledged that the viability of a two-State solution
was in danger. There is an ever-present danger of
another intifada ifa credible peace process is not revived
rapidly. Unless the Israeli Government agrees to resume
the implementation of the two-State solution and halts
and reverses its policy of expanding settlements, the
Security Council must, in accordance with its mandate

and its own resolutions, adopt a concrete and legally
binding plan to implement the two-State solution and
take the necessary measures for its enforcement.

A two-State solution was promised by the
international community to the Palestinian people.
This promise was a solemn one and must be kept. An
independent, contiguous and viable state of Palestine,
based on the pre-1967 borders and with Al-Quds
Al-Sharifas its capital, is and must remain our objective.

Pakistan, for its part, remains committed to
supporting the Palestinians in their decades-long
legitimate struggle for their rights and for their dignity.
The President of Pakistan reaffirmed this commitment
when he met President Abbas at the Extraordinary
Summit of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in
Jakarta last month.

It will be difficult to resolve the other crises that
have proliferated in the Middle East or to stem the rise
of terrorism and extremism if the world does not find
ajust and durable solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Meanwhile, what was termed the Arab Spring has
turned into a winter of despair and suffering. The scale
of the suffering in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and elsewhere is
unprecedented in its scope and intensity.

As we discuss solutions here today, people continue
to endure unimaginable suffering, and their exodus has
created a humanitarian catastrophe. There is an urgent
need for statesmanship, diplomacy and dialogue. The
political and ideological polarization in the region has
exacerbated the consequences of external intervention,
intensified sectarian and ethnic divisions and rendered
political solutions more difficult.

The unity displayed by the international community
in combating the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIS) is a critical first step. But these efforts will
be successful only once the world has addressed the
underlying reasons for the appeal of its toxic ideology
to so many young and impressionable people in so
many countries.

Syria recently marked the fifth anniversary of
its conflict. Every succeeding year has been worse
than the one before. The Syrian people continue to
suffer unimaginable hardships. Atrocities are being
committed by all sides.

We all agree that there is no military solution to this
conflict. It is therefore critical that the fragile cessation
of hostilities be maintained and that the proximity talks
in Geneva, reconvened last week, at least chart a way
forward towards a negotiated settlement.

We support the efforts of the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy to Syria, Staffan de Mistura, and hope
that all sides will accord primacy to the interests of the
Syrian people in evolving a durable political solution to
this vicious conflict, in accordance with the principles
of the United Nations Charter.

Positive signs are also emerging from Yemen. A
truce was agreed last week and, although the direct
face-to-face dialogue that was to be initiated in Kuwait
earlier today has encountered a difficulty, we hope that
will be temporary. We note with hope the statement
of Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed in the
Council last week that,

"[we] have never been so close to peace." (S/PV7672, p. 4).

It will not be easy to restore peace and stability
in the Middle East. Beyond diplomacy and a genuine
commitment on the part of all Powers and parties to
negotiated solutions, a comprehensive and enlightened
policy is needed to address and overcome the underlying
political, economic and social causes ofthose conflicts.

My country stands ready to make its contribution
to the construction of a new and peaceful order in the
Middle East.

