Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to preface my remarks by thanking the
United States presidency for having convened this
very important meeting. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), Mr. David Shearer, for his briefing.
We reiterate our full support for all the work that he and
his team are doing in the country.

Similarly, we welcome the briefing of the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Senegal, Ambassador
Gorgui Ciss, pertaining to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan, which is chaired by Senegal.

The current situation in South Sudan is one of
the most alarming in the world. A huge part of the
population suffer high levels of insecurity as a result of
the ongoing armed clashes between the various actors.
They are also faced with the worst humanitarian crisis
since their independence. We reiterate our full support
for the efforts of the Secretary-General as he seeks
to find a solution that will open the door to lasting
and sustainable peace in South Sudan. The cessation
of hostilities and the resumption of a dialogue-led
peace process is key. There must also be an end to all
restrictions on humanitarian access and these must be
the key priorities on which we must focus our efforts at
this juncture.

In a similar vein, we pay tribute to the key
role played by regional organizations in the quest
for a solution to the conflict. We welcome the
communique of the thirtieth extraordinary summit
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
Heads of State and Government on South Sudan made
on 25 March. We call on the Government of South
Sudan to implement the ceasefire and the general
amnesty, which would promote participation in the
process of national dialogue. In the same way, we urge
all stakeholders to work with the Government along
those lines and to guarantee an inclusive political
process in which all people of South Sudan will have an
opportunity to express their needs and to contribute to
the development of the country.

The ongoing support of the African Union,
the Security Council and the entire international
community, as well as the good offices of the Chair
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
Mr. Festus Mogae, and the African Union High
Representative for South Sudan, Mr. Alpha Konare',
will be crucial to ensuring that this dialogue process is
genuinely inclusive and that it enjoys legitimacy.

With regard to the security situation, we are
concerned about the recent clashes in Pajok and
the town of Wau, which have left more than a dozen
people dead. We condemn them and we hope that the
Government will speedily bring those responsible
to justice with full regard to due process. One of the
key issues in the efforts to achieve peace in South
Sudan is the transitional judicial process, because such
acts cannot go unpunished. We therefore call for full
compliance with chapter V of the peace agreement and
trust that the African Union will take all necessary
steps to ensure that a hybrid court can be established so
that South Sudan can deliver impartial, credible justice.

We welcome the progress that has been made so
far on the deployment of a regional protection force
and call on all those involved to ensure that it is fully
deployed as soon as possible, in order to achieve its
key goal, which is to ensure the safety and security of
civilians in South Sudan.

On the humanitarian front, and to echo an issue
raised by Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien,
we call on the international community and the relevant
international entities to make the necessary aid available
so that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) can respond to the worrying situation
of famine in former Unity state. So far, according
to information from OCHA, less than 30 per cent of
the necessary financing is in place. We also urge the
Government of South Sudan to cooperate fully with
UNMISS so that it can fulfil the mandate conferred
on it by the Security Council. It is also important to
ensure that we can guarantee the safety and security
of humanitarian workers in South Sudan so that they
can deliver aid to the hundreds of thousands of South
Sudanese in need.

In conclusion, Bolivia commends the bravery
of UNMISS and the humanitarian workers in South
Sudan at a time when security issues are so evident.
Despite that, they continue to do their work in a spirit
of professionalism and dedication, and we are grateful
to them.

