Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join others in thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the two Tribunals for their oral briefings this
morning. We are also thankful for the written report
(S/2005/343 and Corr.1) before us.

The report on the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) states that 41 cases are earmarked
for transfer to national jurisdictions, with 15 cases
having been transferred to Rwanda and 10 additional
cases to follow shortly. We support the Prosecutor's
assertion that it is important to transfer those cases to
African countries in which certain suspects are living.
We also support the proposition that capacity-building
and assistance should be provided to Rwanda and to
other national jurisdictions that will take up those
trials.

We applaud the various strategies adopted by the
ICTR, both in the pre-trial and trial stages, that are
meant to expedite the trying of cases. We especially
applaud the election of 18 ad litem judges in 2003.
That followed the adoption of resolution 1512 (2003),
which increased the number of ad litem judges - who
can take office at any time - from four to nine. The
competence conferred upon ad litem judges to
adjudicate over pre-trial matters will go a long way
towards helping achieve the Tribunal's completion
strategy.

We commend the Governments of Norway and
the United Kingdom for their voluntary contributions,
which have enabled the ICTR to commence and finish
the construction of the fourth courtroom at Arusha.
That is also an important contribution to the Tribunal's
completion strategy.

On the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the arrival at The Hague of
an unprecedented number of indictees, bringing the
total up to 51 persons awaiting trial, is a good sign that
war criminals in the former Yugoslavia will not go
unpunished. We commend the establishment by the
Tribunal's President of two working groups to examine
expediting trials and appeals while maintaining the
Tribunal's established regard for due process.

We believe that the Council's April 2005 decision
to remove restrictions on the re-election of ICTY
ad litem judges and the General Assembly's election of
a new pool of ad litem judges in the near future will
help the Tribunal achieve its completion strategy.
However, we note that the ICTY report does not offer a
specified completion framework for its mandate as a
result of a number of outstanding issues.

We share the concerns about the inadequate
cooperation extended to the Tribunal by some States in
the region. We are still concerned that some of the
most notorious indictees - Ratko Mladic, Radovan
Karadzic and Ante Gotovina - still remain at large.
We agree with the assertion that the ICTY will not have
completed its mission if those three are not brought to
The Hague to face justice. We urge Croatia, Serbia and
Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate
fully with the ICTY to bring all the remaining 10
indictees, including the three leaders, to The Hague as
soon as possible. Attempts by those fugitives to outlast
the ICTY should never be allowed to succeed.

In early 2005, the United Nations administration
lifted the freeze on recruitment of new staff, which had
threatened the completion strategies of both Tribunals.
We are happy to note that the lifting of the freeze has
had positive results on the work of the Tribunals. The
ICTR and the ICTY should continue to receive
resources to enable them to carry out their functions. In
that regard, we appeal to all Member States to pay their
contributions to the two Tribunals.

Lastly, we wonder whether the Presidents and the
Prosecutors could share with us their views concerning
the transfer of cases to national jurisdictions. As the
exclusion of the death sentence is a condition to such
transfers, what are the pitfalls for such transfers to
countries whose legislation does not exclude the
application of such a sentence, in View of the fact that
such exclusion might establish national double
standards for similar crimes?

