The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Portugal and Timor-Leste in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Borges
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/319, which contains a letter from the
Secretary-General transmitting a letter from the
President, Prime Minister and Speaker of the National
Parliament of Timor-Leste.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to documents 8/2006/320, S/2006/325,
S/2006/326 and S/2006/327, which contain letters from
Australia, New Zealand and Portugal.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council received briefings
from the Secretariat on the situation in Timor-
Leste on 24 and 25 May 2006.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at developments in Timor-Leste,
recognizes the urgency of the deteriorating
security situation and condemns acts of violence
against people as well as destruction of property.

"The Security Council urges the
Government of Timor-Leste to take all necessary
steps to end the violence with due respect for
human rights and to restore a secure and stable
environment.

"The Security Council urges all parties in
Timor-Leste to refrain from violence and to
participate in the democratic process.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
request made by the Government of Timor-Leste
to the Governments of Portugal, Australia, New
Zealand and Malaysia to dispatch defence and
security forces under bilateral arrangements.

"The Security Council welcomes the
positive responses made by the Governments
concerned and fully supports their deployment of
defence and security forces to urgently assist
Timor-Leste in restoring and maintaining
security.

"The Security Council looks forward to
close cooperation between the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste and the forces of the
Governments concerned.

"The Security Council welcomes the
initiatives of the Secretary-General, including his
intention to send a special envoy to Timor-Leste
in order to facilitate the political dialogue.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to follow closely the situation
in Timor-Leste and to report on developments, as
necessary.

"The Security Council will continue to
monitor closely the situation in Timor-Leste and
confirms that it will act, as appropriate."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/25.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 p.m.

