Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to recognize that
the presence of Deputy-Secretary-General Eliasson
brings additional awareness and attention to this
important subject.

In December 2010, a Tunisian police officer
confiscated the cart of a young street vendor. The
same young man had been harassed by local officials
for years. Instead of upholding the law, the police
demanded a bribe to return the card. Humiliated,
distraught and denied legal recourse, the young man
went to the headquarters of the provincial Government
and lit himself on fire. That young Tunisian became
a symbol for men and women in the Arab world who
long for freedom. Tens ofmillions ofpeople understood
the desperation felt by that young vendor because they
too live in a society without an honest judiciary, an
independent media or free elections.

Across the Middle East and North Africa, nations
are sinking under the crippling weight of corruption,
tyranny and inequality. Mahatma Gandhi famously
said, "A nation's greatness is measured by how it treats
its weakest members."

In too many parts of the Middle East, the rule of
law is not used to protect and defend citizens but rather
to discriminate against them. Women are denied their
opportunities to make decisions about their future,
such as getting an education, pursuing a profession and
earning money and choosing how to spend it. In Saudi
Arabia, women need a guardian's permission to marry,
take classes and travel. That is also the only country
in the world that bans women from driving cars. Not
long ago, a few brave women defied the ban and were
detained by police and fined for the so-called crime of
tarnishing the Kingdom's reputation. Tarnishing the
Kingdom's reputation? The real stain on the Kingdom
is its failure to recognize that by relegating half of
its population to the back seat, Saudi Arabia is being
steered off course.

In addition to upholding draconian laws that
marginalize their civilians, the judicial systems in
many Arab nations subject women to unspeakable
injustice and violence. Syria and Iraq's legal systems
allow rapists to avoid punishment by marrying their
victims, while Iranian women are arrested, beaten and
even mutilated with acid for not conforming to the
regime's so-called moral code.

This past summer, three Iranian Christians were
found guilty of "crimes against State security" and
sentenced to 10 years in prison. What was the terrible
crime that threatened Iran's security? The three
Christians were selling Bibles. Iran abuses its judicial
system to deny its citizens due process and subject
prisoners to inhumane and degrading punishments such
as lashings and execution. In 2013, 624 people were
executed in Iran, many in secret. Just a few weeks ago,
the regime hanged a poet for criticizing its treatment of
minorities.

Nation after nation in the Middle East mercilessly
persecutes its citizens and seeks to mandate what they
should believe, how they should act and whom they can
love. In Lebanon, in Egypt and in Syria, the penalty for
being gay is imprisonment, while in Yemen and Iran
the penalty is death.

In a region known for intolerance and repression,
Israel stands out for its commitment to the rule of law.
Our Declaration of Independence ensures that the
majority governs, while minorities enjoy equal rights.
In fact, our Arab citizens in Israel have more rights
than Arabs anywhere else in the Middle East.

While most nations in the region relegate women
to the margins of society, Israeli women are leaders
in every field and discipline, from courtrooms to
classrooms and from operating theatres to boardrooms.
More than 40 years ago, Golda Meir became Israel's
first female Prime Minister, making my country then
just the third in the world to elect a woman to its highest
office.

Israel's commitment to the free exchange of ideas
has made it a destination of choice for reporters,
academics and human rights activists. They know that
they can speak freely without fear of arbitrary arrest,
imprisonment or execution. If someone here were
put on trial and had to pick which legal system in the
Middle East would hear their case, which nation would
they choose? I suspect they would select Israel, where
they are guaranteed their day in court, as opposed to
our neighbours, where the judicial system is nothing
short of a nightmare.

Israel's commitment to freedom means that the
burden of condemnation falls disproportionately on
Israel. It also means that our struggle to combat terrorism
is made more difficult because of our determination to
respect the rule of law. As former Israeli Chief Justice
Aharon Barak said, "A democracy must sometimes
fight with one hand tied behind its back. Even so, a
democracy has the upper hand."

The character of a society can be assessed by its
commitment to a system of laws that both protect and
liberate its citizens. Insecure tyrannies deny their
citizens the security of an impartial judiciary. Israel,
on the other hand, understands that the rule of law is
key to unlocking opportunity. By ensuring its citizens
enjoy freedom and empowerment, Israel has built a
thriving, prosperous and robust society. While those
freedoms present real challenges to our security, Israel
is secure in the knowledge that the long-term benefits
far outweigh the short-term costs.

A society cannot be truly free until its citizens
have the right to challenge the status quo and to openly
speak their minds. The Council should do everything
in its power to support the brave few who live and die
by such ideas.

Somewhere there is a soldier who knows that he is
outnumbered and outgunned but who stands tall at his
post. Somewhere there is a police officer who refuses
to take a bribe even as he struggles to feed his family.
Somewhere there is a peaceful protester raising her voice
against oppression, knowing that the consequences will
be grave. Such men and women are willing to risk their
lives because they believe that every person deserves
freedom and dignity. They are role models for us all.
Let us be inspired by their courage; let us be driven by

their strength; and let us strive to be worthy guardians
of their ideals.

