Mr. Apakan (Turkey): The Israeli-Palestinian
dispute continues to imperil prospects for peace and
stability in the Middle East. At a time when we need
a spirit of reconciliation and political resolve, Israel's
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory are
undermining the two-State solution and the established
parameters for a just and durable peace. That situation
is neither viable nor acceptable.

The settlement activities of Israel continue
unabated. With unprecedented indifference, Israel not
only persists in its illegal practices, but also attempts
to legitimize them. The report issued by the former
Israeli Supreme Court Justice Edmond Levy is yet
another example. The Israeli actions unfortunately defy
all moral value systems. The recent news about the
intention of the Israeli Ministry of Defence to demolish
eight Palestinian villages in the South Hebron Hills,
to use the territory as a military exercise area and to
resettle its inhabitants elsewhere is also worrisome.

Turkey supports the rightful aspirations of the
Palestinian people to internationally recognized
statehood. The Palestinians should be able to exercise
their rights in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Turkey thus welcomes the
Palestinian application for membership to the United
Nations, submitted by President Mahmoud Abbas on
23 September 2011 (S/2011/592, annex I), and praises
the Palestinian reconciliation efforts fostered by Egypt.
A united Palestinian front will draw wider support
from the international community.

Turkey also respects the right of all peoples to
live in peace and security and rejects the use of force
and means of terror. In that context, we condemn the
suicide bombing targeting Israeli tourists in Bulgaria
on 18 July.

The illegal blockade on Gaza is now in its sixth year.
The grave situation in housing, health care and other
primary services in Gaza is, no doubt, an embarrassment
to the international community, but responsibility lies
first and foremost with its perpetrator.

Let me quote the statistics of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which may help
to visualize the level of suffering in Gaza. Eighty per
cent of people in Gaza are aid recipients. Forty-four per
cent of them are food insecure. Seventy-one thousand
new housing units are required to meet urgent demand.
There are electricity outages for up to 12 hours a day.
More than 90 per cent of the Gaza aquifer is unsafe
for human consumption. Such collective punishment
should come to an end without further delay. Israel has
yet to shoulder its responsibilities regarding the attack
on the civilian humanitarian aid convoy in high seas,
which resulted in the death of nine civilians.

Before I conclude my statement, I would also like
to mention the situation in Syria. With the continuous
assaults by Government forces, the number of
casualties reportedly only last week exceeded 1,200,
which was the highest since the beginning of the crisis.
The total number of deaths has reached more than
19,000. We are deeply concerned about the reports that
the Government of Syria is using fighter jets to attack
population centres.

As the number of Syrians seeking shelter in Turkey
exceeds 40,000, Turkey will continue to support
the people of Syria at this dire time. We once again
call for an end to the violence in Syria and for the
implementation of the six-point plan of the Special
Envoy to Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan, with immediate
effect. As the shooting down of the Turkish military
aircraft in international airspace showed, the crisis in
Syria increasingly poses a threat to regional peace and
security.

The socio-political transformation in the Middle
East, triggered by the rightful aspirations of its peoples
to a better life, exposes us to a volatile situation,
in which strong commitment to the principles of
democracy, respect for human rights and the rule of
law are essential. Such principles also apply to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, where the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people are threatened. Thus, while
welcoming the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Special Coordinator Serry, we call on the international
community to give its decisive support to a just and
lasting solution based on international recognition of
Palestine, with the 1967 borders and East Jerusalem at
its capital and living side by side in peace with Israel.

