Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned about the current humanitarian
situation in Syria and attaches great importance to
efforts to mitigate it. With the implementation of the
de-escalation areas in Syria, the overall situation
has improved, which has in turn created favourable
conditions for such operations. The international
community should make concerted efforts to ensure
that progress in this area continues.

In our view, the international community's
humanitarian operations in Syria must be based on the
guiding humanitarian principles of the United Nations

and relevant international law. We must ensure that all
Syrians in the de-escalation areas receive timely help.
The cross-border delivery of humanitarian assistance
is a special measure taken in special circumstances,
and it must be carried out on a basis of full respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria and in strict compliance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

The associated operations should be subjected to
United Nations monitoring, whose transparency should
be improved, while efforts must be made to strengthen
coordination with the Syrian Government.

Against that backdrop, China participated
constructively in the negotiations on resolution 2393
(2017), which extends the mandate for cross-border
delivery of humanitarian assistance. China has on
many occasions underscored its hope that the parties
will continue their patient consultations in order
that consensus may be achieved. China commends
the sponsors, including co-penholders Egypt and
Sweden, for their efforts to promote consensus on
the resolution. We note that the sponsors took on
board recommendations by some members to enhance
monitoring over the delivery of cross-border deliveries.
We also note, however, that some of members'
legitimate concerns were not fully included. We
believe there is still room for improving the resolution.
Council members should have been allowed more time
to carry out consultations to reach consensus. In those
circumstances, China had to abstain in the voting.

The political process in Syria has entered a critical
stage. The international community must be firmly
behind the United Nations so that the Organization can
play a role as the main channel for mediation in order to
help the parties in Syria to find a settlement acceptable
to all through peaceful negotiations. That is the only
possible way to alleviate the suffering of Syrian people
and once and for all find a comprehensive, just and
proper solution to the question of Syria.

