Mr. Halvorsen (Norway): Only a negotiated
two-State solution can create durable peace between
Israelis and Palestinians. Economic development and
institution-building are essential building blocks for a
future Palestinian State, but they cannot replace the need
for a political resolution to the conflict. Norway shares
the concern to ensure urgent improvements in the living
conditions of the Palestinian people. It is crucial for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to maintain its
capacity to deliver basic services, in particular health
care and medication, to Palestine refugees. That is also
an important factor for regional stability. Norway will
therefore continue to support UNRWA both politically
and economically.

A key challenge remains - how to implement
projects that can lead to stability, growth and economic

development in preparation for a negotiated two-State
solution? The obstacles are many and of a political
nature, such as the continued occupation, restrictions
to access and movement, and internal Palestinian
divisions. We call on all those involved to take steps
to reverse the current negative trends on the ground,
including settlement activity and acts of violence.

Norway strongly regrets the Israeli Government's
ongoing demolitions of Palestinian buildings in Wadi
Al-Homs, part of Sur Baher in occupied East Jerusalem.

Norway is deeply concerned about the current
financial situation of the Palestinian Authority.
The international donor group for Palestine, the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC),
remains the international framework for addressing
economic issues between the two parties and the donors.
Norway will chair the next meeting of the AHLC, to be
held in New York on 26 September. The key priority
will be to develop a common strategy to implement
concrete measures that will strengthen the Palestinian
economy and improve the dire situation in Gaza.

With regard to Syria, we express our support for
the early establishment of a constitutional committee.
We call for trust-building measures that will contribute
to an atmosphere conducive to such a committee's
work, including prison releases that initially prioritize
women and children. Norway also encourages renewed
de-escalation in north-west Syria and the launch of a
genuine political process.

The increased tension in the Gulf region is of great
concern. It is critical that all actors refrain from actions
and statements that may further escalate the situation.
Iran's seizure of ships in the Gulf is unacceptable and
is contributing to a further escalation of tension. As a
leading shipping nation, Norway views the freedom of
navigation and the free flow of commerce as crucial to
secure international trade and cooperation.

Norway remains committed to preserving the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with Iran.
The agreement plays a crucial role in international
non-proliferation and regional stability. We regret
all steps that may jeopardize the agreement. Recent
enrichment activities by Iran are inconsistent with
its commitments and are moving it away from the
agreement. We urge Iran to reverse course and return to
full compliance. Norway strongly supports the ongoing
measures by France, Germany, the United Kingdom
and the European Union to preserve the JCPOA.

Norway expresses great concern about the situation
in Yemen, which remains the world's worst humanitarian
crisis. We urge all parties to abide by the Stockholm
Agreement in its entirety and to commit to a political
process under the guidance of Mr. Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. We call on
the Security Council to apply pressure on all parties to
live up to their commitments enshrined in international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
The de-escalation in Al-Hudaydah is a positive step. It
should be utilized to make further progress.

Norway has a long-standing commitment to
contribute to peace and security in the Middle East. If
elected as a member ofthe Council for the term of 2021-
2022, we will bring that commitment with us. We will
remain an active and consistent partner in supporting
international efforts that ultimately lead to peaceful
solutions in the region.

