Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the entire Egyptian delegation
for providing an environment conducive to effective and
efficient work by the Council in the month of May. Your
team's highly professional efforts have been a hallmark
of the Egyptian presidency and deserve high praise.

At the outset, the Ukrainian delegation would
like to welcome the return of the formal wrap-up
meeting at the end of the month. In our opinion, it is
an important instrument in the Council's toolkit for
ensuring transparency in its work, something that is
appreciated both by the United Nations membership
and civil society. May was not an easy month, full
of difficult discussions, important negotiations and
events requiring the Council's urgent attention. It was a
month of some historic decisions, one of them being the
lifting of sanctions on Liberia and the termination of
the related Security Council Committee, a case where
I felt very pleased to be losing my job as its Chair. It
was a month when from the very first day Council
members demonstrated the ability to reach agreements
and find solutions to issues on which very different and
sometimes opposing views exist. That is not to say that
we found a magic formula for resolving differences, but
to point out that if and when the political will is present,
the Council is very likely to deliver a result.

Exactly four weeks ago, the Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection ofmedical and
humanitarian personnel in armed conflicts. The fact
that 85 States Members ofthe United Nations sponsored
the resolution emphasized very vividly that the subject
requires urgent attention on the part of the international
community. That is nowhere more apparent than in
Syria, where medical facilities and health-care workers
have been repeatedly and systematically targeted. Over
the past month, the Syrian issue has consistently been
on the Council's agenda. In our view, that consistency
is a sure sign that things in that country are not moving
in the right direction. The international community is
anxious to hear and welcome news that humanitarian
assistance has been delivered to one or another Syrian
town or village, and it appears that for the moment
that is the best we can hope for. What a sorry state of
affairs - especially when we are reminded that we
are talking about a conflict that according to various
counts may have already taken the lives of as many
500,000 people.

At February's wrap-up session (S/PV.7633), my
delegation spoke of a glimmer of hope that seemed to
have appeared for the Syrian people. Three months
later, we can say that the glimmer has been all but
extinguished; last night's bombings of Idlib are
gruesome proof ofthat. This is not the occasion to point
fingers about it, but what I would like to single out is
the issue of accountability. Accountability is the point
of reference in resolution 2286 (2016), and it would be a
challenge to find anyone generally opposed to bringing
those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law to account. While we are fully aware
of the political sensitivities surrounding the whole
Syrian political negotiation process, we are nonetheless
convinced that if for the time being accountability is
not about to be achieved through proper legal processes,
transparency is the very least we can provide. In that
regard, a very controversial picture emerged last Friday
from the briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(S/PV.7701). The Council would do well to modify its
approach to its consideration of the ongoing conflict
in Syria.

I would be remiss if I failed to commend the
Egyptian presidency for spearheading open debates on
the topics of countering the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism (S/PV.7690) and cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union (see S/PV.7694),
and for leading the Council's visit to Somalia. All in
all, Ukraine welcomes the strong regional, Chapter
VIII-focused edge of the Egyptian presidency. Besides
the meeting with the African Union Peace and
Security Council, that also relates to the first everjoint
consultative meeting with the League of Arab States.

As a country with European integration at the heart
of its foreign and internal policy, Ukraine also greatly
appreciated the useful informal exchange between
the Council and the Political and Security Committee
of the European Union (EU). In that regard, we also
look forward to next month's EU briefing. Since all of
those important topics have already been eloquently
addressed by other speakers, I will not dwell on them,
or on my visit last week to the Central African Republic
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic, about which I am planning to report to the
Council later.

In keeping with your suggestion to focus statements
on key subjects, Mr. President, I would like touch on the
issue of the appointment of the next Secretary-General.
There have been several discussions on the issue this
month among Council members at various levels. We
believe that those deliberations have been very useful
but perhaps somewhat slow when it comes to deciding
on the Council's next steps. Given the importance of
the matter, the large number of candidates and the
ever-present time pressure, the Ukrainian delegation
would like to underline that we are strongly in favour
of holding the Council's meetings with candidates in a
timely fashion - provided that the candidates express
an interest in that - and of organizing initial straw-
poll rounds without any delays. We are of the opinion
that for the Council to postpone taking action can only
result in its unnecessary imposition on itself of time
constraints that it would be better to avoid.

In closing, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your team on the successful
completion of your presidency, and to assure the
incoming French presidency of our full support.

