Mr. Holmes: I will try to cover the various points
that have been raised by the representatives around the
table.

First of all, it gives me no pleasure to say this,
but I note that there is a large measure of agreement on
the analysis of the gravity of the humanitarian situation
in all three countries. There is no dispute as to the
seriousness and the need to take action. I think that is
an important message for all of us.

I also agree very much with those, such as the
representatives of Belgium and France, who have said
that we need to press on with all our efforts in parallel,
if you will - that is to say, the search for a political
solution, which is being led at the moment by Jan
Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim. I am happy to
confirm, in response to the representative of Qatar, that
I give my full support to those political efforts. I think
that the effort to find a lasting political solution which
all the parties can sign up to and respect afterwards is
absolutely fundamental, because without that it is very
hard to see how we are going to make the progress we
need and put an end to the tragic humanitarian
problems that I have talked about.

In parallel, obviously, we need to continue the
effort to put in place a strengthened peacekeeping force
in Darfur, and I agree with those who have put their
emphasis on that. It is clearly important, as the
representative of South Africa said, that we give our
continued support to the presence of the African Union
Mission in Sudan (AMIS). AMIS is facing a number of
difficulties - not just the recent tragic loss of its
personnel, but also difficulties in carrying out its
mandate in the situation in which it finds itself. It
needs our support. It needs continuing financial and
other support from us while we await its strengthening
with the heavy support package and, ultimately, the
hybrid force, because that is an essential building block
for a future force. So I hope that everybody will
contribute in whatever way they can to the
maintenance in place of AMIS and its future
strengthening.
Many people have referred in a welcoming way
to the joint communique which was agreed on
28 March. Many people have asked how we can
reinforce support for that. I repeat my own welcome
for that agreement, but I also repeat what I said in my

introductory statement: the key is not in the words
contained in the agreement, but in whether it is actually
implemented. As various representatives have pointed
out, we have seen similar agreements in the past that
have sometimes been respected for a period, but then
that respect has declined. What we want to see in this
particular case is implementation of a continued and
complete nature. I think it is important that countries
represented around this table, and the international
community in general, follow the implementation of
the agreement in Khartoum themselves through their
local representatives.

An important part of the agreement is the
establishment of a practical follow-up committee on
which there are representatives of the donors and the
non-governmental organizations, and that would
therefore be a mechanism to keep implementation of
the agreement on track. But it would also be very
helpful if constant attention were paid to that by
representatives of the international community in
Khartoum. It was helpful, for example, that, shortly
before my arrival in Khartoum on the occasion of the
annual aid consortium meeting, mainly devoted to the
southern Sudan, the representatives of the countries
who were there put a very strong emphasis on the need
to resolve those bureaucratic problems and made clear
their desire to see some progress. I think that kind of
attention is very welcome, and of course if the Security
Council wanted to call for regular reports on how that
was being implemented, that would no doubt be a
helpful step as well.

Various representatives have commented on what
I said about the regional nature of the conflict and how
resolving the conflict in Darfur is the key to solving
the regional conflict. Of course, I agree with that, but I
would also point out that I added that there are in each
case national conflicts and national political issues
which need to be resolved independently of whether
there is a resolution in Darfur. We must not lose sight
of that and the need to tackle those issues as well.

Many representatives have echoed the point I
made about the importance of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement in the southern Sudan and the need
not to lose sight of that. I think the representatives of
South Africa, Peru and Italy, for example, referred to
that. I repeat that it is absolutely vital. Because the
immediate humanitarian needs are diminishing, I am
glad to say that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) itself is beginning to
centralize its presence in Juba, rather than have the
network of offices we have had around the South of the
Sudan, but we are by no means withdrawing our
presence and we remain ready to respond to
humanitarian crises as they arise. It is important,
however, that the rest of the United Nations
development, recovery and reconstruction system step
up to the plate to take the development of South Sudan
forward effectively so that there is no gap and there is
an effective transition.

The representative of Slovakia asked about other
African conflicts and my travel plans. I am still
finalizing my travel plans for the coming months, but I
would like to visit Somalia because of the deep
humanitarian problems there. That depends, obviously,
to a large extent on security. I would like to visit
Uganda, in particular northern Uganda, because of the
depth of the problems there, which we have already
talked about, and the need to ensure that the Juba peace
process continues, puts an eventual stop to the
problems there, and allows the many displaced persons
to return to their homes. I think it is important that I
visit, at some relatively early stage, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo because, again, there are still
enormous operations there and enormous problems. I
would also like to pay a visit at some stage - perhaps
later this year - to the West African and Sahel
regions, which I think perhaps need a visit of that kind
at some stage.

I think that kind of combination of visits would
enable me to look at not only conflict situations, but
also the problems raised by natural hazards and
disasters and the effects of poverty as well. I have no
current plans to visit Zimbabwe myself, but it is
possible that a senior representative of OCHA will go
there at some point this year.

The representative of the Russian Federation
asked about the use of the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF) in the region. I have some
figures which I can give members of the Council. In
Chad, the Central Emergency Response Fund has
contributed some $10 million in 2006 and $7.5 million
so far this year. In the Central African Republic, CERF
contributed $5.5 million in 2006 and $4.5 in 2007. And
of course, we have used CERF extensively in Darfur
itself; in 2006, some $34 million were contributed and,
so far in 2007, up to $39 million altogether, including a
loan. We are continuing to look at further use of CERF
in all those areas, but I think it is a good illustration of
CERF in responding to immediate needs that we have
been able to use it in that way.

Several representatives, not least the
representative of Qatar, have asked about the prospect
for the hybrid peacekeeping force and the three-phase
approach in Darfur, and referred to the meeting
between President Bashir and Secretary-General Ban in
the margins of the Arab League summit last week. We
are indeed hopeful that some progress was made at that
meeting, and we are hoping - as the Secretary-
General said, I think, earlier in the week - to organize
a meeting with representatives of the Sudanese
Government and the African Union in Addis Ababa
next week, which we hope will represent progress
towards putting in place the heavy support package
and, ultimately, the hybrid force. I think our
interpretation of this meeting is that it is to clarify what
we intend to do on the heavy support package and the
hybrid force, not to start a long and possibly fruitless
negotiation about the details of the force. It is very
much a clarificatory meeting, as we see it.

On the question of the proposed peacekeeping
force in Chad and the Central African Republic, I
should say that I agree with those representatives who
have commented on the importance of putting it in
place soon, as I also said in my opening statement. It is
quite clear, as the representative of France, for
example, said, that President Bozize of the Central
African Republic is very anxious to see this force
deployed because of the delicate situation in the north-
eastern Central African Republic caused by cross-
border incursions of various kinds. I think that
underlines the importance of moving rapidly on that
issue.

I can confirm, incidentally, in response to the
comments of the representative of France, that we -
the United Nations, not necessarily the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) - are
proposing to open a series of United Nations offices in
the north of the Central African Republic in order to
enable us to deal more effectively with the
humanitarian problems there, because of the
difficulties of communication and infrastructure.
The representative of Peru asked what measures
we had in mind to deal with the forthcoming rainy
season in all three countries. I think we are extremely
conscious that the rainy season in all three places
represents a huge challenge. It differs from place to
place, depending on how heavy the rains are in
different areas. It tends to be easier in the north than in
southern parts of the countries we are dealing with. For
example, in the southern part of eastern Chad, it is
clear that the rainy season makes virtually all
movement in the area impossible. That can apply also
to the Central African Republic and to parts of southern
Darfur. It is therefore absolutely vital that we have the
necessary assistance in place before the rainy season.

This is a familiar problem, but it nevertheless
presents considerable difficulties - for example, in
eastern Chad, in having the right amount of stocks in
the right places before the rainy starts: as I say, once
the season starts overland movement becomes virtually
impossible because of flooded wadis in the area. That
is why, for example, in eastern Chad, we have put a lot
of emphasis on the rapid development - which we
hope to have in place later this week - of an urgent
90-day plan for all humanitarian organizations dealing
with these problems in eastern Chad, so as to have in
place everything that we need before that rainy season
starts.

We are looking at very much the same sort of
thing in the Central African Republic. Just to give one
example, it is clearly crucial that the people who are
displaced in the bush, as I was describing earlier, and
who have lost their stocks of seeds and their
agricultural tools should be given access to seeds and
tools in the next few weeks so that they can cultivate
their fields and plant crops. Otherwise, the food
situation in 6, 12 or 18 months could become even
more dramatic than it is now. The World Food
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations are working very hard to try to
ensure that those items can be distributed effectively to
those scattered through the bush, although one can
imagine the logistical problems that that presents at the
moment.

The representative of Panama asked about the
contribution that political leaders can make to finding
political solutions to some of these problems, and I
entirely agree with him that those who are visiting these
countries in whatever form should take every opportunity
to press for political solutions and not simply concern
themselves with bilateral problems. I hope that that will
be the case in the future. It is also very important that
when political leaders visit these countries they take the
opportunity to become advocates for humanitarian
principles and humanitarian effects - not least, as so
many representatives around the table have noted, the
need for the fundamental protection of civilians to be put
in place much more effectively in all the countries we
have been talking about than it is at present.

The representative of Indonesia asked how the
United Nations could improve the situation in eastern
Chad. I think I partly answered that question in
reference to the urgent 90-day plan that we are putting
in place in cooperation with all the non-governmental
organizations and agencies there. We are also looking,
as I said, I think, in my opening remarks, to put into
place a comprehensive strategy for the next two or
three years which can deal at the same time with the
problems of the Sudanese refugees who are there and
with the problems of the internally displaced persons
there, and also with the problems of the host
communities: they have been very generous, as has
been noted, in welcoming the refugees and the
displaced people, but they have nothing left to share
now and they are beginning to suffer themselves from
the pressure that all these people are putting on the
resources of an area that is very fragile and difficult to
start with.

The representative of Italy asked, like others,
about the timely implementation of the joint
communique. I think I have partly answered that
question. I think that we have no absolute guarantees
on implementation of the agreement, but we hope that
follow-up committee put in place will provide a
mechanism to do that. But, as I say, I think the most
important point is that we all continue to give attention
to it, to watch closely and to be vocal if we see any
signs of backsliding in the implementation of this
agreement, which, as I think I have suggested, is vital
in many ways for the continuation of the humanitarian
effort. It is the combination of the insecurity and the
bureaucratic problems which saps the morale of the
humanitarian workers in place and renders the
operation fragile.

The representative of Italy also asked whether I
saw any signs of optimism in Chad following my
meeting with the Prime Minister. I have to say that I
did not. I had a very good discussion with the Prime
Minister of Chad, but I think the problems there, as I
have indicated, remain very serious and, if anything,
are getting worse. There is a real issue to deal with
there, and a real need to move forward, not only with
the humanitarian operation, as I have indicated, but
also with the deployment of a force in the area. It is
very difficult to see how people can be protected
without that.

I hope that I have dealt with all the problems that
people around the table have raised. I apologize if I
have missed any, but I think I have covered the ground.

