Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation thanks
Ms. McAskie for briefing us on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
also thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling this
humanitarian briefing on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The prevailing political deadlock in the peace
process makes it easy to overlook the war's tragic
consequences on the population. However, we need to
retain our focus on the human dimensions of the
conflict, and perhaps this debate will galvanize the
warring parties to adopt a constructive attitude towards
the resolution of the conflict.

My delegation is deeply concerned by the grave
humanitarian situation prevailing in the country.
The population affected by the conflict- some
16 million - and the over 2 million internally
displaced persons and refugees in neighbouring States
exceed the populations of many of the Member States
of the United Nations.

We have been told that the magnitude of the crisis
and the effect of the conflict on the delivery of aid have
resulted in minimal humanitarian assistance being
provided to populations in need. Most have to fend for
themselves in a country in the grips of war with few or
no possibilities for economic activity. This situation
has the making of an immense human tragedy.

We are encouraged by the promise of President
Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
United Nations observers will be given freedom of
movement to oversee the fragile situation. We look
forward to the implementation of this promise, and we
expect that this same freedom of movement will be
guaranteed by other forces involved in the conflict, not
just for the observers of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) but also for humanitarian
personnel operating in the field.

Tens of thousands of Congolese citizens have
sought refuge in neighbouring States. At the same time,
over 330,000 refugees have fled to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The extension of regional
conflicts to the soil of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo makes the security of these foreign refugees and
the 2 million internally displaced persons tenuous.
These facts alone support the idea of a conference on
the Great Lakes region and a comprehensive approach
to the conflicts in the region as a whole.

Within the Democratic Republic of the Congo
itself, the systematic targeting of civilian groups by the
dozens of ethnic groups, armed rebels and soldiers
from up to nine different armies has led to human
rights abuses by all sides in this conflict. The cases of
extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary arrests, detentions
and executions are cause for great concern and must
not go unnoticed or unpunished. The culture of
impunity must be erased from the face of the earth.

My delegation commends the United Nations
humanitarian workers in the field for the tremendous
work they have been doing under very trying
circumstances. We are pleased to learn of the close and
collaborative efforts of the United Nations agencies,
the Humanitarian Coordinator and MONUC
humanitarian liaison officers and the streamlining of
the existing coordination arrangements between the
various relief agencies and MONUC. This has already
resulted in an improved mechanism for the delivery of
aid to those most in need.

My delegation is supportive of any action that
would further enhance the efficiency of humanitarian
agencies to deliver assistance as well as build
confidence in the United Nations agencies and
personnel. We note that these objectives could be
achieved by enhancing MONUC's air capacity and by
making that capacity accessible to all humanitarian
agencies in order to reach the most remote parts of the
country. Accordingly, we urge the international
community to respond to the United Nations
consolidated appeal for the year 2000, as well as that
for 2001, which is to be announced shortly. It is
understood that the 2001 consolidated appeal will have
as two of its important components the support of
community-based self-recovery initiatives, as well as
the promotion of free circulation of persons and goods
across the front lines. These are crucial elements for
the eventual return to peace, when former enemies will
have to resume normal contact with people who were
once their mortal enemies.

Despite the successes of the humanitarian
programmes, the only way to permanently alleviate the
humanitarian situation is to finalize a comprehensive
peace agreement. We are disappointed that the Lusaka
Agreement has not resulted in overcoming the
obstacles to a final peace. We recognize, however, the
continued goodwill and commitment on the part of a
number of countries in the region to address the
situation and advance the peace process. We therefore
welcome the news from Maputo that ministers from six
Governments and two rebel factions plan to meet on
Wednesday to work out details of a revived peace plan
to allow United Nations monitors to supervise the
ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
trust that the process of peace will prevail. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the other concerned parties must demonstrate a
commitment to the peace process.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is yet another stark reminder of
the human toll that results from conflict. It reinforces
our own views that those who bear primary
responsibility for making peace and fail to do so must
accept responsibility for the continued suffering of the
civilian population under the control of their guns. We
have heard every possible reason for the failure of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, and in our view none of
these reasons justifies the human suffering described
by Ms. McAskie in her statement to the Council today.
What is even worse - indeed, reprehensible - are the
reports that all parties to the conflict fail to provide
secure access to humanitarian aid for those in need in
areas under their control. Leaders who perpetuate or
ignore wanton human suffering of the kind existing in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be judged
by the bar of history and hopefully by their fellow
countrymen and countrywomen.

