Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the observer of the European Union (see annex 30), as well as with the statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of Solidarity for Global Health Security (see annex 54), and would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is, in the first place, a global health crisis, requiring a coordinated and multilateral response. From the very beginning, Italy has strongly supported such a collective approach by actively advocating an international alliance to advance research on a vaccine and to guarantee its rapid development and equitable distribution. We were proud to be among the promoters - in partnership with the European Union and other key partner countries of the Coronavirus Global Response pledging conference on 4 May and of the following one on 27 June, which collected almost €16 billion for universal and fair access to vaccines, treatments and diagnostics to fight COVID-19. We were also among the pioneers of the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, and the main contributors to the COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access Facility through Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, Advance Market Commitment, which will ensure that developing countries have access to the vaccine. At the same time, global health is a fundamental precondition for peace, stability and prosperity as it interacts with the tripartite peace-humanitarian- development nexus. Besides its tragic impact on public health and the profound repercussions on human rights and socioeconomic conditions at the global level, the COVID-19 pandemic has seriously exacerbated ongoing threats to the maintenance of international peace and security. In countries ravaged by armed conflicts or affected by political instability, the effects of the pandemic have aggravated the situation, hindering the delivery of humanitarian aid and intensifying the suffering of local populations. For that reason, in all hotspots of the world, conflicting parties should heed the appeal of Secretary-General Guterres for a global ceasefire - which Italy fully supports - and join forces against the virus. In this vein, we welcome yesterday's adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), demanding a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on the Security Council's agenda and expressing support for the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General in this regard. A durable humanitarian pause is indeed crucial to enabling the safe, unhindered and sustained delivery of humanitarian assistance, particularly to vulnerable groups, refugees and displaced persons. In these difficult circumstances, United Nations peacekeeping operations have a special role to play in supporting local communities in their handling of the pandemic. Italy greatly appreciates the work of the Secretariat in implementing measures and procedures to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 and to protect peacekeepers and local populations. Now more than ever, we need to remain committed to peace operations. Leaving peacekeeping missions understaffed and unable to fulfil their mandates would put local populations and mission personnel alike at risk. Together with its European Union partners, Italy has fully confirmed its commitments as a troop- and police- contributing country. Moreover, the Italian contingent in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has been providing medical equipment to local health services, thereby directly contributing to mitigating the impact of the virus. This shows how peace operations could serve as a flexible tool for preserving peace and stability and how the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative has been a fundamental step forward in modernizing United Nations peacekeeping missions. Italy welcomes the initiative undertaken by the Secretariat in reprioritizing A4P in this phase, with a stronger focus on safety, security, performance and protection, particularly as they relate to coronavirus prevention and containment and public- health support. In assessing the interaction between pandemics and security, we must also consider the impact of the coronavirus on food security. In a state of emergency such as the current one, it is of paramount importance that everyone have access to safe and nutritious food in sufficient amounts, and we must do everything in our power to keep trade routes open and supply chains functioning while carrying out initiatives to support food access for the poorest and most vulnerable people in our societies. In this spirit, Italy is committed to supporting the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme and all relevant United Nations actors in their efforts to prevent a global food crisis. Italy has also been promoting a food coalition against hunger through the FAO to mobilize expertise, provide policy support, establish a space for dialogue and promote initiatives focused on the creation of more resilient and sustainable food systems. Last but not least, the pandemic has reminded us of the importance of fully implementing the women and peace and security agenda. As a result of the health crisis, women and girls have are being particularly exposed to sexual and gender- based violence and to the unequal sharing of responsibilities. At the same time, women - who represent the majority of health workers - have been at the forefront of the response and will be the backbone of recovery in communities. The pandemic calls us to strengthen our commitment to achieving gender parity and to ensuring that women participate meaningfully in decision-making processes for the sake of peace and prosperity for all.
