Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I too
wish to welcome the two ministers who have honoured
us with their presence today, in particular my
neighbour at the Council table, Francois Fall. I also
thank you, Madam President, for your presence and for
the excellent way in which you are guiding our debate
today.

I would like to begin by paying special tribute to
the United Kingdom for its determined commitment in
service of peace in Sierra Leone through the presence
of ground troops, which at a particularly difficult time
made it possible to restore full credibility to the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and
through the United Kingdom's resolute commitment to
rebuilding the State and the economy of a devastated
country.

We are here in a brainstorming session. I would
like to note three things.

First of all, personal relations between heads of
State are a key factor for peace in this region, as indeed
elsewhere in Africa. Restoring good relations among
the three presidents of the Mano River Union is a
priority, and that is why France welcomes in particular
the role now played by the Rabat process. I salute the
commitment of King Mohammed VI to the peace
process in the Mano River Union region.

My second point is there can be no peace in the
region unless there is peace among the three
countries - I would say within each of these three
countries. What is striking today is that, if we have a
clear strategy that is working for Sierra Leone, we do
not have a comprehensive strategy for Liberia. Of
course, we have the sanctions committee, and I
welcome the role played by the Ambassador of
Singapore. However, a sanctions committee is not
enough for providing a strategy. I entirely support what
General Diarra has said on behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). We
discourage any seizure of power by force, and we must
condemn Liberians United for Reconciliation and
Democracy (LURD) in its attempt to do this. We need
to assist all political forces in Liberia to prepare as best
they can for the presidential elections to be held in
2003. Accordingly, the statement adopted last week in
Ouagadougou seemed very positive to us. One
understands that we need to elaborate, in partnership
with the other stakeholders, a true strategy for Liberia,
just as we did for Sierra Leone.

From that standpoint, today's dialogue, including
with ECOWAS and Morocco, is particularly useful. We
believe ECOWAS deserves encouragement in their its
efforts. The United Nations should, for example, help
ECOWAS set up the four early warning regional
centres.

I would like to refer specifically to four elements.
First, and this point was made by other speakers, we
need to set up the contact group of interested countries
within the Mano River Union as quickly as possible.
This group should be limited in composition, but it
needs to be established urgently.

Second is another urgent matter. We need a
representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations in Liberia. I am sure the United Nations Office
in Liberia should be strengthened. I know this is not
easy, because President Taylor has the unfortunate
habit of rejecting people proposed to him. But I would
like to ask Under-Secretary-General Prendergast, what
stage are discussions between the Department of
Political Affairs and the Liberian authorities on this
point.

The third idea was mentioned by Sir Kieran, the
upcoming installation in Dakar of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa. How does he see the role of Mr. Ould-Abdallah,
among the other stakeholders - that is, ECOWAS and
the Rabat process, lead by the King of Morocco?

The fourth and last idea concerns the Rabat
process. If it makes good progress in coming months,
could we take advantage of the General Assembly
session this autumn to invite to a meeting of the
Security Council the three foreign ministers of the
region? We already have two right here. Perhaps with
the three heads of State we can crystallize the progress
that will have taken place in the intervening period
through the activities of Morocco and give additional
momentum to the peace process in the region of the
Mano River Union.

