Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, it is an honour having you chair our
meeting today. Thank you for doing so. And you have
chosen a topical issue. Although the Charter
recognized from the outset the role of regional
organizations, they have never been as active and
important as they are today. I would like to highlight
just a few examples and challenges.

We have seen the contribution that the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has
made to focusing international attention on Burma, not
least the support ASEAN is giving to the efforts of the
Secretary-General, whose presence is also extremely
welcome here today, and Professor Gambari. My
Government hopes the ASEAN Summit later this
month will send a strong further message about the
need for change in Burma.

In Africa, the expanding role of the African
Union (AU) has been one of the most important
developments of recent years. The Security Council
mission to Addis Ababa this summer resulted in a joint
declaration, committing this Council and the African
Union's Peace and Security Council to intensify their
cooperation across the conflict spectrum. As part of
this, we should explore more sustained United Nations
support for the African Union, including in capacity-
building. We look forward to the forthcoming report
from the Secretary-General.

In Darfur, this partnership faces a critical test, as
the AU-United Nations hybrid force takes over from
the purely AU force. The experience to come in Darfur
is bound to provide lessons for both organizations. Our
priority now must be the effective deployment of the
hybrid force. My Government supports the AU-United
Nations proposed composition of this force, and we
look to the Government of the Sudan to accept it
without reservations.

Darfur is also a diplomatic partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations. Salim Salim
and Jan Eliasson are working to build a sustainable
peace, supported by a joint mediation team. They need
all our support in what will be a difficult and lengthy
process.

In the Middle East, the Arab League, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Gulf
Cooperation Council play valuable roles in promoting
cooperation and political progress.

Across Africa, we have seen regional and
subregional organizations playing an important role in
conflict resolution, for example the Economic
Community of West African States in the Ivory Coast.
My Government hopes that such efforts could also
succeed in Zimbabwe. The South African Government
and the Southern African Development Community
have been engaged to seek to resolve the crisis there.
We would support any process to improve the plight of
the people in Zimbabwe, where human rights abuses,
appalling standards of government, brutal intimidation
and economic collapse have turned a once rich nation
into one of the most desperate places on Earth.
Our principal organization in Europe, the
European Union (EU), has developed new capabilities
in foreign policy and defence over the last 10 years. I
associate myself with the statement to be made later in
this debate by Portugal on behalf of the EU. In Africa,
but also in the Balkans, the Middle East and Asia, the
EU is active in military and civilian stabilization
efforts. The EU is directly engaged in building up the
rule of law in Iraq, providing police support and
training in Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, developing Palestinian Security Forces and
providing the peacekeeping force in Bosnia.

On Bosnia, we look forward to hearing from the
High Representative on 15 November. We support the
steps he has taken to ensure the continued viability of
the Dayton Agreement. The European Union also
stands ready to take on its responsibilities in Kosovo,
working alongside NATO, once the status process is
concluded next month.

NATO, of course, is our second regional
organization, a transatlantic alliance designed to defend
the West during the cold war, and now transformed so
it can project stability and security beyond our region.
NATO bears the brunt of the security effort in
Afghanistan. It has stabilized the Balkans after the
tumultuous 19905. And it stands ready, as the most
militarily capable multinational organization, to
consider further demanding security tasks.

EU military operations in the Balkans have been
conducted in partnership with NATO, and both the
European Union and NATO work closely with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
another valuable organization in our conflict resolution
toolbox. NATO, the EU and the United Nations are
also working together in Afghanistan. In such cases, an
array of international involvement can be needed.
Different actors can bring different assets. But it is
crucial that coordination of the international effort is
effective, and the United Nations often has the central
role to play there.

May I just say, on Afghanistan, that we are
appalled by today's suicide bombing in New Baghlan,
which seems to have killed up to 100 people, including
five members of the Afghan Parliament. Actions such
as this are inhuman. We utterly condemn those
responsible and those who supplied the materials for
this act of terrorism.
Around the world, the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations are partners for
peace, as the statement we will adopt later today makes
clear. The challenges are more complex than ever, but
the opportunities for progress are also there. That
should be our focus and our common goal.

