Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his valuable briefing on the recent developments
in the Gaza Strip and the most recent developments in
the occupied territories. We commend his endeavours
and underscore our full support for his efforts. We also
thank the delegation of the United States for calling
this meeting to discuss the situation in the occupied
territories - a situation that continues to deteriorate
in the light of the ongoing oppressive practices of
the Israeli occupying power. We reiterate our firm
and principled position related to the condemnation
of targeting civilians by any party anywhere and at
any time.

The Israeli occupying power bears full
responsibility for the most recent escalation in the
occupied territories. For as long that occupation
continues, the Palestinian people have the legitimate
right to fight it and defend their aspirations and dreams
of independence and a life of freedom and dignity. We
support their fight and commend their steadfastness in
the face of the destructive Israeli machine.

The Israeli policies and practices in the occupied
territories cannot be justified. The occupation in itself
is a blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. It must end, as it is the root
cause of the problem and the conflict in the region.
It is unacceptable that the international community
remains silent and inactive in the face of recurrent
Israeli violations in the occupied territories, contrary
to international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

The occupation continues, even though the
international community has condemned it and the
Security Council called for it to cease in resolution
2334 (2016). Arrests continue to be carried out, along
with the seizure of land and the destruction of houses.
The occupation proceeds systematically, even though it
has been condemned by the world as inhumane.

Moreover, illegal unilateral measures that seek the
Judaization of Jerusalem and changing its demographic
composition, character and religious sanctity continue.
Recurrent incursions by settlers and occupying forces
into Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem every now and then
continue to provoke Muslims. The blockade on Gaza
has gone on for over 10 years. It is a repressive blockade

of nearly 2 million people. The occupying power did not
respect its obligations in accordance with international
law and did not heed the call to lift restrictions on
the freedom of movement of people and goods and to
open border crossings in Gaza amid deterioration in
the economic and living conditions. That has led to
more suffering for the Palestinian people, which has
generated widespread despair.

In the past few weeks, Israel, the occupying power,
has used live ammunition and shot at civilian protesters
who came out to peacefully revive the Great March of
Return. As a result of that, more than 120 martyrs fell,
including some children. Thousands were wounded and
some were permanently disabled. We have submittted
three draft statements to the press expressing our
concern, given the death of those victims, and
affirming their right to protest peacefully. We also
called for a transparent and independent investigation
into that massacre. However, all those press statements
were rejected.

Therefore, the State of Kuwait has submitted a
draft resolution to provide international protection to
the Palestinian people, because they are the ones who
deserve protection and not the occupying Power, which
claims that it is defending itself while it possesses a
huge and sophisticated arsenal that it uses excessively
against defenceless people under occupation. The State
of Kuwait has ensured transparency and inclusiveness
in the negotiations on the draft resolution and has taken
into account many of the proposed amendments. We
hope that the draft resolution will be adopted by the
Security Council so that a message can be sent to the
Palestinian people that the international community,
represented by the Security Council, will do them
justice and stand by their side in their plight, and that
it will do its utmost and shoulder its responsibility to
help them recover their legitimate rights, and that long-
awaited justice will finally be served.

In that regard, we welcome the resolution of the
Human Rights Council adopted on 18 May in relation
to urgently deploying an investigative team to the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially Gaza, to
investigate all Israeli Violations.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait supports the
choice of peace because it is the strategic option, as
underscored in resolutions ofthe League ofArab States,
the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and many conferences.
Our objective is to establish comprehensive, just and
sustainable peace, based on internationally legitimate
resolutions and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the
principle of land for peace, the Quarted road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative. That objective should lead
to Israel's withdrawal from all the territories occupied
since 4 June 1967, so as to ensure that the Palestinian
people achieve all their legitimate political rights,
including their right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent State on their territory
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

