The President: I wish to welcome the presence at
this meeting of His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.

Under the item on its agenda, the Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the report
of the Committee on the Admission of New Members
concerning the application of the Republic of South
Sudan for admission to membership in the United
Nations, which appears in document S/2011/420.

In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee
recommends to the Security Council the adoption of a
draft resolution on the application of the Republic of
South Sudan for admission to membership in the
United Nations. I should like to congratulate the
Committee on its unanimous decision to recommend
that the Republic of South Sudan be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
prior consultations among members of the Council, I
propose that the Council adopt the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 3 of the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members without
a vote.

As I see no objection, it is so decided.
2

I therefore declare that the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 3 of the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members
(S/2011/420) has been adopted without a vote as
resolution 1999 (2011).

I shall convey the decision of the Security
Council recommending the admission of the Republic
of South Sudan to membership in the United Nations to
the Secretary-General for transmittal to the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly in accordance with
rule 60 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure
and the request of the Republic of South Sudan.

I shall now make a statement, in my capacity as
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the
members of the Council:

"The Security Council has decided to
recommend to the General Assembly that the
Republic of South Sudan be admitted as a
Member of the United Nations. On behalf of the
members of the Security Council, I wish to
extend my congratulations to the Republic of
South Sudan on this historic occasion.

"The Council notes with great satisfaction
the Republic of South Sudan's solemn
commitment to uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and to fulfil all the obligations contained therein.

"We look forward to the Republic of South
Sudan joining us as a Member of the United
Nations and to working closely with its
representatives."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/l4.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the matter before it.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
11-41267
