Let me begin by thanking the Indonesian presidency for having organized today's open debate. Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union (annex 29). Let me add a few remarks in my national capacity. The unprecedented health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic poses a formidable challenge to the United Nations peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda. It has already left a lasting imprint on all three pillars of the United Nations, including by exacerbating the underlying root causes of armed conflicts, placing limitations on existing peacebuilding action and putting additional pressure on already fragile security, political, socioeconomic and humanitarian environments. The negative consequences of the pandemic have had a disproportionate impact on conflict-affected women and girls, children, forcibly displaced populations, older persons and persons with disabilities. In addition, the direct effects of the pandemic have been reflected in the disruptions caused to United Nations peacekeeping operations, special political missions and the Peacebuilding Commission. It is equally important to ensure that the COVID-19 pandemic does not distract us from our efforts to address the aforementioned root causes. Failure in that respect could cause irreparable damage to international peace and security. While, regrettably, there are many examples illustrating such a scenario in today's world, I wish to focus on the one that my country is experiencing these days. Amid its efforts to fight the spread of coronavirus in the country, Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity have been targeted by one of the permanent members of the Security Council. In blatant violation of its international obligations and commitments, as well as in contravention of the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, the Russian Federation has heightened the scale of its provocations directed against Georgia. Intensified military exercises and a military build-up, the continued fortification of the occupation line by erecting barbed-wire fences and other artificial barriers, the illegal practice of arbitrary detentions and kidnappings of conflict-affected people, and the denial of humanitarian access to both the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia have further aggravated the security, human rights and humanitarian situation on the ground. To make matters worse, the process of intensified ethnic discrimination and grave human rights abuses, coupled with lengthy closures of so-called crossing points, have compounded the already fragile situation in the occupied regions, ending in the deaths of 15 people who were denied the possibility of an urgent medical evacuation. On top of that, the Russian Federation has amplified its hybrid-warfare tools and disinformation campaign, attacking one of the laboratories of Georgia's National Centre for Disease Control and Public Health, the Richard Lugar Center and even the European Union Monitoring Mission, the only international mechanism on the ground mandated to facilitate peace and security throughout the whole territory of Georgia. Notwithstanding the aforementioned harsh reality, Georgia remains committed to doing its utmost to ensure humanitarian relief for those conflict-affected people, who have been carrying the heavy burden of the grave consequences of Russia's illegal occupation in the time of the pandemic. Let me conclude my remarks by once again calling on the international community to urge the Russian Federation to immediately ensure the complete and unconditional elimination of any impediments to the effective delivery and access of emergency humanitarian assistance to the civilians living in the occupied regions of Georgia and to start fulfilling its international obligations, first and foremost the European Union-mediated 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement.
