The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bailly (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes with concern
the postponement of the first round of the
presidential election, scheduled for 29 November
2009 in the 18 May 2009 communique of the
Permanent Consultative Framework of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement, which was
endorsed by all the main Ivorian political actors.

"The Security Council welcomes the positive
steps taken by the Ivorian actors, in particular the
publication of the provisional voters list and of the
list of candidates. It further welcomes the
3 December 2009 communique of the Permanent
Consultative Framework. It commends the
Facilitator, President Blaise Compaore of Burkina
F aso, for his continued efforts to support the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council takes note that the
Permanent Consultative Framework considered, on
the basis of a presentation by the Independent
Electoral Commission, that the postponement of
the elections was due to technical and financial
constraints and that the first round of the
presidential elections would be organized by the
end of February or the beginning of March 2010. It
urges the Ivorian actors to address the remaining
tasks and to hold open, free, fair and transparent
presidential elections in accordance with
international standards at the earliest possible date.

"The Security Council notes again that the
publication of a final voters list certified by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General is
crucial for the holding of open, free, fair and
transparent presidential elections. It urges the
Ivorian stakeholders to meet their commitments to
support the elections and to facilitate this process
without delay, in particular during the 38-day
phase during which the provisional list can be
challenged before independent local electoral
commissions and courts. It urges again the Ivorian
authorities to allow equitable access to public
media, consistent with the Code of Good Conduct
for elections. It reiterates its intention to react as
appropriate, consistent with its resolution 1880
(2009), towards those who would block the
progress of the electoral process.

"The Security Council welcomes the
signature by President Laurent Gbagbo on
17 November 2009 of several military rules and
regulations, including seven decrees. It urges the
Ivorian parties to make further concrete progress,
before and after the elections, to advance the
reunification and disarmament processes.

"The Security Council recalls that it will
review the mandate and the troop level of the
United Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) by 31 January 2010. It reiterates its
determination to bring its full support to a
credible electoral process in Cote d'Ivoire. It
requests the Secretary-General to provide to it, in
the report referred to in its resolution 1880
(2009), options for the future direction of
UNOCI, in particular in light of the publication
of the final voters list and of a credible electoral
time frame, including preliminary indications on
timing, benchmarks and modalities for a possible
drawdown of the operation."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/33.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.
09-63817

