Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, we should like to express our
gratitude to Ambassador Takasu of Japan, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his briefing on the work of
the Committee over the past 90 days.

Libya reaffirms the importance of stepping up
international efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue, based on a commitment to
Security Council resolution 1803 (2008), which calls
for continued diplomatic efforts to encourage renewed
dialogue and consultations with Iran with a view to
achieving a comprehensive, appropriate and long-term
solution to this issue. That would open the way for the
development of comprehensive relations and
cooperation with the Islamic Republic of Iran on the
basis of mutual respect and for the building of
international confidence in the peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme. In this respect, we call on all
relevant parties to continue direct negotiations until
that goal is achieved. We repeat that what happened in
Iraq should not be allowed to occur again anywhere
else in the world, especially when it is based on
groundless information.

Libya reiterates its conviction that we must deal
with questions of non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament in a comprehensive and non-selective
way and that all States, without exception, must subject
their nuclear facilities to the safeguards regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

We note with disapproval that the Security Council
has disregarded Israel's nuclear weapons, even though
that country refuses to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty
or to subject its facilities to the International Atomic
Energy Agency's comprehensive safeguards regime.
This stands as an obstacle to the aspirations of the
States of the Middle East to create a nuclear weapons-
free zone, as expressed at the 1995 Review Conference
of the States Parties to the NPT concerning the Middle
East and in relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly. The International Atomic Energy Agency
must inspect the Israeli Dimona reactor, so as to
confirm that Israel is not above the law. Otherwise, all
States in the Middle East can rightly wonder why they
do not have the right to have such weapons while Israel
does possess them.

Our concern for and commitment to the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should not lead
us to forget the inalienable right of all States Parties to
the Non-Proliferation Treaty to the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, to possess nuclear energy and to
develop nuclear technology. In this respect, we
reaffirm that the International Atomic Energy Agency
is the only specialized authority equipped to verify the
fulfilment by States parties of the safeguards
agreements, carried out in compliance with their
obligations under the Treaty, in order to prohibit
nuclear energy being diverted from peaceful uses to
nuclear weapons and other forms of nuclear explosive
devices.

The International Atomic Energy Agency is also
the international coordinating centre for technical
cooperation in nuclear matters. The international
community should consider expanding the functions of
the Agency to include the verification of bilateral
nuclear arsenal reductions carried out by nuclear
States, with a view to achieving the ultimate goal of
totally eliminating these nuclear arsenals.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that international
peace and security cannot be achieved through the
possession of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction, or the threat of their use. Rather,
these can be achieved by consolidating the principles
of dialogue, understanding and mutual respect,
upholding justice and promoting fruitful cooperation
between States. We hope that those States which
possess nuclear weapons will uphold their
responsibilities in this area.

