First of all, allow me to congratulate Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November. I thank the presidency for convening today's debate and for its selection of the topic for discussion. I would also like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive statements. Morocco welcomes the topic of today's debate, which allows us to go beyond our usual discussions and incorporate into the peacebuilding equation elements that, regrettably, are inadequately addressed, such as climate change and health risks, food insecurity and the impact of the illegal exploitation of natural resources. Today's debate also enables us to reaffirm some of the cardinal principles of peacebuilding, including the need to work together, while demonstrating coordination and consistency. As a fervent supporter of the principles of peacebuilding, while adhering to the instructions of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Morocco is committed to providing targeted support for friendly countries and prioritizing South-South cooperation within its foreign policy. Morocco believes that peacebuilding cannot be successful without a holistic vision. First and foremost, prevention must be the priority. In that spirit, Morocco provides political and financial support to the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs to assist in its prevention activities, through both mediation efforts and the good offices missions of its regional offices. Secondly, Morocco was swift to adopt the concept of the peace, security and development nexus, while promoting the holistic vision in its cooperation efforts. Morocco is proud to be able to support several countries, in particular in Africa, by providing experts in agriculture, electrification, water management and other areas, commensurate with the most pressing needs of the countries concerned. In its capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, Morocco adopted an identical approach - focusing its work on supporting the political process, the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan 2017-2021, which is an ambitious socioeconomic recovery plan, and the rule of law. Morocco has also been a pioneer in improving cooperation among the PBC, the Economic and Social Council and the Security Council. For the third consecutive year, the configuration just adopted Security Council recommendations for the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. Capitalizing on its dual role as Chair of the configuration and of the Humanitarian Affairs Segment of the Economic and Social Council, Morocco organized the first joint meeting of the PBC and the Economic and Social Council in 2019 on the sidelines of the high-level event of the Humanitarian Affairs Segment. Lastly, for decades, Morocco has also been committed to combating the adverse effects of climate change. This commitment increased tenfold following the twenty- second Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Marrakech, and the adoption of our new national energy strategy, which aims to achieve more than 60 per cent of the country's energy consumption through its own resources. The Kingdom of Morocco is now cited as a model for responsible management of the environment. Expertise developed in this area is also shared with several partners in Africa and beyond. Several other factors have a critical impact on peacebuilding processes. However, by building on the One UN principle, the United Nations can assist its Member States in identifying the main challenges and areas that need to be prioritized. In conclusion, taking into account the considerable impact of the pandemic, I would like to stress that the joint efforts of the international community must now be focused on mitigating its negative consequences, the extent of which will be known with certainty only in the coming years. We must ensure that the root causes of conflict are not further exacerbated by this crisis and that, insofar as possible, hard- won peace dividends are not put at risk.
