Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting to discuss issues related to the agenda item
"The situation between Iraq and Kuwait". We consider
this a very important meeting, as this will allow the
Security Council to take into account the views of non-
members before taking decisions that all the Member
States of the United Nations will have an obligation to
implement.
When the Council last March held an open debate
on the humanitarian situation in Iraq, Council members
expressed concern about the plight of the Iraqi people
and welcomed the recommendations put forward at that
time by the Secretary-General. The Council has since
taken a series of actions to improve the oil-for-food
programme, in addition to removing all quota
restrictions on the quantity of oil authorized under the
programme, which resulted from the adoption of
resolution 1284 (1999). Having removed the ceiling for
oil exports, we also recognized the constraints posed
by the lack of capacity inherent in the deteriorating
state of the oil industry of Iraq. Jamaica, like other
members of the Council, advocated an increase in the
amount of money to be made available for oil spare
parts and equipment. The Security Council responded
favourably by increasing substantially the amount of
money made available for this purpose.

There remained, however, a problem with the
holds placed on certain items, which made the approval
of the increase in expenditure somewhat meaningless.
Jamaica joined others in the Council to urge those
countries placing those holds to ease them. While many
of these holds have been removed, much more needs to
be done to increase and improve the flow of goods and
services to the oil industry.

Jamaica also supported increased expenditure on
areas critical to the socio-economic well-being of the
Iraqi people, particularly in the health and education
sectors, as well as the removal of all impediments to
the import of goods and services earmarked for these
sectors. We supported the call for expenditures targeted
on Iraq's infrastructure, particularly on water and
electricity. We shared the belief that the long-term
damage to Iraq's development should be ameliorated.

We must, however, express our regret that the
Government of Iraq has not taken full advantage of the
funds available in the oil-for-food programme, and that
the people of Iraq are not deriving the full benefits
from it. At the same time, Jamaica has consistently
stated in the Council that sanctions regimes must be
focused, effectively targeted and of limited duration.
We have also emphasized that sanctions must be
designed in such a way that the civilian population is
not made to suffer for the intransigence of its leaders.
For this reason, Jamaica supports the current efforts
being undertaken in the Security Council to modify the
sanctions regime so as to alleviate the suffering of the
Iraqi people.

Jamaica is cognizant of the concerns expressed by
States neighbouring Iraq that the changes being
contemplated could cause disruptions to their
economies. Their legitimate concerns must be taken
into account in our deliberations.

In this review many difficult issues remain to be
resolved. For that reason, Jamaica would have been
prepared to support a period longer than the month's
extension of the oil-for-food programme adopted under
resolution 1352 (2001). Nevertheless, we believe that,
given the requisite political will, appropriate solutions
can be found to reduce significantly the effect of
sanctions on the people of Iraq, while preventing Iraq
from acquiring the ability to threaten its neighbours
and the international community.

In this regard, we call on the Government of Iraq
to cooperate fully with the United Nations, to comply
with Security Council resolutions and, through
verification, to prove to the international community
that it no longer possesses the ability to produce
weapons of mass destruction. Iraq, we believe, must
allow the United Nations Monitoring and Verification
Commission (UNMOVIC) to carry out the tasks
assigned to it. UNMOVIC stands ready to engage Iraq
in the inspection and verification process. It is up to the
Government of Iraq to act.

Finally, we call on the Government of Iraq to
abide by all relevant Security Council resolutions with
respect to Kuwait. We urge Iraq to cooperate with
special envoy Vorontsov on the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and to return
Kuwaiti cultural property.

As we consider the proposals presented by
various members of the Council, my delegation will be
guided by the determination to improve the socio-
economic conditions of the Iraqi people, while seeking
to ensure that Iraq's neighbours and the region can
enjoy peace, security and prosperity.

