Mr. Lucas (Angola): Madam President, I wish at
the outset to welcome you and to express my
delegation's appreciation to the Philippine delegation
for convening this important meeting on the role of
civil society in post-conflict peace-building. My
delegation welcomes the participation of the Secretary-
General and the President of the Economic and Social
Council.

A word of praise goes to the representatives of
civil society organizations invited to take part in this
meeting. Their presence here is recognition of the
important role played by civil society in international
life - an importance acquired by their relationship
with the Security Council and their potential for
dynamic cooperation in the struggle for peace and
international security.

The engagement of civil society in fulfilling the
goals of the United Nations is steadily growing, as are
the depth and quality of that commitment. It makes
cooperation with civil society an essential element in
strengthening the efficiency of the United Nations. By
their intervention and commitment, civil society
organizations have become a sort of moral reserve for
the international community, filling a gap that defence
of national interests by States is not always able to fill.

The concept paper proposed by the presidency to
guide our work raises a number of questions that are
self-explanatory on the important role that civil society
and its organizations play in international life.
Interesting changes have been taking place in the
perception of Governments, particularly those facing
post-conflict situations, of the role of civil society.
That perception is evolving from deep distrust towards
a better understanding of the potential and important
role of civil society in education for peace and in basic
activities of reconstruction and development leading to
the establishment of solid partnerships.

In many countries, civil society organizations
have become a niche where many women and men
with social sensitivity can put into practice efforts and
ideas for the common well-being. It is essential to
ensure, in those circumstances, the full participation of
those people in post-conflict peace-building.

The establishment of a climate of tolerance and
respect for different views on alternative strategies to
strengthen peace and national reconciliation is a
cornerstone for the participation of civil society in
social processes. The Security Council, with its great
authority, has an essential role to play in strengthening
civil society in post-conflict situations by using its
influence and striving for the establishment of such an
environment of tolerance and democracy.

The studies produced by civil society
organizations and the proposals they present are of
great value in assisting the Security Council and its
members in dealing with most critical and complex
crisis situations. Over the years their presence on the
ground has been instrumental in providing information
on extremely grave situations that otherwise would
have gone ignored. In many instances, it was the
information and actions of non-governmental
organizations that prompted the international
community to act. A new partnership has emerged in
which civil society and its organizations are crucial
factors in the mobilization of national and world public
opinion and in channelling that commitment to specific
causes such as post-conflict peace-building,
humanitarian relief, DDR, landmines and HIV/AIDS.
In such contexts we stress as a landmark the role
played by civil society in the international campaign
for banning landmines, which lead to the 1997
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines.

In Angola, civil society and its organizations are
playing an ever-increasing and decisive role in national
reconciliation and peace-building. Civil society in
Angola is steadily becoming a vibrant and powerful
social force. Its organizations - local, national and
international - now work in partnership with the
Angolan Government in the consolidation of peace, the
fight against poverty, demining, raising awareness of
HIV/AIDS, the fight against epidemics, providing
education and health, and in cooperating for the
development of Angola. The partnership with civil
society became a vital component of the efforts
deployed by the Angolan Government and by Angolan
society as a whole to overcome the wounds of war.

To conclude, I would like to say a word on
regional approaches to post-conflict reconstruction and
the role of civil society. The African Union has been
engaged for many years with African civil society
organizations by attaching great value to their role in
the promotion of development and in fostering post-
conflict peace-building. It is widely recognized that
peace-building policies in Africa should encompass a
comprehensive strategy that includes State institutions
and civil society, acting in partnership, as a means to
bestow ownership in the solution of very complex
problems, such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; refugees and displaced persons; national
reconstruction and long-term post-conflict
reconciliation - issues that go well beyond
Governments and the United Nations.

Finally, we seize this opportunity to commend the
report of the Panel of Eminent Persons on United
Nations-Civil Society Relations, released yesterday. It
is our belief that the work of the Panel is of great
importance for further improving the partnership
between the United Nations and civil society in post-
conflict peace-building. We hope that this meeting,
which is taking place at a very timely moment, will
contribute to establishing a solid conceptual and
operational framework with a view to strengthening the
relationship between the Security Council and civil
society in the search for peace, reconciliation, justice
and social progress.

