Mr. Pascoe: Two months after unilateral
ceasefires were declared in Gaza, we face a worrying
situation of impasse and uncertainty. Despite
international engagement and support, very little
concrete progress has been made on key issues outlined
in Security Council resolution 1860 (2009). They
include the establishment of a proper ceasefire regime
in Gaza, unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance,
opening of the crossings, prevention of illicit
trafficking in arms and ammunition, and
intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

Turning now to the more detailed part of the
briefing, let me begin with Palestinian political
09-27993
developments. Palestinian Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad announced on 7 March his intention to resign
at the end of the month, in order to bolster efforts to
form a national conciliation government. President
Mahmoud Abbas asked the Prime Minister to remain in
office until the reconciliation dialogue was brought to a
conclusion.

Between 10 and 19 March, Palestinian factions,
as well as independents, assembled in Cairo under
Egyptian auspices, with the goal of reaching agreement
prior to the League of Arab States summit meeting to
be held in Doha on 30 March. Egyptian officials report
progress on certain aspects of the issues under
discussion, namely the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO), elections, government, security
and reconciliation. However, the talks adjourned
without an agreement and are expected to reconvene on
1 April. We reiterate our support for this process, as
called for in resolution 1860 (2009).

Egypt hosted the International Conference on the
Palestinian Economy and Gaza Reconstruction in
Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March. The Secretary-General
joined representatives from some 80 countries and
multilateral organizations in responding to the
Palestinian Authority's Gaza Early Recovery and
Reconstruction Plan. Donors generously pledged some
$4.5 billion for humanitarian and economic relief.

As he outlined at the Conference in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Prime Minister Fayyad has initiated three
large-scale interventions for Gaza's recovery process,
aimed at rebuilding houses, agricultural development
and private sector recovery. The United Nations
supports the Palestinian Authority's relief and recovery
efforts and continues to implement projects under the
flash appeal, while simultaneously trying to restart
projects dormant for many months prior to the military
operation due to lack of material allowed in by Israel.

Discussions continue on convening the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in the near future. Key challenges
to be addressed include the need for increased budget
support for the Palestinian Authority, more clarity on
how to channel the funds pledged in Sharm el-Sheikh
for Gaza's recovery and on the need to address the
overall framework for economic growth in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

However, the intolerable situation at Gaza's
crossings remains the key impediment to bringing help
and hope to the people of Gaza. From 15 February to
09-27993
21 March, a total of 3,633 truckloads - a weekly
average of 727 - entered Gaza through the various
crossing points from Israel and through Rafah.
Roughly 85 per cent of all imports consisted of
foodstuffs and medical supplies, whereas construction
materials, spare parts and other industrial goods
remained almost totally banned. While there has been
an increase in the amount of goods getting into Gaza,
and the Israeli Cabinet announced on 22 March that
foodstuffs from relevant sources would be allowed into
Gaza without restriction, the quality and quantity of
imports are insufficient compared to needs. For that
reason, the United Nations reiterates its call on Israel
to abide by its obligations under international
humanitarian law and to open the crossings for
emergency supplies and reconstruction materials,
without which there will be no way to rebuild Gaza.

The quantity of industrial fuel and cooking gas is
also insufficient, as only about 70 per cent and 25 per
cent, respectively, of the weekly needs enter Gaza. A
total ban remains in place on the import of petrol and
diesel, except for small quantities delivered to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

According to the International Monetary Fund,
the continued restriction on the entry of cash and the
inability of many, including Palestinian Authority
employees, to withdraw salaries from the banks affect
the livelihoods of approximately half a million Gazans.
UNRWA and other international partners are unable to
distribute cash assistance and to settle payments for
social hardship cases.

We continue to be concerned that, despite
Egyptian efforts, no ceasefire regime is in place. In
addition, there has been no breakthrough in efforts to
secure the release of Corporal Shalit and several
hundred Palestinian prisoners, despite the
intensification of efforts. Following an Israeli
announcement on 17 March that agreement had not
been reached, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) arrested
10 Hamas leaders in the West Bank, including a former
deputy prime minister of the Palestinian Authority. The
Israeli Cabinet announced on 22 March its intention to
remove privileges not mandated by legal requirements
or treaty obligations from Hamas and Islamic Jihad
prisoners.

In the absence of a ceasefire, violence continues.
During the reporting period, more than 100 rockets and
3
mortars were fired into Israel from Gaza. Those
attacks, targeting civilian areas, are irresponsible and
must cease. In addition, there were 12 Israeli air
strikes, killing five Palestinians and injuring 30. We
call for an end to all acts of violence and for respect of
international humanitarian law by all parties.

Four United Nations Mine Action Teams continue
working in Gaza to remove and deactivate unexploded
ordinance. One UNRWA and one municipal school
have been cleared, along with the UNRWA warehouse
at the Karni crossing. There has been no development
regarding the return or identification of a new location
of the ordinance, including several unexploded bombs
that went missing in February 2009.

We are concerned by recent actions of the
de facto Hamas authorities in Gaza purporting to assert
control over the Palestinian Authority Department of
External Medical Treatment. If not reversed without
delay, that step could prevent referrals from Gaza of
patients needing urgent or complex medical care not
available there.

The members of the Board of Inquiry into
incidents in Gaza, established by the Secretary-
General, have returned from the region and the Board
is now working on its report. As the Council is aware,
the Board was tasked to review and investigate a
number of specific incidents that occurred in the Gaza
Strip between 27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009,
in which death or injuries occurred or damage was
done at United Nations premises. The Board will
submit its report to the Secretary-General when he
returns to New York in early April.

During the reporting period, a number of
allegations emerged from Israel Defense Forces
soldiers that they engaged in improper conduct towards
civilians during Operation Cast Lead. On 19 March,
the IDF Military Advocate General instructed the
military police to probe those allegations.

Special Coordinator Serry is in Gaza today, and
his consultations with business leaders and civil
society representatives have underscored the desperate
need for a new approach to Gaza based on a ceasefire,
open crossings, rejuvenation of the private sector and
Palestinian reconciliation. Without those, the many
unresolved issues, combined with the absence of an
active negotiations track and continued suffering, could
portend a quick return to violence.
A new Israeli Government has yet to be formed
following the elections for the Knesset last month.
President Peres commissioned Likud party leader
Binyamin Netanyahu to try to form a Government on
20 February, and Mr. Netanyahu remains engaged in
intensive consultations with several parties to that end.

We continue to follow with concern negative
actions on the ground in the West Bank, where
insufficient steps are being taken to lift the weight of
the occupation and to implement commitments. The
rejection by the Israeli Ministry of the Interior of a
planning scheme submitted by residents of the Silwan
neighbourhood in East Jerusalem has given rise to
concerns that it could pave the way for the demolition
and building of a municipal park in a sensitive area of
the city populated by more than 1,000 Palestinians.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities also
served dozens of new orders for demolition and
eviction, as well as against structures located in Area C
of the West Bank which, if implemented, could affect
hundreds of Palestinian residents throughout East
Jerusalem. We call on the Government of Israel to stop
house demolitions in East Jerusalem and generally to
refrain from unilateral actions that may prejudge final
status issues.

In the affected areas of the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, it is extremely difficult for Palestinians
to obtain building permits. Quartet Representative
Tony Blair drew attention last week to the fact that,
without changes in the current system applied to areas
of the West Bank under full Israeli military and
administrative control, Palestinians will be prevented
from improving their standard of living and from
developing their land.

Also in Jerusalem, on 21 March, Israeli security
forces disrupted a Palestinian celebration marking East
Jerusalem as a capital of Arab culture. Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem remain closed by Israeli
order, and the construction of illegal settlements
continues in Jerusalem and throughout the West Bank.
No action has been taken to remove outposts.
Settlement activity, including in the highly sensitive
E-l area, continues to deprive Palestinians of land for
development and agriculture and to create facts on the
ground that severely prejudice final status issues.

The Ministry of Defence also approved
construction plans for a settlement near Hebron. Let
me reiterate before this Council that Israel's
09-27993
obligations under the Road Map are clear. Settlement
activity, including so-called natural growth, must be
frozen and outposts must be removed.

Elsewhere in the West Bank, the more than
600 obstacles to movement continue to make normal
social and economic interactions impossible for the
Palestinian residents there. Construction of the barrier
continued in the occupied Palestinian territory away
from the Green Line, contrary to the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice.

In the context of Palestinian Road Map
obligations, Palestinian security forces remain highly
visible in urban centres in the West Bank, prevent
militants from conducting activities or displaying
illegal weapons and continue their efforts to ensure law
and order. However, no major operations or new
deployments have taken place since reconciliation talks
began in Cairo, and more than a hundred Hamas
prisoners were released from Palestinian Authority jails
as a goodwill gesture in the context of the
reconciliation talks.

There have been some gradual improvements
regarding cooperation between Israel and the
Palestinian security forces, including the recent return
of hundreds of rifles confiscated in 2002 and an easing
of the closure regime in and around Nablus.
Nevertheless, the IDF continues to raid West Bank
towns and villages on a daily basis, citing security
concerns. According to United Nations statistics, IDF
operations in the West Bank have more than doubled in
frequency since the end of the Gaza crisis, with nearly
two hundred carried out during the reporting period.

Also during the reporting period, two Israeli
policemen were killed by Palestinians in an attack in
the Jordan Valley and two other policemen were
injured in another attack in West Jerusalem. On
21 March, Israeli police reported that a large bomb had
been found and defused in the car park of a shopping
mall in Haifa. Two Palestinians were killed by Israeli
security forces, and 82 were injured. Most injuries
occurred during protests against the barrier and against
settlement expansion. During the reporting period, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
recorded 26 incidents involving Israeli settlers
targeting Palestinians, which resulted in seven injuries.
Twenty-eight people were reportedly wounded in Israel
on 24 March during clashes between police and
09-27993
demonstrators marching in the vicinity of the town of
Umm al-Fahm.

The Secretary-General looks forward to attending
the summit of the League of Arab States on 30 March
and offers his encouragement for Arab unity in support
of Palestinian unity under President Abbas and the
central importance of the Arab Peace Initiative. In that
respect, we take note that Saudi Arabia hosted a
meeting with Syria, Egypt and Kuwait in Riyadh on
11 March aimed at strengthening ties within the Arab
world and that participants agreed to support the
Palestinian reconciliation process under way. The
Secretary-General continues to support the holding of
an international conference in Moscow in the near
future.

During the reporting period, senior United States
officials visited Damascus, and Syrian President Assad
has indicated his country's readiness to renew indirect
negotiations with a new Israeli Government. On the
ground, settlement activity in the occupied Syrian
Golan continued, although the situation was otherwise
quiet. We continue to stress the importance and
potential of Israeli-Syrian negotiations and hope that it
will be possible in the year ahead to further that track,
alongside a reinvigorated Israeli-Palestinian track.

I now turn to Lebanon. Mindful that the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon briefed the Council on
10 March on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), I should just like to touch on a
few issues.

On 23 March 2009, the relative calm that had
prevailed in Lebanon for several weeks was interrupted
when Kamal Medhat, Deputy PLO Representative in
Lebanon and a high-ranking Fatah member, was killed
by a roadside bomb outside the entrance to Saida's
Mieh Mieh camp. In the explosion, three of Medhat's
bodyguards were also killed and two other persons
were severely injured. Palestinian as well as Lebanese
political leaders have reached out to Palestinian faction
leaders in the camps in an attempt to mitigate potential
tensions on the ground. The Secretary-General has
condemned that terrorist attack. He expressed his hope
that the perpetrators of that crime will be promptly
brought to justice and noted that such actions must not
be allowed to endanger the climate of calm that
currently prevails in Lebanon.
Campaigning for the 7 June elections has started,
leading to increased political rhetoric among the
country's numerous political groups. Parties have yet
to announce their electoral lists, but consultations on
candidates are under way. Candidates have until
7 April to register.

A fifth session of the national dialogue, bringing
together Lebanon's 14 main political leaders, took
place on 2 March under the aegis of President Sleiman.
Participants agreed to develop proposals for a national
defence strategy. It was also agreed at the dialogue that
all parties will work to ensure that the elections are
conducted in a calm and peaceful atmosphere. A
further session of the dialogue is planned for 28 April.

A ceremony took place on 9 March to mark the
start of reconstruction in the Nahr el-Bared camp.
Securing adequate funding to complete the work
remains an issue of major importance.

On 16 March, the Lebanese embassy in Syria was
inaugurated. The Lebanese Ambassador to Syria will
take up his post in mid-April. On 24 March, Lebanese
President Sleiman accepted the credentials of the
newly appointed Syrian Ambassador to Lebanon.
Those appointments come at a timely juncture and are
welcome developments that fulfil one of the key
provisions of Security Council resolution 1680 (2006).

The overall situation during the month in the area
of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon has been generally quiet. Progress on the
project of visibly marking the Blue Line continued to
be made this month, with four additional points having
been agreed for marking. Israeli air violations
continued on an almost daily basis during the reporting
period.

It is important that the Quartet and the
international community act with unity of purpose to
help stabilize Gaza and reinvigorate the peace process.
We need to have both Israeli and Palestinian
Governments that are clearly committed to the two-
State solution. We need a continuation of negotiations,
the implementation of commitments on the ground and
a strategy for de-escalating tensions and addressing the
urgent humanitarian needs in Gaza.

