Mr. Fall (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset, on behalf of the Secretary-General, to join
previous speakers in expressing congratulations and
gratitude to you, Madam President, for having taken
the initiative to organize this important meeting, and to
thank your country for the diligent and active manner
in which is has been chairing the International
Conference on the Great Lakes region.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/46),
which it is my honour to introduce to the Council,
follows up on his report to the Council of 17 November
2003 (S/2003/1099), in which the Secretary-General
described the state of the preparatory process for the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Some important progress has been made in that process
since November 2003, and the Council has been kept
regularly informed, here at Headquarters and during
visits on the ground. The most important advance, of
course, was the holding of the first Summit of the
Conference, at Dar es-Salaam in November 2004.

Furthermore, thanks to the momentum generated
by the Conference process, the regional political
dialogue that began in 2003 has continued to make
progress. That regular framework for diplomatic,
political and technical cooperation at the regional level
has been conducive to the emergence and strengthening
of a climate of trust among the countries members of
the Conference, which has helped to facilitate the
preparatory work for the second Summit - the Nairobi
Summit - originally scheduled to take place in
December 2005 but delayed until 2006 at the request of
a country member of the Conference.

The first Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the International Conference was
successfully held at Dar es-Salaam on 19 and
20 November 2004, and marked the end of the first
phase of the process. The Dar es-Salaam Declaration
was an important milestone for the region. It was the
first comprehensive regional political document
prepared jointly by Governments and non-
governmental actors in which leaders offered a candid
diagnosis of the ills of the region and agreed on a
forward-looking regional vision of peace, security and
development, formulating guiding principles and
policy priorities on the four key themes of the
Conference and charting a road map for the elaboration
of a Security, Stability and Development Pact in the
Great Lakes region, which is to be concluded during
the second Summit.
In the Dar es-Salaam Declaration it was also
decided to establish a mechanism for formulating
action plans, protocols and specific, achievable and
measurable projects. The mechanism has three
components: a Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee; a
Regional Preparatory Committee; and technical
thematic groups.

The Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee, which
will be led by Tanzania, which chairs the Conference
process, until the holding of the second Summit, is
made up of 11 member country ministers in charge of
the organization of the conference - nine of whom
have honoured us with their presence today in this
Chamber - as well as of ministers from neighbouring
co-opted countries, several of whom are also taking
part in today's meeting. The Regional Inter-Ministerial
Committee has met to shape, consider and approve the
work of the Regional Preparatory Committee. It also
liaises with the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region and the international community in general,
using its good offices to resolve the most difficult
questions relating to projects and protocols, prioritizing
such protocols and action plans and mediating complex
and sensitive political and diplomatic issues. The last
meeting of the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee
before the second Summit will take place in Bangui
from 21 to 24 February 2006, during which priorities
for the draft Pact will be finalized and adjusted.

The Regional Preparatory Committee is the
executive body of the Conference. It coordinates the
technical preparation of the action programmes,
protocols and projects to be submitted to the second
Summit. It is made up of the national coordinators of
the 11 member countries, as well as of national
representatives of women, youth and civil society, and
submits its recommendations to the Regional Inter-
Ministerial Committee. The technical thematic clusters
are the technical organs of the Conference, composed
of experts from the Great Lakes region, assisted by
experts from the United Nations system, the Group of
Friends of the region and regional and subregional
economic communities. Those experts are responsible
for elaborating projects and protocols.

It is in that context that the joint secretariat of the
Bureau of the African Union and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region is responsible for preparing,
coordinating and ensuring follow-up on all
mechanisms, operations, documents, meetings and
other priority Conference activities and for
implementing all of that in order to give substance to
the Security, Stability and Development Pact by
supporting the preparation and finalization of action
plans, projects and selected priority protocols.

In that context, the Special Representative carries
out political activities in support of member States,
preventive diplomacy and confidence-building
measures intended to preserve and strengthen the
atmosphere of trust essential for continuing the
Conference preparation process.

The region's countries have chosen a number of
protocols and priority projects, which are combined in
action plans corresponding to each of the Conference's
four themes. The report submitted for members'
consideration summarizes those priority documents.

With regard to peace and security, the protocol on
non-aggression, mutual defence and peaceful
resolution of conflict is emphasized. That protocol is
accompanied by a series of priority projects, all of
which are related to joint border security management
based on an innovative security architecture that
divides the Great Lakes region into 12 cross-border
security zones. Those projects include the disarmament
of armed groups in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the disarmament of farmers
in border regions between the Sudan, Uganda and
Kenya. A third project is related to managing the
common border between Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. Those are
specific and concrete border cooperation projects that
combine State security with human security, and their
implementation brings together governmental actors
and local populations.

The other priority projects, in keeping with the
Dar es-Salaam Declaration, seek to support, harmonize
and strengthen the initiatives of existing regional
mechanisms in areas such as combating the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
countering terrorism and transnational crime, demining
and combating anti-personnel mines.

In the area of democracy and good governance,
the priority initiatives are based on the project for a
regional centre to promote democracy, good
governance, human rights and civic education. In
addition, three protocols - on preventing crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, on
combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and on judicial cooperation - complete this picture.

With respect to economic development and
regional integration, the priority projects include a
mechanism for the certification of natural resources,
which is the operational interface of the protocol on
combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources;
a regional microcredit project; the relaunching of the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries;
and a framework project establishing cross-border
developmental zones to strengthen regionalism and
development among States and border populations
through cooperation initiatives concerning cross-border
natural resources.

Other projects are related to the development of
existing infrastructures, such as road, railway and river
transport corridors. The one and only protocol
concerns the specific zone for reconstruction and
development, whose creation was announced by
Conference member States in the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration.

Finally, in the area of priority humanitarian and
social issues, the projects focus on the pioneering
protocols on protecting and assisting internally
displaced persons, on the property rights of repatriated
persons, on sexual violence against women and
children and on humanitarian workers' access to
populations in need. In addition, Conference actors
have always sought to integrate, in a practical manner,
the highly important cross-cutting themes of gender,
HIV/AIDS, human rights, the environment and human
settlements into the protocols and priority projects.

Once it has been signed, the Pact must be
subjected to the test of implementation. To that end,
the countries members of the Conference have planned
to establish a simple regional follow-up mechanism,
whose activities must be supported by the United
Nations and the African Union. It is already agreed that
its role will be to supervise the implementation of the
Pact, to work to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts
in the region and to maintain close working
relationships with the regional and international
institutions involved in implementing the Pact.

As the protocols and priority projects indicate,
the draft Security, Stability and Development Pact for
the Great Lakes region seeks to address the root causes
of insecurity, conflict and instability in the region
through an integrated regional approach and by
emphasizing the links among the four themes of the
Conference. These projects and protocols might have
seemed numerous during the first phase of the
Regional Preparatory Committee's work. However, on
the basis of ministerial directives, the Committee
subjected them to a rigorous priority-setting exercise at
its meeting in Luanda in September 2005.
Here, I should emphasize once again the close
links that exist among the priority projects
corresponding to each theme and among the projects
corresponding to the four themes of the Conference,
within the framework of an approach based on human
security. As the Dar es-Salaam Declaration recalls,
although poor governance, systematic violations of
human rights, policies of discrimination, exclusion and
political, social and economic marginalization or
marginalization based on gender, the use of violence
for conquering or conserving political power and
impunity for crimes are all related to the theme of
democracy and good governance, they are - together
with the worsening of poverty, economic stagnation
and the illegal exploitation of natural resources -
among the major causative factors of the insecurity,
conflicts and wars that have ravaged the region.
Therefore, it might seem difficult to isolate and limit
the Conference's sphere of action to addressing peace
and security issues - although, chronologically
speaking, the urgency of those issues naturally calls for
priority and immediate action.

Participation from the outset by all the region's
forces and by African subregional organizations and
taking their concerns into consideration - a regional
first at that level - enabled us to bring the entire
region together in support of the Conference and to
place the preparatory work under the seal of
transparency, consensus and pragmatism. Moreover,
the entire United Nations family, including the
missions in the region, and the lead agencies of the
Conference's four themes are participating fully in the
process.

Finally, the international community - mainly
through the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region - has been the preferred partner of the
Conference since it was established. The preparatory
process has generated enthusiasm and hopes
commensurate with the scope of the challenges to be
met to pacify, stabilize and develop the region.

In that context, postponing the second Summit at
the request of a member State, has, despite the
legitimacy of that request, affected the momentum of
preparations for the second Summit, which had been
scheduled for the end of 2005. It undermines the
process, given the risk of that postponement being
perceived as a lack of political will. It also increases
the likelihood of the preparatory process's being
disrupted and has unpredictable and significant
financial implications.
It is therefore imperative that member States of
the Conference agree on a date for the second Summit
as soon as possible so as to demonstrate political will
and maintain the process's momentum. They must
continue to respect the letter and the content of the
provisions of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration.

The presence of those Ministers who are here
today is undeniable proof of the importance that the
countries of the Great Lakes region and their
neighbours and partners attach to this process. But the
international community is expecting to see other
strong signals of a steadfast political and financial
commitment at the highest levels of the member States
of the Conference. That is a prerequisite if the Great
Lakes region is to persuade the international
community of its determination to transform the region
into a zone of peace, security, stability and
development, which would make it the first proving
ground for the work of the new Peacebuilding
Commission.

The ministerial meeting to be held at Bangui from
21 to 23 February 2006 will be an opportunity to take
specific measures to normalize diplomatic relations
and to implement a number of projects and protocols.

The report of the Secretary-General notes that the
task of pacifying and stabilizing the region and
promoting development there is an immense but
achievable one. Largely as a result of the sustained
work of the African Union and of the small team of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes region, significant
progress has been made during the last two years of the
process, following the last report of the Secretary-
General, in developing concrete and realistic projects
and in strengthening confidence among countries of the
region.

We are nearing our goal. The Secretary-General
believes, therefore, that the Council must continue to
support the preparatory process of the Conference in
general and the work of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in particular.
Every effort should also be made to ensure the
convening, as soon as possible, of the second Summit
and the adoption of the Security, Stability and
Development Pact. It will then be incumbent on the
United Nations, on the basis of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's strategy of
preventive diplomacy and with the support of the
international community, and in cooperation with the
African Union, to support and assist the region in the
establishment of a regional follow-up mechanism and
in the implementation of the Pact - the linchpin of the
entire process. It is only through such an effort by the
United Nations and on that basis that the
Conference - to whose preparatory process the
countries of the region and the international
community have devoted so much effort - will yield
dividends of peace, security, stability and development
to the benefit of the peoples of the Great Lakes region,
which have suffered so much.

That is the content of the recommendations with
which the Secretary-General concludes the report that
it has been my privilege to present to the Council.

Allow me to conclude on a personal note. The
Great Lakes region, in its current configuration,
encompasses the States of central Africa, of eastern
Africa and of southern Africa - three of the five
regions of Africa - which means that bringing peace,
security, stability and development to the region will
make a fundamental contribution to ensuring that the
same process takes place on the African continent as a
whole.

