Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statement that will be made on behalf of the European
Union. Given the importance we attach to this agenda
item, I wish to make a few remarks from the national
point of view.

Turkey, as a country that has suffered from
terrorism for more than 20 years, has been at the
forefront of efforts to eradicate this scourge. However,
terrorism is not a phenomenon peculiar to a certain
country or a certain region. Tragic events around the
globe have proven that no country or region can
consider itself immune from terrorism. Hence, the fight
against terrorism should be a priority for all. Likewise,
one of the most important prerequisites of the success
in this fight is international cooperation.

At this point, I would like to refer to Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), which calls upon
Member States to work together to suppress and
prevent terrorist acts through increased cooperation. I
do not want to go into the details of that landmark
resolution, but allow me to underline some its
provisions that deserve particular attention as to the
need for international cooperation.

First, denial of safe haven to terrorists is one of
the fundamental obligations set out in that resolution,
and it certainly requires a more advanced level of
cooperation among the interested countries.

Secondly, the responsibility to end impunity for
terrorists is also an essential element of the resolution.
That can be achieved only by ensuring that terrorists
are brought to justice, that punishment envisaged in
domestic laws duly reflects the seriousness of terrorist
acts and that refugee status is not abused by terrorists.

The resolution indeed highlights the necessity for
increased international cooperation. We strongly
believe that resolution 1373 (2001) provides a firm
basis for a coordinated and united response to
terrorism. However, the resolution can yield the
desired results only if it is implemented by all Member
States to the fullest extent. In this regard, we hope that
the recently introduced preliminary implementation
assessment mechanism, which is expected to identify
the areas where countries need to take additional
measures, will improve the implementation of that
important resolution.

On the other hand, intensified dialogue between
the Member States and the United Nations could also

help detect some of the shortfalls in the fight against
terrorism. It is with this understanding we accepted the
offer by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to visit Turkey last year. We hope
and expect that CTED will be able to visit other
countries that have become targets or safe havens for
terrorists.

Finally, mutual legal assistance and full respect
for the obligation to extradite or prosecute set the
framework of international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. In this regard, we welcome the
creation of technical groups, as indicated in the revised
organizational plan for CTED, which will be dealing,
inter alia, with general legal issues such as extradition
and mutual legal assistance.

Living in a peaceful and secure world is a goal
shared by all Member States of the United Nations, and
this goal can only be achieved through determined
international cooperation to eradicate the scourge of
terrorism.

Before concluding my remarks, I also wish to
extend our congratulations to the new Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, His Excellency
Mr. Neven Jurica, and to the new Executive Director of
CTED, Mr. Mike Smith, and reiterate that we will lend
them all the support that is needed.

