The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of South Africa.

South Africa joins other members of the Security
Council in congratulating Mr. Fall on his commitment
to the efforts to bring about peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region. South Africa is
truly honoured by the kind of service he has given to
the Great Lakes region and to Africa as a whole
throughout his service to the United Nations.

We also take this opportunity to pay tribute to
Mr. Fall's efforts in initiating, together with the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. We recall that the International Conference
was initiated after decades of armed conflict and
humanitarian disasters in the region, in particular the
genocide in Rwanda and the conflicts in Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We are pleased that we have recognized that
development has a political meaning, encompassing
security and stability, without which no sustainable
development is possible. This recognition has brought
a refreshing outlook to our understanding of peace in
the Great Lakes region.

Today, the Great Lakes region in Africa is on the
threshold of establishing lasting peace. There has been
a reduction in both intra-State and inter-State conflicts.
Even though we are still concerned about the negative
forces that remain active, particularly in the eastern
part of the Congo, tensions have been reduced.

Nonetheless, South Africa is pleased at the
progress that has been made in countries such as
Burundi, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which recently inaugurated a democratic
Government. The region has continued to suffer from
the lack of resources to help it meet developmental
objectives, including the Millennium Development
Goals. We are pleased that Mr. Fall's efforts have
contributed immensely to addressing the critical and
sensitive issue of plundering national and natural
resources in the region.

The region is also experiencing increased
political dialogue and collaboration in the resolution of
conflicts and towards post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding. There is now a chance that we may be
witnessing a new direction towards peace, stability and
development in the Great Lakes region.
In this regard, the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region signed by
countries of the region is significant because it creates
a positive environment for sustainable development.
The fact that it allows the leaders of the region to meet
regularly is, in itself, very positive, indeed.

South Africa is privileged to have been part of the
process leading to the convening of the International
Conference. We remain committed to assisting the
region in effectively addressing the objectives that
remain on the transitional agenda. Today, we look back
with pride and with hope for an African renaissance in
the Great Lakes region.

I thank Mr. Fall very much for his service.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Ibrahima Fall to
respond to comments and questions that were raised.

