Mr. Edjo Memba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of this organ for the month of September
and to thank Poland for its excellent work last month.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/682) of 26 August. We also extend our
thanks to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame, and Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for their briefings. We also
thank Ms. Mohamed for the information provided to
the Council.

Allow me to begin my intervention by expressing
the solidarity of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
with the Libyan people and our hope that a solution
to the serious crisis is found and that the peace so
desired by Libyans and the countries of our region of
Africa is restored. We reiterate our firm support for
Mr. Salame in his immeasurable task and unwavering
message that there is no military solution in Libya. We
urge the parties to establish an immediate and definitive
ceasefire and to resume the political process through
direct, frank and inclusive dialogue.

We approach today's meeting with the utmost
concern about the situation and the deterioration of
humanitarian conditions. We are concerned about the
number of civilians killed and internally displaced,
as well as the more than 5,000 migrants and refugees
arbitrarily held in detention centres, not to mention
the high number of deaths off the coast of Libya and
in the Mediterranean recently. In that connection, we
welcome the measures presented by Mr. Salame' at the
meeting held on 29 July (see S/PV.8588), in particular
the call for the closure of detention centres, which we
strongly support and hope will soon take place.

It is with alarm that we highlight the repeated
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We condemn the attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure, clear recent
examples being the attacks against Zuwara and Mitiga
airports between 15 and 17 August and 1 September. We
also condemn the deplorable attacks on health personnel
and health facilities, as well as the obstruction of
access to basic resources such as water and electricity,
among others.

With regard to the security situation, we deeplyregret
the escalation of the conflict, which is compounded by
the presence of foreign fighters and active terrorists and
by egregious and orchestrated violations of the arms
embargo by the main actors in the conflict, as well as
by other United Nations States Members. The massive
flow of arms serves only to rekindle the conflict and
spread instability and insecurity throughout the region.
The Council must be stricter and speak unequivocally
on this issue and must take more effective measures to
put an end to the crisis.

Without straying too far from the matter, allow
me to further insist on a point that we have long been
stressing and which we believe was, and continues to
be, the main obstacle crippling the work of Mr. Salame
and the United Nations, that is, the issue of blatant
and deliberate foreign interference in Libya. It is a
key factor in the crisis and, if not removed from the
equation, will doom us to the prolongation of this
painful conflict. As we stated at the our meeting on
29 July, the Council and the United Nations must
vehemently condemn such interference as a violation
of the principle of State sovereignty and integrity, and
consequently, of the Charter of the United Nations and
a pillar of the Council, namely, the safeguarding of
peace and security. Accordingly, we believe that, by
not condemning such interference and failing to take
definitive action, the Council and its members are
legitimizing, and therefore permitting it to happen. We
do not believe that this is the image the Council wants
to project to the world.

To conclude, we urge the Council and the
international community to redouble their
efforts to find a genuine political solution
focused on the interests of the Libyan people.
We commend the United Nations work in coordination
with the African Union and repeat the statement by
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission at
the latest Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, held in Japan on 28 and 30 August, that

"African problems ought to be solved by Africans
themselves, as illustrated by the signing on 6 August
of the peace agreement between the Government of
Mozambique and the armed opposition RENAMO
and by the political arrangements for a democratic
transition in Sudan."

Once again, we express our solidarity with the
Libyan people.

