Mr. Al-Qirbi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Australia for the work done by the Australian
Mission during its presidency this month. Our thanks
go also to Mr. He'ctor Marcos Timerman, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Argentina, for his wise leadership
of the Council last month. I would also like to convey
the greetings of President Mansour and his deep
appreciation of the role played by the Security Council
in supporting the Yemeni Republic, which enabled it
to peacefully overcome the political crisis; that was
deeply appreciated by the international community.

The visit of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council mission to Yemen truly touched the hearts
of the Yemeni people, because they reaffirmed the
concern of the Security Council and the international
community with regard to the crisis in Yemen and their
support for the country during the transitional period,
with a view to bringing the transition to a successful
conclusion.

The Security Council supported the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) initiative and its
implementation mechanism by adopting resolutions
2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012). I am sure that the Council
will agree that the leaders of the two parties to the
conflict showed wisdom in agreeing to a peaceful
settlement and the democratic transfer of power.

President Mansour was able to manage the crisis in
such a way as to absorb all ofthe parties and induce them
to work together to implement the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative in keeping with the deadlines set.
He was able to defuse the political conflict and involve
all parties in the National Dialogue Conference. That
acceptance is evidence of the degree of civilization of
the Yemeni people, who, at the end of the day, have
given priority to the interests of their country over
those of clans, parties or individuals.

The National Dialogue Conference has been a forum
for the free, transparent and courageous expression of
differing, sometimes provocative positions, but, most
importantly, it has made it possible for people to hear
and accept others' views and make concessions; it
therefore stands as a good example.

On behalf of the Republic of Yemen, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General, who followed
the political process in Yemen; the five permanent
members of the Security Council; and the States
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, which,
through their ambassadors in Sana'a, made it possible
to reach a political solution by reaffirming that it had
to be Yemeni-led.

We thank the countries of the GCC, which
proposed the Gulf initiative and have continued to
sponsor it. We would also like to thank Mr. Al-Zayani,
Secretary-General of the GCC, as well as Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, for their tireless efforts to involve the Yemeni
people in the process of resolving the most complex
issues, particularly during the most trying stages of the
National Dialogue Conference.

Over the course oftwo years the Council has heard a
number of briefings by Mr. Jamal Benomar, which have
made clear that the Yemeni people are committed to the
GCC initiative and its implementation mechanism, as
well as to the National Dialogue Conference, so as to
allow Yemen to emerge from its political crisis and to
create a new Yemen.

During his briefing today, although he spoke of
the fragility of the economic and security situation
and of other threats, Mr. Benomar stressed the
commitment of the Yemeni people. However, in order
for success to be achieved, economic and political
support will be required in the areas of reconstruction
and compensation. Members will agree that that cost,
whatever it might be, would be lower than that of Yemen
returning to the starting block.

President Mansour has worked tirelessly in the
area of the economy, which has been adversely affected
by terrorism. The President focused on managing the
National Dialogue Conference and was able to overcome
obstacles through his wisdom and his patience. Despite
his efforts, however, certain participants in the National
Dialogue made a deliberate attempt to reject the five
goals contained in the GCC initiative, particularly
the need to preserve the unity, security and stability
of Yemen. Those goals were reaffirmed in resolutions
2015 (2011) and 2014 (2011), given the importance of
the Yemeni-agreed hewing closely to the five goals
defined in the GCC initiative.

The Council is thus called on to respect those
resolutions and to reject any proposal that is not
consistent with those goals, because that could
give certain parties a pretext to go back to square
one - which was a situation of violence and conflict.
That is what we have been able to avoid up until now,
thanks to the Gulfinitiative, the unified position of the
Council and its unity with the GCC countries.

The differences among and the legitimate claims of
Yemenis in the north, south, east and west of the country
were taken into consideration during the National
Dialogue Conference, in full transparency, with no
restrictions. Most of those involved in the Dialogue
agreed on a consensus laying out a number of solutions.
Those solutions are part of the new Constitution, which
sets out how power is to be exercised and provides for
justice for all, the equitable distribution of wealth and
the building of the State, while also addressing the
administrative and power imbalances that were the
source of previous crises. The solution must ensure
that the experiences of the past do not recur; indeed,
the best guarantee for the future is the Constitution,
the rule of law and the State institutions tasked with
implementing the outcome of the National Dialogue;
external guarantees will help the political forces to
remain involved in the process, in keeping with the
agreements reached.

Mr. Benomar's briefing described the developments
in the political process since his previous briefing. I
should like to add that six of the nine working groups
have finished their work. The problem remains with the
State-building group and the group dealing with the
southern provinces. The success of the State-building
group depends on the work being completed by the
group dealing with the southern issues. A small
committee of 16 - eight from the North and eight
from the South - members from the southern issues
group has been created to deal with that, including
representation from all political sides, with members
from north and south, to resolve those differences and
arrive at a consensus with regard to the nature of the
State. However, there are fears that there may be delays
for unknown reasons, which could create a further
separation in the future. Thanks to the good offices of
the President of the Republic and Mr. Benomar, those
meetings have continued, and Mr. Benomar has been
able to bring together the views of the participants. We
hope that consensus will be possible.

As in the past, through the GCC initiative, we have
sometimes had to wait for months for consensus to be
achieved, but our goal is to have a successful end to
the transitional period and National Dialogue in order
to accomplish the planned goals in a comprehensive
manner.

I would like to reaffirm to the Security Council that
what we need from it as Yemenis is that the Council
not dictate the solution but that it maintain unity within
the Council and its support for the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementing mechanism,
as well as the two relevant resolutions, and avoid any
attempt to prevent the implementation of the initiative
for the National Dialogue.

President Hadi Mansour is sure that the transitional
period and the National Dialogue will be successful.
We must not move away from that towards a situation of
violence. He always reaffirms that all constitutional and
legal solutions are acceptable with a view to bringing
about freedom and justice for all and to dealing with the
genuine injustices that existed in the past. That is all
part of Yemeni unity, which is not just a safety valve for
Yemen itself but for the region and the world.

Mr. Benomar spoke about the challenges of the
economic and security situation through which Yemen
is going. The friends of Yemen group has also dealt
with those issues in detail. Today's transitional efforts
will not be successful unless the economic and security
challenges, as well as the political ones, are addressed,
particularly in light of the precarious humanitarian
situation that Yemen is experiencing.

The support of the international community for

Yemen remains inadequate, although we recognize that
the international community has understood that the
way to deal with the crisis in Yemen is to provide it with
the necessary support to enable it to achieve stability.
That will be less costly, of course, for the international
community than to see Yemen fall back into conflict
and violence. Yemen must continue to be a shining light
in the wake of the Arab Spring.

In that connection, I would like to point out the
humanitarian suffering of approximately 600,000
displaced persons in Yemen due to wars and terrorism
and the presence of more than 1 million refugees
from the Horn of Africa, as well as the issues of
unemployment, poverty, and malnutrition that threaten
40 per cent of the population. Despite such a precarious
humanitarian situation, the 2013 appeal was financed
only to the tune of 44 per cent. That, I believe, requires
that the Council examine how the deficit can be made
up, since that support is important for Yemen's security.

To conclude, I would like to say that the people of
Yemen are hoping for a clear position from this Council
that will reaffirm the support it has always given to
the Gulf initiative and to resolutions 2014 (2011) and
2051 (2012). The results of the National Dialogue will
be the only way to define the outlines of a new future,
which the Yemenis themselves must do. The unity
of Yemen is a Yemeni and international demand to
preserve its stability, as well as international peace and
security. We are sure that the Council will stand by us
in that endeavour, as it always has. The Yemeni people
themselves want to ensure that their own model is
successful in overcoming the political crisis and that at
the end of the transitional period there will be success.

