Ms. Kyung-wha Kang: I have the honour to deliver
the following statement, prepared by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien. He deeply
regrets that he is unable to present it in person today,
owing to previously scheduled travel plans that could
not be changed, but he would like to assure the Council
that he will do so next time.

Three years ago, the United Nations expressed its
condemnation and deep concern about the 1,200 people
who had been killed in Syria up to that point, and about
the 10,000 refugees who had fled to neighbouring
countries. There were already warnings that what
was happening in Syria included atrocities that could
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Today, more than 220,000 people have been killed and
more than a million injured. Some 7.6 million have been
displaced inside the country, and more than 4 million
have fled across its borders. And the violence continues
with utter impunity.

Over the past month, that violence, which has
been perpetrated by all parties to the conflict, has
neither abated nor diminished in brutality. The
continued use of explosive weapons in populated towns
and cities in Aleppo, Dar'a, Idlib, Damascus, Deir
ez-Zor and Hasakeh governorates, among others, has
killed hundreds of people, many of them children, and
displaced tens of thousands. Indiscriminate attacks
on Government-controlled areas in Aleppo killed at
least 116 people in April and May, nearly half of them
women and children. In the past week, the situation
has deteriorated significantly in Kobani/Ain Al-Arab
following attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) aimed at reclaiming that city, which
have reportedly resulted in civilian deaths and further
displacement.

The Government's use ofbarrel bombs in populated
areas has continued, causing hundreds of civilian deaths
and widespread destruction across the country. Some of
those incidents are described in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2015/468), including barrel-bomb attacks that
killed more than 200 civilians in Aleppo, at least 24 of
them children. A barrel-bomb attack on a mosque in
Aleppo on 22 June reportedly killed 10 people. Attacks
on medical facilities continue, in blatant disregard for
international humanitarian law and resolution 2139
(2014). According to the Physicians for Human Rights
organization, the month of May was the worst on record
for such attacks since the start of the conflict, with
15 verified attacks on medical facilities, all by aerial
bombardment, including eight barrel-bomb attacks.
Ten medical staffers were killed.

Intense fighting across the country has displaced
tens of thousands more people. In Tel Abyad, some
50,000 people have been forced from their homes since
May. In Dar'a, fighting between Government forces
and non-State armed groups began in the early hours
of 24 June, displacing at least 40,000 people. In the city
of Hasakeh, an ISIL attack displaced at least 60,000
people in the past week, and in Raqqa, thousands of
Kurds were told by ISIL to leave the governorate.
Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon continue to bear the lion's
share of the ever-growing burden of caring for those
who flee Syria. Turkey, for example, is already hosting
1.8 million refugees, and took in at least 23,000 ofthose
who fled Tel Abyad in mid-June. I would like to thank
those neighbours of Syria and to echo the comments
made recently on the subject by the High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres (see S/PV.7433).
The rest of the world should step up to do substantively
more to address the consequences of this conflict. It is
crucial that other countries welcome Syrians who are
seeking a safe haven.

Despite the extremely challenging environment,
humanitarian organizations operating from within
Syria and from neighbouring countries continue to reach
millions ofpeople in need. Each month, the World Food
Programme (WFP) has been feeding approximately
4.1 million people; the World Health Organization
is distributing medicines and supplies to around
2.7 million; and UNICEF is reaching 2.2 million with
water, sanitation services, education and other support.
The Office of the United Nations High Commission
for Refugees continues to provide more than 240,000
people with core relief items and protection services,
and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East supports around
480,000 Palestine refugees. That is complemented by
the ongoing programmes run by non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), which reached more than a
million people in May.

However, aid deliveries to the 4.8 million people in
need in hard-to-reach areas remain a serious challenge,
owing to active conflicts, poor security and deliberate
obstruction by the parties to the conflict. United Nations
agencies and partners are reaching only about 34 per
cent of hard-to-reach and besieged areas every month.
Of the 48 inter-agency requests made to the Government
so far in 2015, 20 were approved following meetings in
April and June and 12 have been put on hold because
of poor security, leaving 16 awaiting Government
approval. The recent progress in the approval of access
to some locations must continue, and we call on the
Government to approve the pending requests and allow
rapid, unimpeded and sustainable access to all hard-to-
reach locations. We also note the Government's quick
approvals in May and June of a number of short-term
visas for United Nations and international NGO staff
to attend humanitarian meetings hosted in Damascus
within the context of the whole of Syria, and we very
much hope that trend will continue.

Parties to the conflict continue to besiege 422,000
civilians. Some humanitarian assistance, including
medical supplies, was delivered to eastern Ghouta,
besieged by Government forces, during April and
May, and assistance was airlifted into western
neighbourhoods of Deir ez-Zor under siege from ISIL
forces. But the assistance that the United Nations and
partners have managed to get into besieged areas in
the past three months has been wholly inadequate.
Aid agencies are working hard to assist the millions
of Syrians affected by the conflict. But those efforts
require adequate resources. Only a quarter of the total
appeal for lifesaving work in Syria and the region has
been funded as of today, and food assistance across the
region is now injeopardy.
Since January, WFP has had to reduce its food
provisions by 30 per cent, and more cuts are anticipated
in the next three months owing to serious funding
shortfalls.

Resolution 2165 (2014) continues to be a strong tool
for humanitarian organizations attempting to reach
Syrians in need. Resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) have enabled the United Nations and partners
to reach people in need who were largely inaccessible
before. United Nations cross-border food and medical
shipments have increased significantly over the past
six months. The 92 shipments since 1 December have
included food assistance for 2.6 million people; basic
household items for more than 1 million people; medical
supplies and treatments for over 1 million people; and
water and sanitation supplies for more than 600,000
people. Active fighting and shifting conflict lines have
had an impact on the use of certain crossing points.
Given the fluid and dynamic nature of the conflict in
Syria, it is crucial for United Nations agencies to be able
to use any and every route - across both borders and
conflict lines - to reach those who require assistance.

The parties to the conflict continue to violate
human rights and international humanitarian law with
impunity by killing and torturing civilians, blocking
humanitarian access and destroying and besieging
communities. The siege on more than 422,000 people
must be lifted. Those who need protection and assistance
in all parts of Syria must be provided with rapid and
unhindered access to such assistance, including to
medical services and surgical supplies. The relentless
use of barrel bombs by the Government must be halted
immediately, as must other forms of indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, which are strictly prohibited under
international humanitarian law. We look to the Council
to pressure the parties to get them to protect civilians
and abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and to promote and seek systematic
accountability for violations.

For the people of Syria and the humanitarians who
assist them, it is hard to see an end to this nightmare of
violence and destruction. We look to the leadership of
the Council to press for a political solution.

