President Putin (spoke in Russian): All of us are
participants in a truly historic and precedent-setting
meeting of the Security Council. The previous few
months of this millennium remind us of our
responsibility and obligations to our peoples and the
whole world.

The key United Nations body - the Security
Council - has done all it can to safeguard the world
from a new global military catastrophe, and to
safeguard politicians from the temptation to use any
advantage to pursue objectives unworthy of mankind.

When the Security Council acts in solidarity and
unity, the most complicated problems are resolved.
This only serves to enhance the authority of the
Council. In my opinion, in the new century it might be
well to make more frequent use of high-level summit
meetings - and not only at United Nations
Headquarters in New York, but also at locations closer
to the events the Council is dealing with.

Before our eyes and with our direct participation,
a new epoch is being shaped. It does not matter that we
have different ideas about the specifics of this epoch.
We are firmly united in our principal beliefs. This
epoch must become one of equitable security and just
peace. In this connection, I would like to emphasize
that the principles laid down in the Charter of the
United Nations have passed more than one durability
test and proved their effectiveness.

The most important of these principles is the
supremacy of international law. Secondly, we have a
common responsibility to promote global stability and
to take a collective approach to settling disputes and
conflicts. Recent history vividly teaches that
approaches and measures that ignore international law
inevitably undermine both regional and global stability.

I would like to stress that only the Security
Council has the right to sanction such an extreme
measure as the use of force in a crisis situation. It does
so on behalf and in the interests of the whole world
community. When so acting the Security Council has a
special responsibility to clearly define the mandate and
rules for conducting a peacekeeping operation. In
particular, in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter, the self-serving interests of any party should
not be allowed to become part of any such operation.

In recent years the peacemaking efforts of the
Security Council have made it possible to extinguish a
few major regional conflagrations - in Cambodia,
Mozambique and Central America. The settlement of
the conflict in Tajikistan is the latest and one of the
most interesting examples of such efforts. United
Nations support for the process of national
reconciliation has returned Tajikistan to normal life. I
am convinced that such an approach could achieve a
just solution to the problem of Iraq and secure peace
and stability in the Balkans.

The relevant resolutions of the Security Council
already contain the necessary political and legal
conditions for such action. They need only to be
implemented conscientiously and fully.

One of the most acute problems of the
contemporary world is the incessant conflicts in Africa.
This issue has already been discussed today. The future
of the continent depends to a great degree on the
speedy and effective settlement of these conflicts. If in
the twentieth century Africa became free from
colonialism, the twenty-first century should rid it of
poverty and military confrontation.

In order to solve this major problem the United
Nations and its Security Council must most closely
coordinate their activities with the peacekeeping efforts
of the African nations themselves. The most important
task is to improve the United Nations anti-crisis
potential. In this regard, we believe that the Brahimi
report is a useful document. We should jointly develop
a culture of crisis prevention and devote greater efforts
to forestall crises. Of special importance is bringing to
light the deep-rooted reasons for conflicts, including
economic and social ones.

Russia has played and, on the basis of the
foregoing, intends to continue to play an active role in
peacekeeping operations. Today my country is
participating in 10 out of the 15 United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We share the sorrow of the
United Nations in connection with the deaths of the
peacekeepers in West Timor, and we condemn any
aggressive actions towards United Nations personnel.
Sons of Russia are among those who at various times
have given their lives while protecting and defending
the lofty ideals of the United Nations.

In conclusion, from this lofty rostrum I would
like to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan and his
staff for the superb organization of our work and for
the preparation of this meeting. I hope that the
implementation of its results will be as productive as
these discussions.

