Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): We thank
Mr. Rashid Khalikov of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing.

We are concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation and rising security threats in
Darfur, in the Sudan. In conflict areas, civilians
become the most vulnerable group, whether in
Afghanistan, Gaza, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or elsewhere. Viet Nam has always maintained
that the protection of civilians and their livelihood
must be a priority that all parties concerned must take
into careful consideration.

While the fact that 13 non-governmental
organizations operating in the Sudan have to leave the
country is regrettable, it cannot be denied that the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
political process in Darfur and in the Sudan in general,
has come about as a result of the decision of the
International Criminal Court to indict the President of
the Sudan. In the course of the Council's deliberations
on the Sudan situation in general, and that of Darfur in
particular, Viet Nam, together with many other
delegations, reflecting the View of many United
Nations Member States, has warned the Council about
this unfortunate, but otherwise well-predicted, negative
development.

Viet Nam has been a consistent and strong
supporter of the struggle against impunity. We have
always maintained that those committing crimes,
especially the most serious crimes such as the crime of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
must be duly punished - rather sooner than later. At
the same time, concerning the situation in the Sudan in
general and in Darfur in particular, we have pointed to
the need to maintain a balance between promoting the
political process and waging the fight against impunity,
in the interest of long-term peace and security for the
Sudan and for Darfur and in the interest of the very
survival and livelihood of millions of Sudanese,
including those in Darfur, suffering as a result of the
protracted hostilities and the worsening humanitarian
situation.

In the face of the worsening situation, we call
upon all parties concerned to exercise restraint and
refrain from any action that may lead to further
complications. We call upon them to cooperate to
improve the humanitarian situation; ensure the safety
of the civilian population, personnel of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
United Nations staff, as well as those doing lofty
humanitarian work in the country; and resume the
peace process, with a View to achieving a
comprehensive political solution to the issue of the
Sudan and Darfur, in the best interest of the people of
the Sudan and Darfur, and of peace and stability in the
region.

