Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to thank Belgium for convening this debate on a matter of paramount importance for all of us who hold dear the fundamental values of truth, justice, peace and the rule of law. We see it as an essential discussion and a logical follow-up to the debate (see S/PV.8668) held last November on the role of reconciliation in maintaining international peace and security. Today's discussion is taking place at a particularly significant time for my country, as tomorrow will mark the fifteenth anniversary of the assassination of Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri. That led to the adoption in 2007 of resolution 1757 (2007), which established the Special Tribunal for Lebanon - a hybrid tribunal created to find the truth about, and bring to justice the perpetrators of, that heinous attack and end impunity. In that regard, let me mention here the ministerial declaration adopted by our newly formed Government a few days ago, in which the Council of Ministers reaffirmed its commitment to the work of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon to ensure that law and justice prevail, free from any politicization or spirit of revenge, so that it does not have a negative impact on the stability of Lebanon, its unity and its civil peace. Unity and civil peace are not mere words in my country, which was torn apart by a 15-year long civil war during which thousands of people were killed or went missing. A study by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) concluded that 75 per cent of Lebanese citizens had personal experience of armed conflict. A positive step towards restoring truth was taken in November 2018 when the Lebanese Parliament adopted Law 105, on missing and forcibly disappeared persons. That piece of legislation recognizes the right of families to learn the fate of missing loved ones and, to that end, seeks to establish an independent national commission.Let me add that the adoption of that significant law was made possible thanks to the key role played by partners such as the ICRC, non-governmental organizations and the International Center for Transitional Justice, to name a few, as well as civil society. That type of collaborative partnership remains essential on our path towards sustaining peace. Such partnership evidences the necessity of implementing a comprehensive approach to transitional justice premised upon the inclusion of all relevant stakeholders. Youth should be given the important role that they deserve to have in transitional justice, as agents of change, as the International Center for Transitional Justice stated. Their participation in transitional justice and reconciliation should be central, and not symbolic. Resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and peace and security, recognizes that role. In the same vein, we continue to believe that women's participation should also be central. In that connection, I would like to mention that Tunisia's Truth and Dignity Commission was headed by a woman. Furthermore, as conflicts and grievances take on varied forms, there is a need for context- sensitive, local transitional justice that is cognizant of national specificities and cultural sensitivities. Throughout the world and across history, human rights abuses, humanitarian law violations, conflicts and cycles of violence have ravaged countries. Such proliferation of suffering tears apart communities and has the potential to entrench instability, which threatens the prospects for peace. Transitional justice is essential to move forward, but first a transition out of the conflict situation is needed in order to start the process of healing. In our region, continuous and perpetual conflicts are the major obstacle to transitional justice. Time is of the essence to transition from conflict to justice within a reasonable time frame. Justice delayed is justice denied. Let us recall that this body has a great responsibility in ending conflicts, in order for peace to take hold and transition to begin. Instead of burying grievances and remaining enslaved by the chains of the past, transitional justice provides a range of mechanisms that allow first the citizen and then the country to achieve sustainable and meaningful peace.
