Mr. Arnault: I would like to thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to brief it on the work
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia and on
developments in the implementation of the Colombian
Final Peace Agreement since the end of the period
covered in the Secretary-General's report (S/20l6/1095),
dated 23 December. In spite of the holiday season, it
was a short but very active period that has brought
about some very encouraging results.

I will begin with the legislative agenda. As the
Council may recall, in early December Colombia's
Constitutional Court empowered Congress to fast-
track the adoption of laws deriving from the Peace
Agreement. As a result, on 28 December Congress
was able to pass an amnesty law - one that excluded
serious crimes, however - which President Santos
Calderon ratified two days later. That responded to a
key request of the guerrilla organization, and besides
paving the way for the release or conditional release
of some 4,000 prisoners, it should facilitate the first
major step towards the lay-down of weapons, which
involves moving the members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) to the 26 zones
where the lay-down will take place.

Next week, on 16 January, Congress will take up two
more critical pieces of legislation, a draft constitutional
law that will enable the establishment of an integral
system for truth, justice and reparation, including
a special jurisdiction for peace, a truth commission
and a missing persons search unit. According to
the Colombian Government, approximately 20,000
cases may be brought before the special jurisdiction
for peace. Congress will also consider the inclusion
in the Constitution of a provisional article granting
constitutional rank to provisions in the Agreement that
are directly connected to international humanitarian
law and the fundamental rights recognized in the
Colombian Constitution.

I would now like to say a few words about the
implementation of the Agreement itself. A key
dimension of that, of course, is the reintegration of
FARC members into civilian life, which, as the Council
can imagine, has a very direct relationship to the
success of the process of laying down weapons. As
the Secretary-General's report mentions, reintegration
in Colombia faces some unique challenges, including
those relating to the thriving illegal economy in
conflict areas. A national reincorporation council was
established on 20 December, and has since held four
meetings devoted primarily to reintegrating pardoned
FARC members and preparing a socioeconomic
census of FARC combatants. Unfortunately, some
disagreement remains regarding attention to children,
which we hope will be resolved soon.

The logistical dimension of the implementation
of the ceasefire and weapons lay-down agreement has
posed perhaps the most difficult challenges so far, due in
part to the political uncertainty surrounding the peace
process in the wake of the October plebiscite, but also
to the large number and remote location of the zones
where the process of disarmament is to unfold. As the
Secretary-General's report mentions, in early December
the tripartite monitoring mechanism pointed out the
need to redouble efforts on the logistical front. Good
progress has been made in the past three weeks with
regard to setting up the mechanism's local headquarters.
The Monitoring and Verification Mechanism is now
deployed in 18 of the 26 headquarters at local level and
has established a presence in another three temporary
locations. Conditions are still spartan, of course, but
there is enough accommodation available to enable
the Mission to deploy around 350 of the 450 observers
required for the full implementation of its mandate.
The observers will be joined at local headquarters by
33 civilian staff before the end of the month.

Let me note in passing that, at 15 per cent, the
United Nations Mission in Colombia currently has the
highest percentage of female observers of all our peace
operations, that with the inclusion of civilian observers
deployed at the local level, the number reaches 21 per
cent, and that today women constitute 55 per cent of
the Mission's substantive personnel. Among other
things, that has enabled the Mission to develop close
ties with women's organizations at national and local
levels. Indeed, a special effort has been made to engage
with women's groups in order to include their views
and recommendations on the ceasefire process and the
Mission's activities, and to establish the confidence
required to prevent and deal with potential gender-
based violence.

With the Mission and the Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism now deployed at 21 local sites,
the monitoring of the FARC camps, the army units in
the vicinity and the 3 kilometre security zone between
them has now intensified. Monitoring activities have
tripled since early November. In that regard, I would
like to stress the dedication and professionalism of
the Mission's staff, both observers and civilians, who
have been doing their work in the too-often precarious
conditions of a start-up. Incidentally, I should add that
we are delighted and relieved that an agreement was
reached last night between the Government of Colombia
and United Nations Headquarters on providing full
casualty evacuation, medical evacuation and medical
coverage to all observers. With regard to health care for

FARC members, an equally sensitive and urgent issue,
progress has also been made in the past couple ofweeks;
in fact, on 28 December, 2,500 FARC members became
affiliated with the national subsidized health system.

The main focus ofthe effort must now be on setting
up the FARC camps. To date, construction has begun in
one third of the zones and preparations are ongoing in
another third, while the remainder still face difficulties.
Last week, I accompanied President Santos Calderon on
a visit to one of the zones in southern Colombia where
he reviewed progress. He gave specific instructions on
overcoming existing obstacles and redoubling efforts
to enable the 26 camps to be ready as soon as possible.
At yesterday's meeting of the Council of Ministers,
he emphasized the urgency of that endeavour and
tasked the Cabinet with prioritizing implementation
in the zones. That is an important decision and will
hopefully allow the arms lay-down process to begin in
the next few weeks. As the Council is aware, the United
Nations Mission bears responsibility for verifying that
process, and observers will be deployed permanently
in all FARC camps for that purpose. In anticipation of
the operation's start, the equipment required for the
initial storing, marking, recording and monitoring of
weapons is being distributed to the Mission's regional
and local offices.

For a number of reasons, including the logistical
issues I just mentioned, it has proved impossible to
meet the first benchmark of the ceasefire timeline,
which was achieving the full concentration of FARC
combatants and militias in the zones by 1 January. I
must also confess that it will hardly be possible to meet
the 30 January deadline for the destruction of all the
unstable ammunition that is spread in caches around
the country. In spite of that setback, last week President
Santos Calderon and the FARC secretariat reaffirmed
their determination to do everything possible to meet the
original goal of a comprehensive lay-down of weapons
by early June. We share the perception that an overly
protracted process and a loss of momentum would be
in nobody's interest. Fast-tracking the ceasefire process
alongside fast-tracking of the legislative agenda makes
sense. Even with determination on all sides, it will not be
impossible to accomplish that objective. Among other
things, there is room to review the timelines once the
logistical imperatives have been met. Some of the more
complex processes, such as the destruction of unstable
ammunition, could begin right away and extend beyond
the very short deadline originally specified in the Peace
Agreement. The timetable for storing weapons under
United Nations monitoring could also be adjusted. Such
flexible adjustments could be made without extending
the overall 180-day time frame.

The Colombian peace process has faced, and
still faces, a host of challenges, many of which are
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report. But it
also has very solid assets. In the first place, it has the
resolve of the Colombian Government and the FARC
leadership to persevere in spite of difficulties, and the
overwhelming support and aspiration of the people
of Colombia for bringing one of the world's longest
armed conflicts to an end. The support of the region
and the broader international community will also
continue to be a very significant success factor. I want
to once again thank the countries that are contributing
observers, and the Governments and the organizations
that have responded to the parties' call for assistance
in implementing the Peace Agreement provisions. I
would also like to acknowledge the united effort of
United Nations agencies and programmes in Colombia
to bring help to the people and areas most affected by
the conflict.

Finally, I would like to recall that almost exactly
one year ago, on 19 January, the parties invited the
Council to oversee the United Nations monitoring of the
ceasefire and weapons lay-down process. In Colombia,
across political lines, that was widely viewed as a
guarantee of success. As the process of implementation
of the Peace Agreement gets under way, the Council's
attention and unanimous support to the peace process,
and its encouraging voice, will continue to be a very
important source of confidence and strength.

