Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I should like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his detailed briefing.

In recent years, the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict has attracted increasing
attention on the part of the international community.
Innocent civilians, particularly vulnerable groups such
as women and children, have always been the principal
victims of armed conflict.

The Security Council has considered the question
of the protection of civilians on many occasions and
adopted relevant resolutions and presidential
statements. Other United Nations agencies have also
made tremendous efforts. Many humanitarian agencies
have played positive roles in easing the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict.

However, it is a matter of concern that tens of
thousands of civilians in conflict situations find it
difficult to guarantee their basic living needs such as
food, drinking water and medicine. Attacks targeting
civilians happen in various forms in some conflict
regions. The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, and incidents of deliberate attacks on
civilians take place frequently. Refugees and displaced
persons are in dire situations.

Obviously, the international community has a lot
of work to do to protect civilians. Some principles
should be followed in carrying out that work. In that
connection, I wish to emphasize the following points.

First, the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with the Governments concerned.
Governments and parties to a conflict should comply
strictly with international humanitarian laws and
should effectively honour the corresponding obligation
to protect civilians. United Nations agencies and
peacekeeping operations should stress international
humanitarian law in their publicity campaigns and
enhance the awareness of parties to a conflict with
regard to their responsibilities to protect civilians, and
they should make sure that the peace agreements
incorporate articles on protecting civilians. On the
other hand, humanitarian assistance personnel and
organizations should stick to just, neutral and objective
principles and avoid supporting any party to a conflict
and affecting the local peace process.

Secondly, the fundamental and most effective
approach to settling conflicts and protecting civilians is
to focus on prevention and to deal with both the
symptoms and the causes of the conflict. As the organ
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should continue to take effective measures to
strengthen preventive diplomacy and to promote
settlement of existing conflicts so as to save civilians
from the miseries of war. In many situations mandatory
means can only further complicate the problems and
result in more casualties among innocent civilians. The
international community should help countries and
regions in conflict to formulate preventive strategies,
eliminate causes of conflict, promote national harmony
and reconciliation and achieve long-lasting and
harmonious development.

Thirdly, in practice, the difference in situations of
armed conflict in different regions should be taken into
consideration, and the various situations should be
dealt with on a case-by-case basis. Universal use of
one modality should be avoided. The conflicts in the
world have different causes, natures and directions of
development. So do the phases of the peace process. It
is difficult to use a single programme to deal with all
the problems of protecting civilians. The protection of
vulnerable groups such as women and children also
requires concrete analysis of the realities of each
region. It is impossible to use one protection
mechanism to deal with all the situations. We should
take particular care with regard to conflict situations
not on the Security Council's agenda. The Council
should carefully analyse and produce a mandate before
taking any new actions. Whether an existing or a newly
established mechanism is involved, it is necessary to
avoid imprudent action.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to those
workers who are making selfless contributions at the
risk of their lives in war. They not only deliver food
and medicine to people in difficult situations; they also
bring them hope of survival. We condemn attacks on
humanitarian assistance personnel, urge that all parties
effectively implement Security Council resolutions,
severely punish the culprits and guarantee the safety
and security of international humanitarian personnel.

