The President: I thank the representative of the
Republic of Korea for his kind words addressed to me.

Mr. Ordzhonikidze (Russian Federation)
(interpretation from Russian): Since this is the first
statement by a representative of the Russian Federation at
a meeting of the Security Council in February 1996, I
should like to congratulate you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
I should like also to express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom for his successful
leadership of the work of the Council last month.

The Russian Federation, which is a member of the
troika of observer States to the Angolan settlement, is
deeply concerned by the woefully slow pace of the peace
process in Angola and the continued drastic delays in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. During the last few
months, the peace process has gone through a period of
terrible crisis, requiring the most energetic efforts of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, the troika of
observer States, the Security Council and other interested
parties in order to overcome it.

The major reason for the crisis is the obstruction of
the peace process by UNITA, whose leadership, under
various pretences, is continuing to evade implementation of
the priority provisions of the Lusaka Protocol, first and
foremost the previously agreed timetable for the quartering
and disarmament of troops, thus hindering the normal
activity of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III), against which it has even launched a
propaganda campaign. All of this has substantially
complicated the situation in the country and has brought the
peace process to the point of breakdown.

We believe it is time for the international community
to draw the appropriate lessons from this bitter experience
and to stop accepting UNITA's inconsistency and endless
manoeuvring vis-a-vis the resolution of a set of military
issues. This is particularly important in the light of the fact
that the present policy of UNITA's leadership recalls to a
great extent its actions at the end of 1992, when it
provoked the breakdown of the Bicesse agreements and the
resumption of a bitter civil war.

In the view of the Russian delegation, it is now
important to focus on forcing the leadership of UNITA to
comply unswervingly with its commitments under the
Lusaka Protocol, in particular regarding the quartering and
disarmament of troops. We agree with the idea contained in
the report of the United Nations Secretary-General on
Angola (S/1996/75) that this process must not be a
rushed, last-minute operation but must be implemented
dynamically, on a large scale and with appropriate
verification by UNAVEM. III. It is extremely important
that at the UNITA quartering points there be real soldiers,
with real weapons, and not unarmed youths, as was the
case on several earlier occasions and, unfortunately,
continues to be the case now. We believe that the UNITA
leadership can have no justification for further
procrastination in the release of all prisoners, in providing
the United Nations with information on military questions
and in ensuring freedom of movement for people and
goods throughout the territory of the country.

The UNITA leadership must finally recognize that
the time has come to reaffirm through concrete action the
promises it has made and to cooperate honestly and fully
with UNAVEM. III; otherwise, it is likely to lose once
and for all the confidence of the entire international
community.

At the same time, we note with satisfaction the
constructive steps taken by the Government of Angola in
recent weeks to strengthen the peace process. These
actions, in our View, deserve full encouragement from the
international community.

We are firmly convinced that the success of a
political settlement hinges first and foremost on the
concrete actions of the Angolan parties. We call on them
to take decisive steps to make the peace process
irreversible.

For its part, the international community is rendering
them great assistance and support. Our country, as a
member of the troika and as a troop contributor to
UNAVEM. III, is making a significant contribution to the
Angolan peace settlement. In the framework of these
efforts, on 4 February the Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, Mr. Kolokolov, went
to Angola and gave the leaders of both Angolan parties
personal messages from the President of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Boris Yeltsin, and is continuing active
contacts with them to accelerate the peace process in
Angola.

The President: I thank the representative of the

Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.


