The Secretary-General: It is a pleasure to join
members today. I am grateful to the presidency of
the United Kingdom for organizing this important
meeting. This is the first time the Security Council will
consider the recommendations of the High-level Panel
on Peace Operations and my recommendations in the
implementation report (8/2015/682). I hope this will be
the start of sustained dialogue and action to strengthen
United Nations peace operations.

I launched the peace operations initiative out
of profound concern over the scale and intensity of
conflict today. The human, political and financial
costs of conflict continue to mount. Political failures
are resulting in insecurity, injustice and deprivation for
millions of people today and fuelling the conflicts of
tomorrow.

The demands of conflict are also putting enormous
burdens on our peace and security tools, particularly
United Nations peace operations. Peacekeeping and
special political missions are deployed for more
places, in more configurations, than ever before. They
are struggling to implement complex mandates. Our
systems are straining at the scale of operations. We are
not always responding with the speed and effectiveness
required. We have difficulty in keeping pace with the
evolution of each conflict. We are finding it harder to
end conflicts and to sustain peace.

That is why I asked an eminent Panel chaired by
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, former President ofTimor-Leste,
to look at how the full range of United Nations peace
operations could be adapted to meet today's challenges.
Strengthening peace operations is a collective task
that will require the collaboration of many actors. In
my implementation report, I identified those areas
where the Secretariat can take concrete actions. I also
signalled those areas where the engagement of Member
States, the General Assembly and the Security Council
is essential. I also highlighted the importance of
partnership to achieve our goals.

The focus of the meeting today is on the role
that the Security Council can play in strengthening
peace operations. The Panel offered a number of
recommendations, and I put forward concrete proposals
for their implementation. The recommendations cover
three broad areas: first, political engagement; secondly,
the design and implementation of United Nations peace
operations; and, thirdly, reinvigorated partnerships. Let
me briefly address each.

First, on political engagement, peace operations
are political tools. They are deployed by the Council to
advance and support a political settlement to a conflict.
They are the signal of international commitment to
help find and sustain political solutions. The Council's
political engagement even before authorizing a peace
operation is critical and remains essential throughout
the life of a mission.

A central finding of the review is that prevention
is the most effective means of tackling the escalating
costs of conflict. It is also the best way of supporting
national and regional partners who are and must be the
front line of prevention.

Committed efforts among Council members to
unite around a shared political strategy to de-escalate
tensions can have apowerful effect. The Council's public
statements and private messaging to the parties shape
perceptions and actions on the ground. The Council's
engagement with regional and other stakeholders and,
where appropriate, the use of sanctions, can change the
incentives of key parties and play a role in reducing
the flow of arms and money that fuel conflicts. The
Council's engagement can help prevent a conflict from
spreading and enhance the support provided to affected
civilians. Such early engagement is most effective
when it is collective, when it is done in partnership with
regional players and when it is sustained over time.

The engagement of the Council with host
Governments is also critical to ensure that they fulfil
their obligations with regard to the safety, security and
freedom of movement of uniformed peacekeepers and
civilian staff. Time and again, we have seen missions
prevented from performing their mandated tasks by an
array of administrative obstacles and other restrictions.

In order to act early, we need timely information. I
have committed to provide the Council with frank and
timely briefings on situations of escalating concern,
particularly those situations where civilians are at
grave risk. Regional offices and my Special Envoys are
invaluable in supporting early and effective political
engagement. My Rights Up Front initiative seeks to
focus the attention of the United Nations system on
the prevention of serious and large-scale violations of
human rights.

Where missions are deployed, we need to devote
greater attention to the political strategies that they
support. I will encourage my Special Representatives
to focus their briefings on the status of political efforts
and to identify risks, challenges and opportunities for
progress. We will be more forthright on the role that the
Council itself can and should play. That could include
engaging members' representatives in the countries
that host our missions who can project the Council's
collective determination in their engagement with all
parties.

A second area where Security Council action can
strengthen peace operations is in better design and
implementation of our mandates. Mandates need to
be better tailored to a specific conflict environment,
and able to adapt as conflicts evolve. Good progress
is being made to prioritize mandates so that missions
are given realistic and achievable tasks. I also endorse
the Panel's recommendation for sequenced mandates.
A sequenced approach can reinforce efforts to focus
on urgent protection and political tasks. It can provide
greater opportunity for the Security Council and peace
operations to engage with national actors and regional
partners, and better direct efforts towards national
priorities. A sequenced approach can also better match
capabilities to tasks and exposes gaps.

Sequenced and prioritized mandates will depend
on the Council receiving better and more regular
assessments from the Secretariat. I am putting in place a
range of measures to strengthen United Nations analysis
and planning at Headquarters, in our field missions
and across the United Nations system. I have directed
my own Office to take on additional responsibility to
help improve the way we develop - and ultimately
provide the Council with - timely, high-quality
analysis, options and proposed courses of action. We
are also strengthening the quality and timeliness of our
reporting.

The Council has a responsibility to ensure that
peacekeepers are equipped to carry out their tasks.
That means ensuring that we have the range of
capabilities required for increasingly complex and
dangerous modern peace operations. High operational
readiness, standby arrangements, agile field support
and high-quality medical care are essential. Troop and
police contributors need support in generating critical
enablers, and United Nations administrative practices
need to be streamlined and adapted.

Equally, we need members' engagement when
things do not go well. Where United Nations peace
operations have a mandate to protect civilians, they
must use all tools, including, where necessary, the use
of force. But that does not replace the search for political
settlements; it makes the engagement of the members
of the Council more critical. Likewise, when there is
a failure to act in the face of threats to civilians, I will
inform the Council. I request, in turn, that members
engage, politically and operationally, to help redress
such situations. I am making a similar request on
issues of misconduct, including sexual exploitation and
abuse. If the Security Council demonstrates that it will
remain engaged in the conduct ofa mission and actions
by its personnel, that can be a powerful performance
incentive.

The third key set of recommendations focuses
on strong dialogue with partners, which is crucial for
devising more tailored mandates and strengthening the
Council's political engagement. Deeper engagement
with regional partners is a must. We need to
institutionalize consultation and dialogue and, where
appropriate, collaborate in planning and conducting
peace operations. We need to provide effective support
to our partners, and that must start with the African
Union, our key regional partner today.

Similarly, the relationship between the Security
Council and troop and police contributors is
fundamental to effective peace operations. We need
deeper understanding of our respective expectations,
capacities and constraints. We need to engage well
before a peace operation is mandated on what is
required and what is available. I welcome the Council's
recent dialogue with contributing countries, and I
encourage members to consider my proposals for
further strengthening triangular consultation.
The recent adoption of resolution 2242 (2015)
sets out an agenda for stronger implementation of the
Council's landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Women
and peace and security considerations have been
fully mainstreamed throughout the peace operations
initiative. My report on peace operations has also
drawn upon and integrated recommendations from the
Advisory Group of Experts on peacebuilding to ensure
strong linkages. In that connection, consideration could
be given to strengthening collaboration between the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.

Taken together, those efforts can enable us to
renew the instruments of the United Nations to address
conflict, protect people and help countries find durable
paths of peace. I hope that our discussion today will
mark the first step in a continued engagement with all
members of the Council in support of more effective
and efficient United Nations peace operations. I stand
ready to work with the Council in the months ahead.

