Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would once
again like to welcome you, Sir, as well as the State
Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany, to
the Chamber. I wish to convey our sincere appreciation
to you for convening this very important meeting, as
well as to congratulate you and your delegation on
promoting the very important and historic resolution
2457 (2019) that we have just adopted. I do believe that
this is an important resolution of the Security Council.

I would also like to thank the briefers for their
presentations. Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra of the African Union and, of course, Mr. Vasu
Gounden have given us a prognosis of the situation on
the ground, which I must say is an eye-opening reality.

The commitment of African countries to silencing
the guns by 2020 is truly an important initiative, for
armed conflicts in Africa have had great costs. Ten of
thousands of lives have been lost; 15 per cent of the
gross domestic product is estimated to be lost annually;
over 5 million people have been forcibly driven from
their home countries; and armed conflict has also left
millions of others internally displaced and in dire need
of humanitarian assistance.

Now, the importance of this meeting goes beyond
realizing a peaceful and conflict-free Africa. It is
also important to promote sustainable development
in the region - not only Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 16.4 in particular, but the SDGs as a
whole. Without peace there can be no development,
and without development there can be no peace. It is
therefore high time that African countries set the goal
of a conflict-free Africa through this initiative and its
road map. Allow me to underline some pertinent points
in this regard.

First, combating the illicit flow of arms and
ammunition is imperative, as illicit arms contribute
significantly to the exacerbation of conflicts. Enhanced
capacity in the areas of national legislation, law
enforcement and judicial capacity is important. The
international community must support the efforts
of African countries in this regard. The capacity to
safeguard national stockpiles ofweapons should also be
improved. Cooperation within the region is crucial. The
joint management of borders, including through border
security measures and information-sharing, needs to
be strengthened.
Secondly, combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime is also key. Terrorist activities have
become a major security threat in Africa and the surge
of terror attacks across Africa, both in number and in
sophistication, has led to the loss of lives, undermined
governance and institution-building, and torn apart the
fabric of society. These terrorist activities are often
closely related to other transnational organized crimes,
including the illicit trafficking of drugs, humans and
natural resources and maritime piracy. It is therefore
crucial to combat terrorism, including by eliminating
illegal activities that contribute to the funding of
terrorist groups. Indonesia welcomes the leadership
taken by African countries to spearheadjoint efforts to
combat terrorism. The Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
are two commendable examples.

To sustain such initiatives, support from the
international community is needed, including
in capacity-building and predictable funding.
Strengthening national and local institutions on conflict
prevention is also an important factor. Regarding that
subpoint, it is important to address the root causes and
drivers of conflict. Indeed, it is not only guns that need
silencing. Poverty, economic gaps and social inequality
also require a response in order to reduce the occurrence
of conflict and prevent the relapse into violence. Social
cohesion and inclusion must be fostered. Indonesia
therefore supports the attainment of the Sustainable
Development Goals in Africa, as well as Agenda 2063.

It is also important to build resilient communities,
strengthen democratic and judicial institutions, include
all sectors in socioeconomic development and promote
the participation of civil society, women and youth. We
in Indonesia stand ready to contribute to that effort, and
we are pleased that the majority of beneficiaries of our
South-South and triangular cooperation programmes
are African countries. We also continuously strengthen
economic ties, among others, through the Indonesia-
Africa Forum, the Indonesia-Africa Infrastructure
Forum, as well as other relevant forums. Our ties
with Africa are centuries old. We also engaged Africa
through the Bandung Asia-Africa Conference of 1955,
and we will continue to do so in future.

Finally, I would like to commend the convening
of this meeting under the agenda item "Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security". Indeed, the role of regional and
subregional organizations is crucial to ensuring the
success of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative. My delegation has continuously stated
the fact that Africa knows what it is best for Africa.
Indonesia can relate to this approach. In our region, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations has managed
to transform a region formerly prone to conflict into a
region of peace and progress.

While silencing the guns in Africa is not an easy
task, it is not an impossible one. It is within our reach
so long as all stakeholders join forces to support the
initiative and the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by the
Year 2020. We therefore call for enhanced partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union,
including through strategic dialogue and exchange of
views, capacity-building and analysis, to contribute to
the Silencing the Guns initiative.
I wish to conclude by underlining that we need to
aim for the sky to reach the ceiling. While silencing
the guns in Africa by 2020 is a noble and essential
aim, it must be pursued with practical and measurable
steps. We should aim to get rid of the guns and not
only provide silencers so that the sound of the gun is
not heard. All stakeholders should take part in this
important initiative, to save the upcoming generations
from the scourge of war. I just want to underline what
Mr. Vasu Gounden mentioned. Africa does not produce
guns; the guns come from abroad. Therefore, this is
not only an African problem; it is a problem for us all.
I would like to conclude by quoting an old and wise
proverb from Uganda: "When there is peace in the
country, the chief does not need shields." In the same
light, if there is peace and development in Africa, the
guns will be silent forever.

