Mr. Samukai (Liberia): Allow me, at the outset,
to express my Government's deep appreciation to
the Security Council for its consistent support to the
maintenance of peace in Liberia. It is a privilege for
me to bring my Government's perspective to today's
important discussion on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), which has been convened under the
presidency of Australia. The Government of Liberia
is also grateful to its many bilateral partners, some of
which are represented in the Council, for their continued
valuable support to Liberia's development.

The twenty-sixth progress report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/479) on UNMIL presents a succinct
overview of the prevailing political, socioeconomic and
security situation in Liberia at this critical juncture in
the transition process. I wish to commend the Secretary-
General for his report, which, in our view, brings out in
a cogent manner the progress that has been achieved
and the challenges that still lie ahead. In the same
vein, I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Karin Landgren and
Ambassador Staffan Tillander for their statements and
the useful observations they put forward. I join them
in emphasizing that, while Liberia has the primary
responsibility for shaping its future, the continued
support and partnership of the donor community are
indispensable to success.

Last month, on 18 August, Liberia celebrated
10 years of uninterrupted peace and stability under
the theme "Never again to war". Indeed, the past
10 years have seen determined efforts to consolidate
peace by promoting reconciliation, building democratic
institutions, initiating reforms across all sectors and
pursuing development. The commemoration of that
national milestone provided an opportunity for all
Liberians to reaffirm their commitment to peace,
security and development.

The Secretary-General's report correctly describes
the security situation in Liberia as stable but fragile.
That means that Liberia and its partners must focus
concerted efforts on reducing the level of fragility.
It is in consideration of that imperative that the
Liberian Government and UNMIL conducted an
extensive transition planning process, which resulted
in a responsible road map for the reconfiguration
of UNMIL, which the Council endorsed in 2012 in
resolution 2066 (2012). The resolution provides for a
phased reconfiguration of the UNMIL presence in
Liberia over a three-year period.

It is the assessment of the Liberian Government
that the first year of the implementation of UNMIL's
transition road map has proceeded according to plan.
The process also brought into focus the realistic
challenges of post-conflict development and the
resource and capacity gaps to be bridged in achieving
our agenda for transformation.

The Liberia National Police (LNP) serves as the
lead agency in the implementation of the tasks assigned
by the road map. Over the past months, the LNP has
taken over the duties and areas of responsibility
transferred to the Government by UNMIL. However,
personnel and logistics constraints remain huge
challenges for the LNP. Training is a vital component
of the transition and an important means of building
capacity. Acute financial shortfalls linked to unmet
revenue projections have hampered the optimal use of
facilities at the National Training Academy, making
it difficult to meet the timeline for the deployment of
police and immigration personnel.

Notwithstanding those initial setbacks, the
Government of Liberia remains firmly committed
to the road map as agreed. In that regard, I hasten to
mention that the LNP and the Bureau of Immigration
and Naturalization concluded plans to expand their
capacity and have undertaken vetting exercises to
increase their forces in the next three years.

In furtherance of the transition plan, the Government
of Liberia is appropriating in its 2013/2014 budget an
amount of about $10 million for the security andjustice
sectors. The Government will continue to seek avenues
for additional support through the budgetary process
and from its partners.

The Government of Liberia remains committed to
the implementation of the 2011 Security Reform and
Intelligence Act, which calls for the rationalization of
security agencies, including the National Bureau of
Investigation and the Ministry of National Security.
The Act is being implemented in stages. Here again
separate allocations have been incorporated into the
2013/14 budget to provide severance pay for employees
who will be laid off; retirement benefits and pensions,
through the Civil Service Agency, for employees
that have reached the age of retirement; and for the
redeployment of some employees to other agencies.

Access to justice is a fundamental human right.
It underpins the initiative to reform the judicial and
criminal justice systems so that they become more
accessible and affordable. That is why the Government
values highly its engagement with the Peacebuilding
Commission and its critical support for the establishment
of five justice and security hubs in the various counties,
only one of which has been constructed thus far. Those
hubs, when completed, will facilitate access to justice
by Liberians in the rural areas; the decentralization of
justice and security institutions; and the reinforcement
of civil administration in the various counties. The
Government has recommitted itself to adequately
supporting and sustaining hub operations.

The Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) have been
undergoing robust tactical and technical training to
protect the territorial integrity of the country. The AFL
is positioning itself to assist the civil administration in
specific support missions when required and preparing
to participate in regional and international peace
initiatives when so ordered. The Government of Liberia
recognizes the full support provided by the United
States Government to date in assisting the AFL in its
efforts to prepare itself.

Currently, an enhanced platoon from the AFL
is serving in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We are seeing
the positive effect of collaboration between the military
and security forces of Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia in
monitoring activities along their common border.

The Government intends to increase the personnel
capacity and capability of the Liberian Coast Guard
to address transnational crimes and illicit activities in
our territorial waters. Again, the Liberian Government
wishes to thank the United States Government for its
generosity in building the capacity of the Liberian
Coast Guard.

The Government is aware of the potential risk
of conflict resulting from any improper handling
of land rights and the management of our natural
resources. The Government will continue to fully
engage all stakeholders of various communities in the
decision-making process where there is potential for
investment in the development of our natural resources.

Finally, Liberia remains grateful to the United
Nations, especially UNMIL, and to the wider
international community for the crucial role that they
continue to play in preserving peace and stability in
Liberia. My Government is committed to continuing
its collaboration with UNMIL and other stakeholders
in ensuring the timely and full implementation of the
transition plan. We believe that the transition plan
has been carefully calibrated to take into account the
resources and capabilities of the Liberian Government
as well as the challenges of reconciliation and healing.
Any initiative aimed at accelerating or fast-tracking
the transition process could have a destabilizing effect
and undermine the gains already made. We support
the recommendation of the Secretary-General for the

extension ofthe mandate ofUNMIL for a further year consultations to continue our discussion on the
and urge the Council fully to endorse it. subject.

