Mr. Fulci (Italy): The tragic earthquake that has just
struck Japan prompts me to open my remarks by joining
you, Mr. President, and other speakers in expressing our
profound solidarity with and sincere condolences to our
Japanese colleague, Ambassador Owada. These are the
sentiments not only of the Italian Mission here in New
York but also of the Government and the people of Italy as
a whole.

Let me begin by expressing Italy's agreement with the
statement that will be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of France, Ambassador Merimee, on behalf
of the European Union, to which we fully subscribe. Our
national comments are meant only to underline particular
aspects or criteria that we deem of special importance.

The "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace", prepared
by the Secretary-General on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, is a much-appreciated
essay that summarizes the challenges facing the United
Nations in the aftermath of the cold war, in the light of the
experience of the United Nations since the Agenda for
Peace was first presented by Mr. Boutros-Ghali. The
Secretary-General's reading of international reality largely
corresponds to the views of my authorities. Some of these
views were expressed in this Chamber only last week by
the Italian Foreign Minister.

The proliferation of forces claiming an autonomous
role on the international scene multiplies the risks of
regional conflicts. Thus, there is a greater need to get to the
root of the problems and to adapt the modus operandi of
the United Nations in this field. Furthermore, in our
opinion, peace-keeping operations must not overshadow the
other essential tasks established by the Charter: to promote
economic development, to protect human rights and to
affirm democratic principles. If, as everyone seems to
agree, there can be no peace and security without
development, then we need a global vision of security.

Allow me to deal with methods before discussing the
Secretary-General's suggestions on preventive diplomacy,
peace-keeping, regional cooperation, sanctions and
disarmament.

Concerning methods, the debate over an Agenda for
Peace, part II, has taken on a public dimension. For some
time now the General Assembly has been discussing the
complex issues it raises in the Committee of 34. In last
year's Presidential Statements of 3 May, 27 July and 4
November, the Security Council focused on the problems
of peace-keeping, stand-by forces and the mechanisms for
consultation with troop-contributing countries. Hopefully,
like the General Assembly, the Council will continue
systematically to study the individual points in the
Supplement in order to foster homogeneous and coherent
responses to these interdependent issues.

With respect to preventive diplomacy, the crises
facing the international community have changed radically
and show a tendency to be less reactive to the instruments
of classical diplomacy. Thus we must drastically expand
the United Nations capacity for early warning, negotiating
influence and crisis management. The role of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoys in recent success
stories, such as Cambodia and Mozambique, cannot be
overemphasized.

Therefore, considering also the efforts already made
to downsize the Secretariat, the proposal to expand the
contingent of high-level personalities, utilizing the
indications provided by Member States, seems to us quite
pertinent. Rightly, the Secretary-General has remarked on
the increased cost that this would entail, especially for
long-term support missions. But perhaps support for
Special Envoys could also be provided by their own
countries, through their embassies.

Peace-keeping operations face numerous
sub-problems that cannot be addressed in a single
meeting. We remain convinced - as is the Secretary-
General - that the United Nations must take a
fundamentally different approach to operations under
Chapters VI and VII of the Charter. The difference must
be in resources and structures, both quantitatively and
qualitatively; conditions, where the consensus of the
parties is the primary condition; impartiality; the use of
force, which should always be the very last resort, as our
colleague from Honduras said this morning; and the
mandate.

Frankly, we are growing increasingly sceptical about
"dual-use operations". When peace-keeping operations are
created for interposition or monitoring, or to support
humanitarian action, they simply cannot be amplified later
on; instead, they should be completely redesigned to fit
Chapter VII of the Charter. Furthermore, the transition
from one phase to another must correspond to an
increased involvement of troop-contributing countries in
the decision-making process. We had a very bad
experience with this in Somalia, and we will never tire of
repeating it again and again.

 

A second order of problems concerns the United
Nations growing difficulty in promptly obtaining suitable
forces on a case-by-case basis. We continue to believe in
the formula of stand-by forces, even if we share the
Secretary-General's perplexity, given the huge gap between
availability in theory and availability in practice. But we do
not believe that the hypothesis of a rapid reaction force
contradicts the model of stand-by forces. One could even
project the creation of a rapid reaction force to be deployed
only after the consent of the participating nations, as the
final outcome of a process that started with stand-by forces.

Those considerations are intertwined with the issues of
regional organizations and their role, or of groups of States
that may take autonomous initiatives to implement Council
decisions. The Secretary-General stresses that this type of
operation entails greater responsibility, because it is tied to
the use of force - for example, the Gulf War, Somalia and
Haiti.

We are convinced that there is growing recognition of
the need for more regional cooperation, as demonstrated by
the decisions taken at the Budapest Summit of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) - the former Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the Western European
Union (WEU) document of Bonn-Petersberg, the Atlantic
Summit in Brussels, and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Conference in Cairo. The availability of "dedicated"
forces for rapid deployment with specific duties, including
those of a humanitarian nature, has been discussed and, to
certain extent, decided on by the WEU. The OSCE, for its
part, has done initial planning for a peace-keeping operation
in Nagorny Karabakh.

On another subject, we believe it is important to
reflect seriously on the sanctions system. In discussing the
extension of the implementation of resolution 943 (1994) a
few days ago, the Italian Foreign Minister said:

"Let us not forget that sanctions hurt people more than
they do Governments. By creating the perception of an
international conspiracy against the country, sanctions
often tend to rally the people around the Government
rather than mobilize them against it" (S/PV.3487, p. 13)

as sanctions are often meant to do.

Not everyone may agree with the proposals formulated
by the Secretary-General for new procedures in the
Council's monitoring and assessment of the impact of
sanctions. Yet there can be no doubt that in deciding on
sanctions the Council must be very selective. Sanctions
are an instrument that must be used parsimoniously, and
only when there are irrefutable reasons.
The Secretary-General also recalled the commitment
expressed at the 1992 Summit meeting to strengthen
United Nations capacity in the fields of disarmament,
arms control and non-proliferation. We all share the view
that 1995 is an important year in this effort.

De-mining is a key issue in countries that have
severe development problems and are dealing with the
aftermath of conflicts. This is the direction taken in
initiatives of the European Union as well as in the
Secretary-General's establishment of a trust fund. Equally
noteworthy is the recent creation of a data bank on de-
mining at the Department of Humanitarian Affairs.
Having already implemented a self-imposed moratorium
on land-mines, Italy intends to continue to do its part, and
urges further steps towards a true system of international
control.

