Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: It is a pleasure for me
to brief the Council for the first time as Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs. Since the
Council was last briefed by the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, on 23 June 2009 (see S/PV.6150), there have been concerted efforts by the
international community to create the conditions for
the prompt resumption and early conclusion of
negotiations to reach the end goal of a two-State
solution.

On 26 June, the Secretary-General joined other
members of the Quartet at a meeting in Trieste, which
was followed by a meeting with Foreign Ministers of
the Follow-up Committee of the League of Arab States
on the Arab Peace Initiative. The Quartet underscored
that the only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is one that ends the occupation that begin in
1967 and fulfils the aspirations of both parties for
independent homelands though two States for two
peoples: Israel and an independent, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security. All Quartet members affirmed their
determination to continue actively and vigorously to
seek a comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
09-42432

At Trieste, United States Special Envoy George
Mitchell briefed both the Quartet and the Arab foreign
ministers on the United States intensive efforts with all
parties throughout the region. He stressed that the
objective was peace and not yet another process. I am
sure that all Council members are aware that Senator
Mitchell will be visiting the region for the fifth time
later this week, as are a number of senior United States
officials. The Quartet envoys will also meet in
Jerusalem at the end of this month to actively follow
up with the parties to promote the implementation of
Quartet positions and formulate recommendations for
Quartet action.

There was strong agreement among Quartet
members that both Israel and the Palestinians should
implement their obligations under the Road Map, and
they urged the Government of Israel to freeze all
settlement activity, including natural growth. I regret to
report that illegal settlement activity is continuing
across the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
that there was no evacuation of settlement outposts
during the reporting period. The situation in East
Jerusalem is of particular concern due to the
developments on the ground, especially indications of
new settlement construction and house demolitions.

The international community expressed its
concern following the Jerusalem municipality planning
committee's approval of the construction of 20 new
housing units on the site of the Shepherd Hotel in the
East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah. On
19 July, in the Wadi Joz neighbourhood of East
Jerusalem, at the homes of two families that have
received eviction orders, Special Coordinator Serry
met with representatives of the European Union Troika
and other members of the international community in
order to express their concern at the plight of the
families and at the prospect of new settlement
construction in East Jerusalem. The homes are part of a
neighbourhood of 26 Palestinian refugee families that
all the face the threat of eviction.

In a significant development yesterday, settlers
accompanied by Israeli security forces took physical
possession of a house in another area of Sheikh Jarrah.
Demolition orders for Palestinian construction without a
permit were carried out against three Palestinian homes
during the reporting period and a further 13 new orders
were issued. Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem
remain closed by Israeli order, and on 15 July a
community centre in East Jerusalem was closed. These
09-42432
unilateral actions in highly sensitive areas of East
Jerusalem increase tensions and undermine confidence
in the basis for the two-State solution. The position of
the Secretary-General is clear - the future of Jerusalem
remains a matter for final status negotiations between
the parties.

In the reporting period, there were 51 incidents in
which 19 Palestinians were injured and property was
vandalized by settlers. Two Israelis were also injured in
these incidents. On 20 July, settlers injured two
Palestinians and set fire to agricultural land in the
village of Burin. There continues to be inadequate
enforcement of the rule of law on violent settlers.

This reporting period marks five years since an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
stated that construction of the wall within occupied
Palestinian territory is contrary to international law.
The construction of the barrier has compounded
movement restrictions in the West Bank, and its
planned route includes some 9.5 per cent of the area of
the West Bank. Approximately 58 per cent of the
barrier in its current planned route has been completed,
and construction is ongoing.

The Quartet principals agreed that transformative
change on the ground should form an integral and
essential part of the agenda for peace. In this respect,
there were some improvements in the West Bank in the
reporting period. Israel has implemented a number of
measures to ease movement between Nablus, Qalqilya,
Ramallah and Jericho. Initial field observations
indicate that these measures have significantly reduced
the amount of time required for Palestinians to access
these cities.

The Government of Israel has also announced
that the hours for commercial crossing at the Allenby
Bridge to Jordan will be increased and that it will
promote the development of three key industrial zones
in Bethlehem, Jenin and Jericho. These welcome steps
by Israel, if sustained and expanded, would have a
significant impact on Palestinian freedom of movement
and on economic development.

There are now a total of 613 closure obstacles
within the West Bank. This figure has been jointly
confirmed for the first time following cooperation by
the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) Central Command and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, including detailed cross-checking and a series
ofjoint field trips.
3

In a difficult context, the Palestinian Authority
has continued to pursue an ambitious reform agenda.
From the establishment of a national credit bureau to
the modernization of the legal framework for
investment, a number of measures are being
implemented to strengthen the foundations for socio-
economic sustainability. I reiterate the call of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee and the Quartet for robust and
sustained financial support for the Palestinian
Authority.

However, the fiscal situation of the Palestinian
Authority remains dire. The International Monetary
Fund estimates that $900 million in external financing
are still needed for the remainder of the year, including
$300 million to respond to needs in Gaza. It is essential
that donor countries fulfil all pledges made at Paris in
December 2007 and Sharm el-Sheikh in March this
year.

As the Quartet also noted in its meeting in
Trieste, the Palestinian Authority has made important
steps to reform its security sector. Members of the
judicial police completed a training course on 5 July,
and the renovation of prisons is under way in several
West Bank cities. Five police stations are also being
constructed in J enin governorate. Palestinian forces are
now free to operate at night in four West Bank cities
following improved coordination with Israel.

The situation was generally calm in the West
Bank and there were no fatalities recorded during the
reporting period, although 19 Palestinians and 10
Israelis were injured. Israeli security forces continued
to arrest Palestinians, but in lower numbers than in
previous periods. In a disturbing development, on
4Ju1y a Palestinian Authority official reported that
Palestinian security forces had uncovered arms,
explosives and $8.5 million in cash from Hamas cells
in the West Bank. I urge the Palestinian Authority to
continue to make every effort to improve law and order
and to fight violent extremism, consistent with its Road
Map obligations.

The Secretary-General shared with the Quartet
his belief that the situation in Gaza is unsustainable
and not in the interests of any of those concerned.
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) remains the
main framework for the way forward in Gaza. The
notable and welcome drop in Violence reported in the
most recent briefing has continued into this reporting
period. However, there were four incidents of rockets
or mortars being fired into Israel during the past month
and nine Israeli army incursions into the Gaza Strip, in
which two Palestinian children were killed and seven
Palestinians injured. A reported seven Palestinians
were killed today when a tunnel used for smuggling
collapsed. No mechanism has been put in place to
prevent the illicit trafficking in arms and ammunition
in Gaza.

I would like to stress that the Quartet called for a
sustained reopening of all crossing points to ensure the
regular flow of people and humanitarian and
commercial goods into Gaza. A few categories of
goods, including small quantities of cement and glass,
prohibited for import since June 2007, were allowed
into Gaza on an exceptional basis during the reporting
period. Overall, an average of 78 trucks per days were
allowed into Gaza, an increase from approximately 70
trucks per day in June and a marked increase from the
18 trucks per day in November 2008.

However, in May 2007, prior to the imposition of
the comprehensive closure regime, 475 trucks per day
were entering Gaza as part of normal commerce and
trade. About 70 per cent of imports during the
reporting period were human and animal food products
while most industrial, agricultural and construction
materials were either prohibited or severely restricted.
No exports were allowed out of Gaza during this
period.

Over the past month, the amount of industrial fuel
entering Gaza through the crossing points was
sufficient to meet approximately 70 per cent of the
quantities needed for Gaza power plants to operate at
full capacity. Power cuts continued throughout the
Gaza Strip, directly affecting most households' ability
to refrigerate foods, as well as the provision of
essential services like water and sanitation, health care
and storage of medicine as well as waste disposal. Due
to the lack of materials needed to fix damage sustained
to the network during Operation Cast Lead, some 10
per cent of the population in Gaza remained without
any electricity at all.

It is important to note that the tunnel economy
continues in Gaza, with smuggling providing an
increasingly broad range of consumer goods, and of
black market petrol in particular. The alternative tunnel
network has alleviated some of the shortages, but it
cannot be a substitute for a healthy and functioning
economy based on the free movement of goods.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East has opened more
than a 150 summer camps in Gaza which are being
attended by over 185,000 children. Under the
coordination of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), efforts to clear over 600,000 tons
of rubble have begun. In support of UNDP efforts, the
United Nations Mine Action Team for Gaza has
received its special explosive ordnance disposal
equipment but still waits for delivery of special
explosives to destroy unexploded ordnance.

No significant amounts of materials for
reconstruction have been allowed into Gaza and I
reiterate the Secretary-General's position that this
situation is completely unacceptable. In Trieste, the
Quartet has expressed it support for the United Nations
proposal to kick-start early recovery in Gaza by
opening the crossings for materials to complete United
Nations construction work on housing, health and
education facilities suspended since June 2007. We call
on Israel for a prompt and positive response to this
proposal.

A further, inconclusive round of talks aimed at
reconciling Fatah and Hamas was also held in Cairo on
28 June. Egyptian efforts have now been put on hold,
at President Abbas's request, to enable Fatah to focus
their efforts on their reform efforts at the upcoming
Fatah Congress, scheduled for 4 August in Bethlehem.
The factions are due to meet again in Cairo on
25 August.

Meanwhile, Hamas continues to assert its control
over the Strip and maintains a visible police presence
in public places. On 9 July, in a new development for
Gazan society, the Hamas Chief Justice in Gaza
instituted a rule that women lawyers must wear a
traditional gown and head covering in court. Intra-
Palestinian relations remain tense and on 21 July, a
bomb injured 61 people at a wedding in Khan Younis.

Fatah claims that nearly 200 of its members in
Gaza have been detained over the course of the
reporting period. Fatah has also expressed its concern
that its members in Gaza will be prevented from
attending its sixth Congress in Bethlehem.

On 14 July, the new Israeli negotiator met in
Cairo with his Egyptian counterpart to discuss
prospects for the release of Israeli captive Gilad Shalit
in exchange for a number of the 11,000 Palestinian
prisoners held in Israeli jails. The International
Committee of the Red Cross has still not been granted
access to Shalit after his more than three years in
captivity.

Justice Goldstone returned to Gaza on 28 June to
conduct two days of public hearings with victims and
relatives of the Cast Lead Operation. On 6 July, similar
hearings were held in Geneva, during which witnesses
and victims from the West Bank and southern Israel
testified, including Noam Shalit, the father of captured
Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit. This mission's report will
be presented to the Human Rights Council in August,
for discussion at the Council's next session in
September.

In the region, Arab League foreign ministers met
in Cairo on 24 June and welcomed a new beginning for
United States relations with the Arab and Muslim
world and President Obama's commitment to exert
every effort towards comprehensive peace in the
region. The foreign ministers emphasized the
importance of a complete Israeli settlement freeze and
the need to lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip as two
key elements to create the necessary climate for the
resumption of peace negotiations.

The Quartet took note of the Arab League
statement and expressed support for dialogue among
all States in the region in the spirit of the Arab Peace
Initiative. The Quartet called on Arab States to take
steps to recognize Israel's rightful place in the region,
to affirm that violence cannot achieve regional peace
and security, and to assist the Palestinian people in
building their future State through consistent support
for the Palestinian Authority.

The situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
remained quiet during the reporting period, although
settlement activity continues.

Turning now to Lebanon, allow me to recall that
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, briefed the Council on 23 July on
recent violations of resolution 1701 (2006) that had
taken place in South Lebanon. Investigations are still
ongoing into some of these violations.

In addition, on 8 July, one Lebanese civilian
crossed the Blue Line near Sheikh Abbad tomb and
was arrested by the IDF. He was handed over to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) the
following morning. During the month, Israeli air
violations took place almost daily.
In meetings with Lebanese and Israeli officials
and political leaders in the past week, the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Mr. Michael
Williams stressed the seriousness of these recent events
and the gravity of the violations to resolution 1701
(2006) that had taken place as well as the need to
de-escalate the situation. With Lebanese leaders, he
requested that there be no further incursions by
Lebanese civilians across the Blue Line. Mr. Williams
was reassured by Prime Minister Siniora, Speaker Berri
and Prime Minister-designate Hariri that no further
demonstrations would take place in the area. A senior
member from Hizbullah also gave the same
reassurances.

In a further effort to defuse the situation,
Mr. Williams Visited Israel on 23 July where he raised
the question of the newly-erected watchtower in Kfar
Shouba and requested that it be removed. An
immediate priority is for all parties to refrain from any
provocative actions that could spiral into undesirable
results.

Even as we await the outcome of the
investigation into the recent events, UNIFIL will
continue to coordinate closely with the Lebanese
armed forces to ensure that the situation in UNIFIL's
area of operation remains under control in line with
resolution 1701 (2006).

On the Lebanese side, the challenge ahead
remains the formation of a new Government after
parliamentary elections on 7 June. We hope that
ongoing negotiations over the formation of the
Government will proceed as expeditiously as possible.
The recent incidents in South Lebanon have been a
stark reminder of how quickly and dangerously the
situation can deteriorate. Despite the seriousness of
those incidents, however, we remain hopeful that we
can move towards full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and towards greater security and stability
in the Middle East.

Now is the time for Israel, the Palestinians and all
actors in the region to play their part to end the Arab-
Israeli conflict and to create a better future for all in
the Middle East. The Quartet will meet on the margins
of the General Assembly in New York in September,
and there will also be a meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee. We continue to support the convening of
an international conference in Moscow in 2009.

We remain determined to actively and vigorously
seek a comprehensive resolution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict on the basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and
1850 (2008), the Madrid framework, including the
principle of land for peace, the Road Map and
agreements previously reached between the parties.

