I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the United Nations Police Commissioners. We appreciate their very important annual briefings. The United States commends the tremendous progress made throughout the past 60 years of United Nations policing. Today, United Nations police are deployed to increasingly more complex, dynamic and multidimensional missions. They play a critical role in protection, public order management, partnering with host-nation authorities, and preventing and investigating crime. United Nations police now have protection of civilians mandates in all of the "big five" missions: the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. These proactive engagements bring new challenges for the United Nations police, and we are grateful for their efforts. I would first like to congratulate Chief Inspector Doreen Malambo of Zambia on receiving the prestigious 2020 United Nations Female Police Officer of the Year Award yesterday. We praise Doreen for her outstanding work as an officer and her dedication to her duties as a leader in UNMISS. The United States strongly supports the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy, and we urge police-contributing countries to embrace policies that increase women's participation in all levels of policing. We were pleased to see the United Nations police implement the women and peace and security agenda, already having achieved their 2020 targets for female police personnel at Headquarters, in the field and for both formed police units and individual police officers. This is important progress, and we look forward to seeing more women police playing leading roles in rebuilding communities and in cultivating trust between citizens and the security institutions that serve them. This is especially true in South Sudan, the Central African Republic and Mali. Two years after the unanimous adoption of resolution 2436 (2018), we repeat our support for the United Nations commitment to implementing an integrated performance and accountability policy. This policy should be based on clear standards for all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel working in and supporting peacekeeping operations. In this regard, the United States welcomes the recently launched integrated peacekeeping performance and accountability framework, which seeks to harmonize the various assessment tools and processes used for military, police and civilian components of peacekeeping missions. I thank the Commissioners who provided briefings today for their hard work on this issue thus far. We must maintain our shared commitment to elevating peacekeeping performance by ensuring that police have proper training and are held accountable for meeting United Nations standards. The United States strongly supports Under-Secretary-General Lacroix's initiative to brief the Security Council on peacekeeping performance. We look forward to hearing candid assessments about performance, including shortfalls, success stories and how Member States and the Secretariat can better address performance issues. We do believe there is still some work to be done in reviewing the Policy on Formed Police Units in United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and in strengthening the individual police officer assessment and evaluation process. With more and more complex missions around the world, we need United Nations police to be professional, successful and accountable. The United States remains committed to supporting United Nations police and to helping them meet the challenges of today and tomorrow. I would like to end my remarks today with three specific questions for our police commissioners and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix. First, how is performance data used to decide police-contributing countries' rotations and deployments? Secondly, how can we best maintain commitment to the protection of civilians in peacekeeping transitions? And thirdly, how can we ensure greater numbers of women in police rotations and deployments?
