Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): First of all, we join
others in thanking Special Representative Helen La
Lime for her informative briefing. Since this is her first
briefing as Special Representative, we would like to
congratulate her on assuming this important position
and wish her every success in all her endeavours.

Kazakhstan would like to commend the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) for implementing a number of
important projects and initiatives, in close cooperation
with the Government and civil society of Haiti. We
also commend the professional operations of the
Haitian National Police (HNP) during the nationwide
demonstrations on 17 October and 18 November. We
call upon the Government of Haiti to make sure that
the HNP strategic development plan is implemented
efficiently and in a timely manner in order to further
enhance professional training and experience. With
a view to consolidating security and stability in the
country, it is critical that MINUJUSTH maintain its
focus on HNP capacity-building.

The recent massive demonstrations have
underscored the importance of building broad-
based political support to implement key economic
reforms and rebuild trust and public confidence in
the Government's institutions, thereby creating the
necessary conditions and legal framework to attract
investments. We consider all those steps essential for
fostering development.

In that regard, we encourage the Government to
redouble its efforts to strengthen the rule of law, fight
impunity and address corruption, which are the basic
prerequisites for long-term stability in Haiti, especially
in the light of the upcoming elections in 2019. That
will require the concerted efforts of key actors from
all branches of the Government, Parliament, judicial
system and civil society to work together towards that
common goal.

It is necessary to focus on ensuring that the objectives
of the MINUJUSTH exit strategy are implemented in
a coordinated manner. As the United Nations system
prepares for a smooth and effective transition towards
a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence, we also
draw the attention of the different United Nations
entities on the ground and at Headquarters to continue
working as One United Nations through a more
integrated and coordinated approach. It is necessary to
break down silos so as to achieve optimal results for
sustainable development in Haiti.

In conclusion, we strongly believe that the
Government, the Mission, the United Nations country
team and all international and regional partners should
continue to work together to plan for the transition and
beyond. It will also be absolutely vital to anticipate,
address and mitigate all challenges that may emerge
from the transition towards a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence in Haiti.

