Mr. Yoogalingam (Malaysia): I am happy to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council for the

 

month of December, especially at a time when the Council
has taken another important decision regarding the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Your country played an
important role in advancing the peace process. I also wish
to extend my appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Oman, who presided over the
Council during the month of November.
My delegation participated at the Security Council
meeting of 22 November, when the Council took two
significant decisions - namely, those regarding the arms
embargo and the lifting of economic sanctions following the
initialling of the Dayton Agreement. Today, we meet again
following the formal signing of the Bosnian Peace
Agreement in Paris yesterday.

The Agreement is just the beginning in the search for
permanent peace, justice and development in the region.
While not wishing to downplay the many potential pitfalls,
we recognize that the Agreement offers real hope of
bringing an end to the cataclysmic conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. If the Agreement is to work, it requires the
full and genuine cooperation of the parties to the conflict,
as well as the strong support of the international
community.

The resolution before the Council endorses the
agreements among the warring parties, while upholding
fundamental principles, including those dealing with the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
crimes against humanity.

One of the centrepieces of the Dayton/Paris Agreement
pertains to the establishment of the Implementation Force
(IFOR) under the command of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). As a country which has agreed to
participate in IFOR, we fervently hope that it will be able
to discharge its mandate effectively and fully. The role of
IFOR is critical to the successful implementation of the
Agreement.

At this critical juncture, every effort must be made to
ensure the success of the mission to be undertaken by
IFOR. Any attempt to undermine the Peace Agreement
should be resolutely resisted. The credibility of the
multinational force will be judged by its actions to fully and
effectively implement the Agreement. Its failure to achieve
strict and immediate implementation would have
catastrophic implications for the region and for the rest of
the world.

 

While we take these tenuous but necessary steps
towards peace, the atrocities and horrors carried out in the
name of "ethnic cleansing" for the past four years remain
fresh in our minds. "Ethnic cleansing", which constitutes
a crime against humanity, should not be brushed aside for
political expediency. Those responsible for such acts
should not be allowed to go unpunished, nor the victims
denied justice. The work of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia deserves the continued and full
support of the international community.
In this regard, the Council's decision, as contained
in the resolution adopted today, which calls on all
Member States to cooperate and comply with the orders
issued by the Tribunal regarding the arrest or detention of
persons accused of committing violations of international
humanitarian law, is indeed commendable.

As part of the international endeavours to nurture
peace and to restore normality, efforts towards
infrastructure rehabilitation and economic reconstruction
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina must be given
immediate, priority attention. In this connection, my
delegation welcomes the decision of the London
Conference held on 8 and 9 December that the World
Bank and the European Commission should take the lead
in the efforts for the reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We also share the View of the Secretary-General,
expressed in his report (S/l995/1031), that the United
Nations too has a role to play in such endeavours.
Malaysia has on various occasions expressed its readiness
to contribute to the country's reconstruction and
humanitarian projects. We are willing to offer our
expertise in different areas to help rebuild the country. As
a member of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council established at the London
Conference, Malaysia will continue to play an active role
and to contribute to the process to ensure that peace
endures.

Given the immensity of the humanitarian and
reconstruction tasks, there is an obvious need for effective
coordination and cooperation between those aid agencies
to avoid competition, duplication and wastage of
resources.

Another issue that demands our immediate attention
pertains to the plight of 2.1 million refugees and displaced
persons. The safe and early return of refugees and
displaced person is essential to the holding of fair

 

elections, and the provision of shelter for them is crucial.
In this regard, we share the views expressed by the High
Commissioner for Refugees on the need for organized and
phased movement. Arrangements should also be made for
voluntary return. In this regard, we hope that IFOR will
provide the logistic and other necessary support to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

Finally, we fully endorse the observation made by the
Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina earlier today
regarding safeguards to ensure

"the holding of democratic, fair, just, free and secure
elections throughout the country, without fear or
intimidation".

