Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. Since it joined the Council,
your delegation has worked unceasingly to promote the
topics dear to our continent, including matters relating
to peacekeeping, through its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and we
are grateful to you for that.

I would also like to apologize on behalf of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
Morocco, Mr. Mezouar, who is unable to join us
given his function as President of the twenty-second
Conference of the Parties United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, which he opened today.

Finally, I would like to thank you for the choice
of theme of today's meeting, in which we are
particularly interested as a troop-contributing country
as peacekeeping operations now face the challenges
of terrorism, transnational criminal networks and all
genres of trafficking and smuggling. The regrettable
incident that claimed the life ofa Togolese Blue Helmet
and injured seven, including civilians, has also been
mentioned during today's debate. We extend our
sympathy to the people of Mali and Togo.

United Nations peacekeeping has undergone
tremendous change since its creation. From the 1950s
until the end of the last century, traditional peacekeeping
was limited to observing ceasefire agreements and
serving as an interposition force. Furthermore, to date,
military observers are not armed. Nonetheless, given
the changes in the nature and scope of contemporary
challenges, peacekeeping operations have had to adapt
and evolve. In addition, the range of their activities has
expanded and now encompasses several peacebuilding
tasks, such as the capacity-building of host countries,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration support,
security sector reform and the strengthening of the
rule of law, just to name a few areas. Contemporary
traditional peacekeeping missions also face the new
phenomenon of asymmetrical threats, which are a
broad concept, subject to various interpretations.
Therefore, we will limit our statement to the threat of
terrorism, violent extremism and organized crime and
its related activities, which peacekeeping operations,
and in particular, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, must face.

The terrorist threat is real and has a significant
impact on the security and the safety of Blue Helmets and
civilian populations. As a troop-contributing country,
Morocco is concerned about the increasing number
of deaths among Blue Helmets and hopes that today's
debate and discussions under way at the United Nations
will enable us to remedy that unprecedented situation.
Aware of the need to tailor peacekeeping operations
to their current environment, we continue to firmly
support the peacekeeping principles of impartiality,
the consent of parties and the non-use of force, except
in cases of legitimate defence and to uphold mandates.
As highlighted in the concept note (see S/2016/927, annex), which contains an extract from the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the challenge for peacekeeping operations
today is to protect themselves against asymmetrical
threats rather than combat such threats.

The current trend is to develop concepts and
measures that steer us away from the principles of
peacekeeping. Some solutions proposed could have
a significant impact on the ground if they are clearly
implemented and based on consensus to avoid having
peacekeeping operations and our Blue Helmets being
considered belligerents and, by extension, targets. I
will give two examples to illustrate my point.
The first is intelligence-gathering. Peacekeeping
operations have always gathered intelligence and
analysed information. A number of mechanisms exist,
including the Joint Mission Analysis Cell, the Joint
Operations Centre, U-2 surveillance planes, among
others. Mindful of the specific situation of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, an intelligence-gathering unit attached
to the Mission - the All Sources Information Fusion
Unit (ASIFU) - has been deployed. Unfortunately, it
has not had the expected result for a number of reasons,
on which we will not dwell in this debate. However,
the experience did underscore the importance of
clear modalities in this area in order to ensure that a
number of challenges facing ASIFU are met, such as
information-sharing, its ownership and knowledge of
the field. We have had an opportunity to speak to those
challenges repeatedly.

What the United Nations needs is to readapt
existing resources and to make optimimum use of
available information. The simple fact of using the
term "intelligence" can lead to confusion and even
undermine the very image of the Mission, which could
be perceived as a party to the conflict. The same applies
to cooperation with various United Nations entities
committed to the fight against terrorism or institutions,
such as Interpol. It is necessary to clarify the terms of
that cooperation and ensure that they conform to the
principles of peacekeeping.

The second point I wish to make concerns the use
of new technologies. We often hear that peacekeeping
cannot meet the challenges of the twenty-first century
with the tools of the twentieth. I believe that we all
agree on that. Where opinions diverge is with respect
to the operationalization of those resources. When one
refers to new technologies, we often think of drones,
which are modern tools that can be very effective in
surveillance and have demonstrated their utility in
certain situations. However, some are reticent regarding
their use as a result of the fact that to date, even though
they have been deployed in three missions, there are
still no clear modalities for their use. Many questions
linked to confidentiality regarding the use of drones or
their scope of application have not yet been addressed.
We therefore take this opportunity to reiterate our call
for discussions on the topic, especially in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which is the
only body that can take decisions in that field. Other
modern technological resources, such as sophisticated
surveillance cameras or protection equipment, could
also be used.
This debate is taking place at just the right
time, as discussions on the future of United Nations
peacekeeping are under way. Following the review
process launched by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, we are all called on to consider
the ways in which we can make peacekeeping more
effective and better tailored to new realities. To this end,
allow me to share a few thoughts for our consideration
as part of our debate here today.

First, we should improve our understanding of the
threats facing missions by enhancing our preliminary
studies of the theatre of enagement. That process should
not be confused with intelligence-gathering. It will also
facilitate mission planning, and take into account all
specific aspects of the engagement.

Secondly we should establish conditions conducive
to promoting contact and communication with local
populations. Indeed, local populations remain the
main source of information. In that framework, it is
important to include languages as part of the criteria
for the selection of contingents, in particular French, a
language that is used in most peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, we should ensure that the troops deployed
have the necessary equipment, based on the preliminary
study of the field. In that respect, a statement of unit
requirement could be considered in order to ensure
that it take better into account the specificities of the
location of deployment.

Fourthly, we should ensure that predeployment
training is bolstered and adapted to the reality on
the ground.

Fifthly, I stress the importance of ensuring that
the principles of peacekeeping - including neutrality,
impartiality, consent of the parties and the non-use
of force, except in cases of legitimate self-defence
and defence of the mandate- are respected. Certain
mission tasks that transform the military personnel into
targets are not acceptable.

