Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Moussa for his briefing and for
all his efforts on behalf of peace in the Central African
region.

Today marks a pivotal moment to reflect
strategically on the myriad of growing concerns
surrounding the Central African region, which risks
full implosion. Flanked by conflict from the Great
Lakes to its immediate south, a struggling new nation
to its east, burgeoning terror threats to its west and an
explosive religious conflict at its core, the region is one
that we must prioritize. We ignore those trend lines and
their ability to handicap the region's trajectory towards
growth to our peril.

We View with horror and outrage the ongoing
campaign of destruction perpetrated by Boko Haram,
which is migrating east and knocking on Central Africa's
door. Boko Haram has primarily chosen targets who
cannot fight back: students, hospital patients, teachers
and other unarmed civilians. The abduction last month
of more 200 Nigerian schoolgirls and subsequent public
threats to sell the girls into slavery have shocked us to
the core, not only as diplomats and policy leaders but
also as parents and human beings.

Boko Haram has no agenda other than cowardice,
sadism, ignorance and death. As such, it has made itself
the adversary of people everywhere. My Government
has pledged its support to the Nigerian Government in
helping to return the girls to their homes. We are prepared
to assist the region in developing a comprehensive
strategy to defeat Boko Haram, including by pursuing
United Nations sanctions against that group, and to hold
its murderous leaders accountable for their actions. My
Government has been in close communication with
Nigerian officials, including Ambassador ngu here
in New York, and we will do all we can to support
their efforts to ensure that the missing schoolgirls are
returned safely to their homes.

Of course, in stealing children, Boko Haram is
mimicking tactics first used in the region by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). For more than two decades,
the LRA has ravaged the lives of tens of thousands of
men, women and children, who have been displaced,
maimed, abducted or killed across four countries. In
the process, the LRA has compelled countless young
people to serve as underage soldiers and sex slaves. Our
goal has been, and remains to bring that scourge to a
complete and decisive end. My Government commends
the African Union (AU) Regional Task Force and its
partners for making important progress. If defector
reports are accurate, the LRA's second-in-command,
Okot Odhiambo - one of several prominent LRA
leaders who have been indicted by the International
Criminal Court for crimes against humanity - was
killed late last year. That represents a substantial blow
to what little remains of the LRA's command structure.

In the past few years, military and political efforts,
combined with strong civil society advocacy, have
reduced LRA combatants from more than 1,000 to a
small fraction of that number. Between 2011 and 2013,
the number of people killed by LRA attacks dropped by
75 per cent, and the level of abductions by 50 per cent.
Since 2012, more than 180 men, women and children
have defected or been released. The decline in LRA
terror has made it possible for hundreds of thousands
to return to their homes, reducing the population
displaced by the LRA from more than 320,000 at the
end of last year to less than 160,000 today. This still
huge and unacceptable number marks the lowest level
in over a decade. Credit for these gains belongs to the
AU Regional Task Force, international peacekeepers,
non-governmental organizations and leaders of local
civil society.

Because of this progress, the LRA is becoming less
relevant. As the threat recedes further, we should place
greater emphasis on working with local leaders to help
affected communities to recover. We urge the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
to coordinate with the AU, the World Bank, national
Governments and other stakeholders to advance a plan
for the long-term stabilization of those areas. Over
the past five years, the United States Government
has provided more than $87 million to enhance food
security, health, development and other priorities in
communities harmed by LRA violence. Collectively,
we must ensure that areas ravaged by the LRA are able
at long last to enjoy the benefits of peace.

Despite some progress, we remain concerned about
reports of unfettered LRA activity in the north-eastern
parts of the Central African Republic, a country that is
beset simultaneously by brutal religious violence and
immense and growing humanitarian needs. We find the
reports of possible LRA collusion with former Seleka
fighters to be particularly disturbing, and we have no
doubt that Boko Haram would like nothing more than to
exploit the despair of displaced Muslims in the northern
part of the Central African Republic.

My Government also shares the Secretary-General's
concern about the possibility that LRA leaders have
again sought a safe haven in Sudanese-controlled areas
of the Kafia Kindi enclave. We call on the Government
in Khartoum to work cooperatively with the AU to
investigate these reports and to deny the LRA any
form of rest or support. Any Government should be
embarrassed to be sheltering the Lord's Resistance
Army. After a quarter-century of merciless brutality,
the LRA should not be tolerated, let alone helped, by
anyone - not to mention a State Member of the United
Nations.

I can assure the Council that the United States
will remain steadfast in providing tangible and
wide-ranging assistance to anti-LRA efforts, including
military advisers, air-lift support, humanitarian aid,
civilian protection and measures aimed at encouraging
defections. We look forward to the day, which we hope
will come soon, when all LRA combatants are removed
from the battlefield.

Mindful that the LRA is but one ofmany significant
threats to peace and security in Central Africa,
my Government applauds the Council's decision to
authorize a United Nations peacekeeping mission
in the Central African Republic. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) must do the
critical work of protecting civilians, facilitating urgently
needed humanitarian access, and supporting the State
in that country, which is of course in a weakened
position. We call on MINUSCA to coordinate closely
with the many actors - the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic
(MISCA), French and European Union forces, and the
AU Regional Task Force - that are currently deployed
and will remain in the Central African Republic. But
above all, we urge Member States to support MISCA
and the African Union, which is still trying to protect
civilians alongside France and the European Union, and
to contribute to MINUSCA, as timely force-generation
for both MISCA and MINUSCA is critically needed
and needed now.

We also express our alarm, as others have done, at
the deteriorating political situation in Burundi, where
the Government has harrassed and arrested members
of opposition parties, pushed for the end of the United
Nations political mission in advance of a very fragile
election period, and is imposing growing restrictions
on civil society, and where we have all seen alarming
reports of youth militia being armed, to which the
Government has responded only by expelling the United
Nations mission's security adviser. We urge UNOCA to
spare no effort at preventive diplomacy.

We remain at a difficult time in Central Africa.
International cooperation has been encouraging, but we
must do far more to confront Boko Haram, to complete
the destruction of the LRA, to counter religious
strife and prevent ethnic cleansing, and to disrupt the
activities of criminals who seek to prey on the innocent
and the weak. The next months will be critical in each
of these areas, and we must take advantage of every
opportunity to turn the tide on all fronts.

