The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Morocco.

At the outset, I align myself with my colleagues
who have welcomed Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, and I thank her for her
detailed briefing. Since the adoption of resolution 1593
(2005), the International Criminal Court has regularly
submitted reports to the Security Council on the
progress achieved in implementing that resolution. We
have taken note of the sixteenth report, which included
the recent developments and activities of the Court with
regard to the Sudan since 5 June.

Morocco has always called for a political settlement
between all relevant parties in order to alleviate the
suffering of the civilian population. We reiterate
our commitment to the principles of international
humanitarian law, human rights and respect for the
sovereignty and integrity of States. Morocco, at the
time, welcomed the signing of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur and the implementation of the
Document's provisions with regard to the issues that
had caused the conflict, especially the provisions on the
fair redistribution of power, resources, restitution, the
return of refugees, reconciliation and the continuation
of national dialogue.

We realize that there are still many obstacles
impeding the restoration of peace in Darfur. We regret
that those challenges, including the refusal by some
rebel groups to become involved in the peace efforts,
continue to delay the effective implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The refusal by
those groups tojoin the peace process in accordance with
the Doha Document is now a major source ofinstability
in the region, with some groups having openly declared
their intention to replace the Government in Khartoum.

In that regard, we would like to underscore the
following positive points. A joint declaration has been
issued by the Government and the Interim Military
Council of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM),
a new group that broke away from J EM. We hope that
other groups will join them. We also underscore the
positive efforts by the new Darfur Regional Authority to
move advance efforts to implement the Doha agreement
and, specifically, their commitment to promoting a
comprehensive dialogue, despite all the obstacles.

We look forward to the upcoming donor conference
in Doha and to the normalization of relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan. We hope that that will
provide the necessary funding to the Darfur Regional
Authority to enable it to carry out all the tasks facing it.

With regard to the ICC indictment of President
Al-Bashir, the League of Arab States stated its position
on the matter a few days after the indictment was
issued. Like other international organizations and
groups, the League has reaffirmed that position on
various occasions.
Stability cannot be restored to Darfur unless public
relations are stable, the agreements signed by the two
countries are signed, and the outstanding issues between
them are resolved. We hope that this happens as soon as
possible so that trust between the two neighbours can
be established on the basis of good-neighbourllness,
cooperation and complementarity, to the benefit of the
peoples of both countries and in the interests of the
stability and security ofthe entire region.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting ruse at 12.10 pm.
