Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for having convened today's
open debate.

Argentina has always maintained a principled
position in favour of resolving disputes and conflicts
by peaceful means; respect for international law,
sovereignty, independence, national unity and
territorial integrity of States; the rejection of the
acquisition of territories by force; and confidence
in the constructive role and persuasive power of the
international community in order to pave the way for
peaceful, just and lasing solutions to conflicts.

The situation in the Middle East, in particular
the Palestinian question, has been addressed by the
Security Council since 1947 and remains one of the
longest-running and most intractable conflicts on the
international agenda. In the light of that situation, we
should ask ourselves what we can do as members of the
international community to help find a just and lasting
solution within the framework of the Council. In that
regard, Argentina believes that overcoming differences
is a priority so that the parties can resume negotiations.
My country strongly supports all efforts to achieve
peace and stability in the Middle East, both in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and in the no less serious
situations in other countries of the region.

On the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of
historic resolution 242 (1967), we again reiterate our
firm support for a peaceful, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question on the basis of
the two-State solution, based on 1967 borders and on
what was agreed by the parties during the negotiations
process. Argentina reaffirms its support for the right
of the Palestinian people to establish an independent
and viable State, recognized by the entire international
community, as well as the right of the State of Israel
to live in peace with its neighbours, within secure and
internationally recognized borders.

Similarly, Argentina reiterates its concern
about the persistent and continued construction of
illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and calls for an end to their expansion, as set
out in resolution 2334 (2016), adopted by the Council
in December 2016 . The international community, as a
whole, has made it very clear that the settlements are
contrary to international law, hamper peace, weaken
the prospect of a two-State solution, with both States
living in peace and security, and therefore perpetuates
an untenable status quo. We also believe that it is
necessary for Palestinian leaders to earnestly address
Israeli security concerns. Argentina believes that it is
unacceptable for Hamas and other Palestinian groups to
carry out attacks against Israeli civilians. My country
strongly condemns all terrorist acts.

Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and rejects any unilateral
measure aimed at changing it. My country believes that
the holy city should be a place of assembly and peace,
and that the members of the three major monotheistic
religions - Judaism, Christianity and Islam - should
be guaranteed free access to the holy sites.

Regrettably, over the past few days the security
situation in the city of Jerusalem has deteriorated
considerably. The Republic of Argentina is concerned
about the spike in violence and repudiates the slew of
acts that have claimed the lives of several Palestinian
citizens and members of the Israeli security forces. The
escalation of fanaticism and the violence that ensues
cannot be allowed to undermine the right of societies
to live in peace and freedom, in full enjoyment of their
civil rights. Our country therefore believes that none of
the parties should take unilateral measures that could
affect the status quo.

Unfortunately, that is not the only issue that
concerns us in the Middle East. Argentina notes with
concern developments in the situation in Syria, in
particular the humanitarian situation and condemns
all acts of violence, particularly those targeting the
civilian population. Our country rejects terrorism in
all its forms and condemns in the strongest terms the
terrorist activity of the organization that refers to itself
as the Islamic State, and the Al-Nusra Front.
We also strongly condemn the use of chemical
weapons in any situation, under any circumstances
and by any actor. We also firmly believe that all those
responsible for their use should be brought to justice. In
that regard, we support the impartial and technical work
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism.

Argentina supports a political solution in Syria,
through dialogue and diplomacy, as well as respect
for international law and the principles of sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We therefore
attach particular importance to the negotiations in
Geneva and Astana. Considerable progress has been
made because these two initiatives complement each
other. We also welcome the agreement reached between
the United States, the Russian Federation and Jordan on
9 July to bring about a ceasefire in south-eastern Syria.

With regard to the situation in Iraq, we are pleased
to note that the Iraqi army has recently retaken control
of Mosul. We regret the many lives lost as a result of
the terrorist acts carried out by the self-proclaimed
Islamic State.

We would also like to make mention of the crisis
among the countries of the Gulf, which is a new
source of tension in the region and cause of concern
for our country. Argentina hopes that all of the parties
involved, with whom we have close cooperation links,
can find a solution, through dialogue and diplomatic
negotiations. We support Kuwait's mediation efforts
and the initiatives taken by various actors within the
international community to improve relations among the
parties. We call for restraint and stress that all decisions
and actions should be in line with international law to
prevent an escalation of the situation and any social and
economic consequences that would have an adverse
effect on the civilian population. We condemn terrorism
in all its forms and view it as a common enemy that we
must defeat.

Peace in the Middle East will be possible only
through greater diplomatic efforts and negotiation.
The Council should spare no effort in encouraging
the parties concerned in that direction, consistent
with the parameters recognized by the international
community in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, a two-State solution based on
agreements between the parties, the Quartet road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as a mutually
acceptable solution to the situation in Jerusalem and a
just settlement of the refugee issue.
