Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the representative of France for the
summary of the report that he has given us. I would
also like to pay tribute to him for the professionalism
he displayed as head of the Security Council mission
during our stay in Central Africa. We fully share his
analysis of the situation with respect to the recent
events that have taken place in that sub-region, and
also with respect to the peace process underway in
Central Africa. We believe that the Council's message
was clear and expressed the willingness of the
international community to facilitate the peace process
in the sub-region. We hope that the Council's message
in that regard was well understood.

I would simply like to make the following
comments. It seems that the most important challenges
to be addressed in both Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo consist of adherence to the
timetable for the elections and the establishment of
institutions. It also seems that the question of the
armed presence of ex-FAR Interahamwe should also be
monitored more carefully by our Council and that a
practical and urgent solution should be found by the
international community with a View to holding
peaceful elections throughout the entire territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, but
also in order to finally give Rwanda a guarantee of the
security that it needs along its border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is also crucial
that the Joint Verification Mechanism become
operational immediately, as well as the tripartite
mechanism that involves Uganda. It seems today that
the presence of ex-FAR and other armed groups must
be addressed from the point of view of their
subregional involvement.

The Council should also discuss further the
question of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration of ex-FAR/Interahamwe. The
principle of their disarmament and their demobilization
is now accepted, and there is no need to go further into
that. However, on the question of the threat of
genocide, we believe that we have to go beyond the
logic of the fable of the wolf and the lamb, and look at
the human rights dimension of the problem. Today, the
question of genocide is taken into account by the
international community through a certain number of
mechanisms and instruments.

In this connection, we have to adopt the approach
of individual responsibility rather than the wholesale
condemnation or demonization of a political
movement, an armed group or an ethnic group. Having
said this, we believe that finding a solution to the
question of the threat of the presence of
ex-FAR/Interahamwe should be considered within the
framework of bilateral and trilateral mechanisms that
have been set up. Parties must refrain from any
unilateral action, because it is only in this way that
they can show that they are truly committed to the
objective of stabilizing the region and thus contribute
to the efforts made by the international community to
strengthen the peace process in the region.

We also have to think further about effective
ways to combat impunity so as to discourage all those
who are thwarting the efforts of the international
community and to prevent events as tragic as the ones
that we saw in the Gatumba refugee camp. The
credibility of the Council is also at stake, because the
people in this region are impatiently awaiting the
establishment of an international commission to
investigate that crime.

We also have to deal more carefully with the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially since
this phenomenon has implications not only for security
but also for the spread of corruption. It could also have
implications on governance, once institutions have
been set up after the eagerly awaited elections.

With the international conference on the Great
Lakes region and dialogue structures already under
way at the bilateral and multilateral level, the
necessary instruments exist to restore peace to the
subregion and to establish the basis for a gradual
implementation of development plans for the
subregion. We have to encourage dialogue as well as
concessions, which are the only way of making
progress towards peace.

Furthermore, the Council should closely follow
the implementation of the conclusions of the mission to
Central Africa. A possible quarterly review, I think,
would be appropriate in order to bring pressure to bear
on the parties.

