Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): The fact that the Security Council is once
again considering the situation in Angola attests to the
sustained interest the international community is taking in
the crisis in that country. Over the past 20 years, the
international community has supported efforts aimed at
restoring peace in this fraternal country, and replacing
mistrust and lack of cooperation, which have marked
relations between the parties concerned, with coexistence,
reconciliation and the determination to make sacrifices so
as to build a unified homeland.

In this regard, my delegation wishes to express again
its gratitude to the Secretary-General for the exhaustive and
very enlightening report that he has submitted, which
highlights the latest events concerning the peace process
that is under way. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who is continuing to coordinate
and encourage the process of dialogue with an unmatched
optimism. I should also like to reiterate the appreciation of
my country for the important role played by the troika of
observer States in the quest for peace in Angola.

Guinea-Bissau recognizes that much remains to be
done to achieve all the objectives laid down in the Lusaka
Protocol and to meet the obligations stemming from the
relevant Security Council resolutions in order fully to
implement, and to give real meaning to, the peace process
in Angola. However, we have noted, with great satisfaction,
the observations of the Secretary-General in his latest report
with regard to the steps taken by the Angolan parties over
recent weeks to strengthen the peace process, which we
believe to be extremely positive. Just a few hours ago the
Security Council received a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Angola transmitting a communique
from his Government announcing the incorporation of a
UNITA general into the Angolan Armed Forces. We
believe that these actions deserve to be fully encouraged
by the international community. At this crucial stage in
negotiations, Angola needs more than ever the support
and contributions of all in order to consolidate the
achievements that have been made. The many delays in
the full implementation of the Lusaka obligations remain
a source of concern.

As we have said repeatedly, it cannot be denied that
important and substantial progress has been achieved, the
most important aspect being the maintenance of the
ceasefire. Other obstacles, without which it will not be
possible to achieve further progress, must be overcome.
The main issue concerns the complete quartering of
UNITA troops and their disarming and demobilization
within the framework of the Lusaka Protocol. The delays
that have occurred in this regard are affecting the
formation of a single military force, the integration of
UNITA officials into the Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation, and other activities linked to the
implementation of the Protocol. Once again, we call on
our Angolan brothers to continue to pursue their efforts
with greater political determination, in the same
constructive spirit shown recently, so as to give priority
to the settlement of all obligations of a military character.
Indeed, in order for the outstanding political issues to be
settled, it is imperative that the parties demonstrate firm
political will by adopting concrete steps aimed at helping
the peace process.

As my country has stated many times, we believe
that peace, security and prosperity in Angola is possible,
and that the Angolan people, with whom we have shared
many years of fraternal history in common, deserves to
enjoy the wealth of its country in peace and to participate
in its reconstruction and socio-economic development. For
all those reasons, Guinea-Bissau believes that the
international community should continue to follow the
situation in Angola closely, while continuing to provide
economic and humanitarian assistance.

With regard to the draft resolution, we are convinced
that the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) still has a role to play in Angola, and that
it must continue to support the peace efforts of the two
parties to the extent that a real will for peace exists. That
 

is why we approve the extension of its mandate, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report. In so
doing, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

