Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by expressing my sincere appreciation for the
comprehensive briefings and reports on the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals by President Carmel Agius, President
Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz.

As the ICTY concludes its work and we approach
that closure, 1 would also like to take a moment to
recognize the staff of the ICTY for their invaluable
contribution to international justice. We welcome the
fact that the Tribunal has issued its judgement in the
final trial case, regarding Ratko Mladie, which was
concluded on 22 November, and the final appeal case
of Prlie et al on 29 November. I also pay tribute to the
commitment of President Agius to leading his team
until the closing date. Finally, let me also express a
special word of thanks to the Netherlands in its role as
host country for the Tribunal.
The establishment of the ICTY in the aftermath
of the Yugoslav wars e the first court established
by the United Nations to try war crimes and the first
Tribunal on war crimes since the Nuremberg and Tokyo
Tribunals - signalled the determination of the Security
Council and the international community to end such
crimes and to bring those responsible to justice. The
ICTY was unique in being the first Tribunal to address
conflict-related sexual violence, to consider violations
against cultural heritage as a crime against humanity
and to indict a sitting Head of State for war crimes.
The legacy of the ICTY, together with the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), is therefore not
only the justice that they have brought to victims but
also their important contribution to the development of
international criminal law.

There can be no lasting peace without justice.
Ensuring that the perpetrators of atrocity crimes are held
to account, by either international or national courts, is
essential to rebuilding trust among communities and
to national reconciliation. As the Tribunal completes
its work, it is our hope that national judicial systems
will take up their responsibility to build on the legacy
of the Tribunal in order to contribute to reconciliation
in the region. We note, with regret, that Serbia has not
carried out the arrest and surrender orders issued by the
Tribunal in January 2015.

We share the Prosecutor's deep concern about the
widespread denial of crimes and facts established by
the ICTY in relation to its cases. Those issues have the
potential to have real consequences for reconciliation
in the Western Balkans. As the Prosecutor points out in
his report, it is now more important than ever to address
such issues. In that regard, we agree with the President
that the Tribunal's creation of a historical record is a
key part of its legacy. We hope that the Council will be
in a position to adopt a statement in connection with
the closure of the ICTY by the end of the year, in order
to recognize and highlight the substantial contribution
of the Tribunal to the achievement of justice for the
atrocities committed in the former Yugoslavia.

We welcome the handover to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals upon
the closure of the ICTY.We underline the importance
of the ongoing work by the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals on victim and
witness protection. Lastly, we are also concerned about
the fact that eight individuals indicted by the ICTR for
serious crimes remain at large. We call on States to
cooperate fully with the Residual Mechanism on their
speedy arrest, as well as on other matters where it can
assist the Mechanism.

The International Criminal Tribunals have played
an important role in acknowledging the wounds that
remain after conflicts end and providing survivors of
the worst crimes known to humanity with the means
to seek and find justice. In the process, they have
also strengthened the international legal framework,
showing that despite the impunity we so regularly
lament in this Chamber, accountability is possible.
Sweden will remain firmly committed to international
criminal justice, and the Residual Mechanism can be
assured of our full support for its work.

