Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We wish to thank
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing to the Council.

Following two decades of prolonged conflict,
Somalia is making remarkable progress in consolidating
peace in the country. South Africa commends the
leadership and the people of Somalia on ending the
transition and on ushering in the post-transition phase.
We are convinced that a peaceful and stable Somalia
will have a positive impact not only on the country, but
on the entire region and continent. The achievements in
Somalia are indicative ofthe success that can be derived
from strategic collaboration among the United Nations,
the African Union and subregional organizations in
addressing the peace and security challenges on the
continent.
In celebrating Somalia's achievements, we cannot
afford to become complacent. As the Secretary-General
stated in his recent report to the Council (S/2012/764),
the end of the transition does not mean the end of the
peace process. Somalia will continue to rely on the
international community for support in addressing the
many challenges that the new Government of President
Hassan Mohamud continues to face.

One important lesson that we have learned from
countries emerging from conflict is the need for the
early realization of peace dividends in order to sustain
peace and security. South Africa therefore welcomes
the convening of the mini-summit on Somalia and the
pledge of the international community to continue its
sustained and coordinated support in the peacebuilding
and stabilization phase in the country. That support
will be crucial in assisting the new Government as it
seeks to address the myriad challenges, including the
security, development and dire humanitarian challenges
still confronting the country.

As we provide that backing, we wish to underline
that no amount of support can replace the important
role of the Somali leadership and ownership in building
their country. We therefore welcome the foundations
of a new beginning, outlined in the six-pillar policy
of the new Government. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the need to strengthen and to support
Somali institutions and leadership to allow the Somali
Government to enhance its capacity in order for it to
function independently in the future.

It must be acknowledged that progress at the
political and peacebuilding levels would not have been
achieved without the conducive environment provided
by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and the countries in the region. However, the success
of the Somali National Security Forces, supported by
AMISOM, in liberating areas that were previously
controlled by Al-Shabaab will require the creation
of local Government structures and the provision of
security and social services to those areas.

It is therefore imperative for Somalia to begin
developing adequate governance institutions that are
equipped to focus on the implementation of the new
Government's immediate and long-term priorities.
In addition, the capability and capacity of the Somali
National Security Forces must be developed to ensure
that security vacuums do not lead to the creation of
militias. It is equally imperative to encourage the
new Somali Government to prepare a strategy of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration aimed at
dismantling, where necessary, and integrating militias
into the Somali National Security Forces. Strong and
loyal National Security Forces will ultimately ensure
that stability and security are preserved in the long
term.

As we celebrate the dawn of this new beginning for
Somalia, we are conscious that there are those in Somalia
who remain Violently opposed to the new Government.
Recent security incidents in Mogadishu, including the
attempt on the President's life, demonstrate that the
political and military gains in Somalia must bejealously
guarded in order to avoid a reversal of the situation.

We are therefore encouraged by President
Mohamud's statement that he will reach out to the
armed groups in the quest for peace and reconciliation.
We should assist that process and consider increasing
efforts to provide incentives to those who remain
outside the political process. If managed properly, this
could facilitate reconciliation and advance the cause of
peace in Somalia. South Africa stands ready to share
its experience and expertise in the area of national
reconciliation with the Government of Somalia. My
delegation is encouraged by the defection of more than
3,000 former Al-Shabaab combatants. Sustaining such
defections will require significant resources and funding
for providing former combatants with alternative
livelihoods and employment opportunities. In that
regard, we encourage the international community to
support the Somali Government as it seeks to implement
its national security and stabilization plan.

We pay tribute to the immense sacrifices that have
been made by AMISOM. and the countries of the region,
working with Somalia's National Security Forces, to
create the security environment necessary for political
and economic development to take place. In order to
sustain those gains, it is vital that the international
community continue its financial and logistical support
to AMISOM. That support must be extended to the
maritime component, for which adequate resources are
particularly crucial in View of the recent gains made
by AMISOM. in capturing the strategic port cities
of Kismayo and Merca, and in order to ensure that
Al-Shabaab's supply line is completely disrupted. In
that regard, my delegation strongly supports the request
of the African Union's Peace and Security Council that
the United Nations support package for AMISOM. be
extended to include civilian and maritime components
for the Mission.

South Africa has always viewed the phenomenon of
piracy as a byproduct of instability on land. Increased
stability within Somalia, as well as strengthened Somali
national institutions, will result in greater success for
the international community's efforts to address this
scourge. In that context, South Africa is committed to
working with the new federal Government in rendering
assistance in capacity-building for Somalis to manage
their piracy situation.

In conclusion, there can be no security without
development and no development without security in
Somalia. In that regard, we welcome the strategic review
of AMISOM, designed to determine how the Mission
can continue to contribute to Somalia's stabilization and
to implementing the Somali Government's priorities.
We also look forward to receiving the Secretary-
General's recommendations on an integrated strategic
approach to the United Nations system in Somalia. The
results of those reviews will be crucial for developing
coherent institutional responses in Somalia's peace
consolidation phase. We would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his personal commitment, and
to express our appreciation for the tireless efforts of
Special Representative Augustine Mahiga in helping
the people of Somalia to close the transition chapter in
their country. Our gratitude and appreciation also go to
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union for their selfless contributions and
solidarity with the people of Somalia.

