Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): The
Netherlands, as host nation to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), is very grateful for this
opportunity to speak in an open meeting of the Security
Council. The Netherlands fully concurs with the
statement made earlier by the Greek Presidency of the
European Union and will therefore be brief.

The Netherlands is in a position to witness daily
the developments at the International Criminal Court.
Its establishment has been conducted in an effective
manner. The judges were inaugurated at The Hague on
11 March this year, and they meet the stringent
requirements that the Statute set. The very competent
Prosecutor will be inaugurated next Monday at the
Peace Palace in The Hague. In short, the International
Criminal Court is ready to take up its important task.

The Netherlands fully endorses the View that
article 16 of the Rome Statute should be invoked in
conformity with the Statute. The article reads in part,

"No investigation or prosecution may be
commenced or proceeded with under this Statute
for a period of 12 months after the Security
Council, in a resolution adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, has
requested the Court to that effect."

From both the text and the preparatory work
behind the article, it follows that the article allows
deferrals: first, only on a case-by-case basis; secondly,
only for a limited period of time; and thirdly, only
when a threat to or a breach of peace and security has
been established by the Security Council under Chapter
VII of the Charter. In our View, article 16 does not
sanction blanket immunity in relation to unknown
future events. The Secretary-General followed that line
of reasoning before the adoption of resolution 1422
(2002) as well.

The Netherlands has committed itself to defend
and advocate the integrity and credibility of the
International Criminal Court and the Rome Statute. The
Netherlands firmly believes that resolution 1422 (2002)
undermines the letter and the spirit of the Statute and
of the ICC, and that therefore a repeated renewal is to
be rejected. Adoption of the draft resolution before the
Council today should not in any way be interpreted as
moving in the direction of automatic yearly renewal.

