Mr. AlAjmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Arab Group, I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumpton of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are convinced that your wisdom and
professionalism will enable you to manage the Council
during this month with success. We would also like to
congratulate your predecessor on his on his presidency
last month.

We find ourselves gathered together again during
this now regular meeting on the ageanda item "The
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question". However, this time it is taking place in
humanitarian circumstances that are far from routine.
That reminds us of the tragic Israeli aggression against
the Gaza Strip at the end of 2009, which remains
quite present in our collective memory. The blood of
innocent victims, men, women, children, continues to
flow. And the anguished cries persist of mothers who
have lost children, the cries of pain of the injured, the
despair of those who have been displaced, who have
lost their shelters, their homes, all as a result of the
Israeli bombardment.

Now we are again facing another episode of
bloodthirsty and ever more aggressive Israeli collective
punishment. Its bombardments resemble a sea of lava
that cannot discriminate among an elderly woman
baking bread, an elderly man praying or a student
studying his lessons. The deadly Israeli machine is
always proud to demonstrate its superiority, especially
its military superiority, when confronting an unarmed
civilian population that is destitute as a result of the
ongoing occupation and the asphyxiating blockade on
the Gaza Strip. The Arab Group vigorously condemns
the barbaric aggression and extreme violence against
civilians in the Gaza Strip.
Israel has again topped itself. This is one of the
darkest pages in history, replete with violations of
human rights law and international humanitarian law
concerning civilians in armed conflict. Israel has
outdone itself in carrying out ever more horrendous
actions and escalating its military operations to a new
level, as evidenced by the ground incursion subsequent
to the air bombardments and the targeting of Palestinian
beaches in the framework of its collective reprisals
against the civilians under occupation. The result can be
seen in the growing number of civilian victims 4 over
600, most of them women and children . Thousands
have been wounded; tens of thousands have lost their
homes, according to reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The crowning
glory of this activity was the murderous action carried
out in the Shujaiya neighbourhood, All these actions
are war crimes.

We now find ourselves on the very brink of a
humanitarian disaster as Israel pursues its nihilistic
policy aimed at undermining all of the basic rights of
the Palestinian people by rejecting the peace process;
shattering the dreams of a people who have been
deprived of the right to create a State within the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and
ignoring all peace proposals, including the Arab Peace
Initiative.

That is why the Arab Group has turned to the
international community, represented by the Security
Council, to request that it assume its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations. As the Council
is the guarantor and bulwark of the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is requested, first, to
push Israel to immediately and unconditionally put an
end to its military aggression against the Gaza Strip and
guarantee that such actions will never happen again,
and force Israel to fully bear its legal responsibility for
the damage caused by its barbaric aggression.

Second, the Council must condemn the racist actions
of the Israeli occupation authorities and Israeli settlers
against the Palestinians and their assets, including
places of worship, and the violations of human rights
and provisions of the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention
on the protection of civilians in times of war.

Third, it must work to lift the illegal blockade
imposed on the Gaza Strip and guarantee the opening
of the crossing points to ensure access to humanitarian
assistance.

Fourth, it must back Egypt's initiative of 14 June
calling for a ceasefire and requesting all relevant players
to abide by it and guarantee all underlying conditions.
Fifth, it must place the Palestinian territories under
international protection to ensure Palestine's enjoyment
of its territorial integrity and legitimate sovereignty.

Sixth, it must call upon Israel to unconditionally
release all Palestinian prisoners held since the
beginning of the current aggression, especially those
under administrative detention without charge, which
clearly contravenes existing law.

Seventh, it must provide the necessary assistance to
the Palestinian State to ensure its capacity to meet the
urgent needs of the Palestinian people and to rebuild
the Gaza Strip.

In conclusion, the Arab Group reaffirms its
commitment to and solidarity with the Lebanese
Republic and its support for its territorial integrity
and security. We demand that Israel end its repeated
violations of Lebanese territory and air space,
completely withdraw from the occupied Lebanese
territories and respect the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006).

