Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to tell you, Sir, how pleased
I am to be at this meeting under your presidency. I
should also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you and Pakistan on the particularly distinguished way
in which Ambassador Akram and the Pakistani
delegation are conducting the presidency of the
Security Council this month.

We live today in a globalized world where all
threats are linked. In that context, the importance of the
pacific settlement of disputes is as crucial as it was
when the Charter of the United Nations was adopted.
Each dispute can, in fact, quickly degenerate, engulf an
entire region and even give rise to brinksmanship.

Chapter VI of the Charter clearly sets forth the
ways that the parties should use, on a priority basis, to
find pacific settlements to their disputes: negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, resort to regional agencies or any other
peaceful means of their choice. We must be aware of
the fact that Chapter VI establishes a balance among
the role of the parties, that of the Council and,
eventually, those of other actors. That balance, it must
be said, places principal responsibility with the parties
themselves, even if they can appeal for external
intervention to help them to settle their disputes. I am
thinking, for example, of the good offices exercised by
France to help solve the dispute between Yemen and
Eritrea on the Hanish islands.

In practice, the implementation of the peaceful
settlement of disputes has given rise, for a number of
years, to two developments on which it would be
interesting to focus.

The first development is that the Secretary-
General or his envoys and special representatives have
been compelled to play an increasingly significant role
in the pacific settlement of conflicts. That is the case in
a preventive role before a dispute degenerates into an
armed conflict; it is also the case when a lasting
solution is sought to a conflict that has already led to
armed confrontation. Here, I am thinking of the efforts
of the Envoys or Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General for Cyprus, for Western Sahara or
for Abkhazia. In all of those situations, the qualities of
patience, discretion, persistence, impartiality and
imagination which have been employed by the
Secretary-General, together with the moral and
political authority conferred on him by the Charter,
enable him to make a decisive contribution.

A second development is the growing role of
regional organizations or integrated groups. For
example, that is the case in Africa at the continental
and subregional levels. Such organizations often have
more direct knowledge of the actors and the stakes in a
crisis and can apply more leverage. The Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has
thus done useful work to help settle conflicts in Upper
Karabakh, in Transdniestr or in South Ossetia. I should
also like to note, as a representative of a European
country, the remarkable action taken by the European
Union to help Macedonia by combining political and
economic instruments - and now military ones -
during a period of crisis that could have had a
destabilizing effect on the Balkans.

We all, of course, have in mind a case in which
there has been a combination of both elements - the
roles of the Secretary-General and of regional
organizations - in a conflict of particular significance
to peace throughout the world. I am talking about the
Middle East and the endeavour which has united the
United Nations, the European Union, the United States
and Russia in a quartet. A great deal of our hope
resides in the implementation of the road map designed
by that body.

In the modern version of the concept of the
settlement of disputes, what is the role of the Security
Council? In our view, there is no call to tamper with
the balance defined by the Charter, but within the
system established under Chapter VI the Security
Council can make a major contribution in various
ways: by defining the principal parameters for the
settlement of a conflict; by giving political support for
the action of the Secretary-General or of regional
organizations; by deciding on peacekeeping operations
and observer missions to stabilize a military situation,
such as the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara; and, in broader terms, by facilitating the
implementation of an agreement between the parties or
by sending them the message that they must find a
negotiated solution. This, I believe, is what the Council
does every day in its work in New York, in particular
with regard to African issues, and occasionally in its
travels, as with the imminent missions to West Africa
and to Central Africa.

In conclusion, I would reiterate my country's
deep commitment to the pacific settlement of disputes.
We are very grateful to Pakistan for having organized
this meeting and we support the terms of the draft
presidential statement. More than ever, if it is to have
any hope of success the pacific settlement of disputes
must be based on the cooperation of all parties
involved: the parties themselves, other States with
particular influence, and the various bodies of the
international community to which I have referred.
Action can be effective only if there is a commonality
of thinking among the principal actors involved in any
given situation.

Our Council cannot stand in for those actors, but
it must and can, wherever possible, try to be the
catalyst for a meeting of minds and wills that will
allow for the implementation of a pacific settlement of
disputes.

