Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Mr. President, I was away from New York
when you assumed the Presidency of the Council, so
now, even if somewhat belatedly, allow me to say how
delighted we are to see you presiding over the work of
the Council for the month of November. We are
particularly delighted in doing this because your entire
programme revolves around what we deem to be most
precious: mankind.

My delegation therefore welcomes this timely
initiative that you took in organizing an open debate on
the importance of mine action in peacekeeping
operations. That is surely a topical and relevant issue
that, because of its many effects on people and on the
future of countries emerging from armed conflicts,
arouses very great interest, not only among such
countries, but also within the entire international
community. Cameroon, a country signatory to the
Ottawa Convention on landmines, is very pleased at the
opportunity to take part in this debate.

In that regard, I am pleased to congratulate
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, on his outstanding
briefing and the very useful information he has
imparted to us. I should also like to express my
appreciation to Ambassador Martin Dahinden, Director
of the Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian
Demining, for his briefing.

Anti-personnel mines are despicable and inhuman
weapons that strike indiscriminately and, each year,
cause many deaths and injuries and horrible suffering
for those who survive. The unacceptable nature of
those weapons stems mainly from the fact that they
strike in both wartime and peacetime and without any
distinction. It also stems from the fact that they ravage
civilian populations, particularly women and
children - the innocent.

The consequences of these weapons have been
denounced for years by the international community.
Anti-personnel mines continue to kill and mutilate
many years after the end of conflicts; they jeopardize
peace-building and reconstruction efforts and therefore
have harmful effects on the economic development of
the affected areas. Indeed, landmines hamper the
resumption of agricultural activities, prevent the return
of refugees and displaced persons and put at risk the
provision of humanitarian assistance to populations
victimized by conflict, perpetuating the precariousness
of their situation. Therefore, they can lead to a
resurgence of tensions and even confrontations.

Such harmful effects of anti-personnel mines on
the establishment of lasting peace and security in
countries emerging from armed conflict justify, in our
view, the efforts of the international community -
particularly the Organization - to find appropriate
responses to the multitude of problems posed by mines.
Thus it has been proved necessary for the United
Nations to take the initiative when peacekeeping
operations are deployed as well as later on, in the post-
conflict phase, to address the problem of landmines.

My delegation is pleased that, for several years
now, mine action has been integrated into the Security
Council's mandates for peacekeeping operations. That
is the case with the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mine action,
led mainly by the United Nations Mine Action Service,
comprises demining per se, raising mine awareness,
educating people about risk reduction, victim
assistance and activities to promote a total ban on anti-
personnel landmines as well as the destruction of
stockpiles.

Within the framework of peacekeeping
operations, mine action therefore seeks to provide
greater chances for peace and to promote a swift
resumption of economic activity and a return to
normalcy in countries affected by conflict. If
implemented early enough, mine action has a greater
chance to be effective and to attain the aforementioned
objectives.
The success of United Nations mine action,
however, depends largely on mobilization of resources,
since the vast majority of activities are funded by
donors' voluntary contributions. It is therefore
imperative, given the scope of the problem, that donor
sensitization and resource mobilization efforts be
sustained. Here, Cameroon launches a passionate
appeal to donor countries to provide adequate and
enhanced support to mine action in African countries
emerging from conflict situations.

My delegation hopes that those concerns will be
reflected and find a place in the draft statement that our
discussion will only serve to reinforce.

