Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open debate
today. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and to acknowledge the statements made
by the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.

After five years of protracted hostilities and human
suffering, it is heartening to acknowledge that the
cessation ofhostilities in Syria is creating the conditions
for a gradual advance towards stabilization and peace.
There has been an overall decrease in casualties since
February. Important cities such as Palmyra are no longer
controlled by the self-proclaimed Islamic State. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
reports a positive trend with respect to humanitarian
access. Besieged or isolated areas are being reached for
the first time in years.

Nevertheless, growing violations reported by both
sides to the conflict in recent weeks may threaten the
significant progress that has been made. We call on the
parties to fully respect the cessation of hostilities. We
should spare no effort in working towards a Syrian-
led and Syrian-owned political transition aimed at
establishing credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
governance, drafting a new constitution and ending the
war, as established by resolution 2254 (2015).

In that regard, we welcome the new round of
intra-Syrian negotiations launched last week in Geneva
under the auspices of the United Nations and with the
assistance of the International Syria Support Group.
Brazil reaffirms its steadfast support for the efforts
of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and those of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, led by Mr. Paulo
Sergio Pinheiro.

But we are also concerned about the negative
humanitarian impact of unilateral sanctions on Syria.
As a study commissioned by a group of experts recently
confirmed, unilateral economic and trade measures
often create insurmountable practical barriers to the
work of humanitarian organizations attempting to
deliver food, medicine, fuel and other essential items
to civilians affected by the conflict. The sanctions also
hinder the establishment of conditions conducive to
refugees' safe and voluntary return to Syria, thereby
exacerbating the massive displacement crisis currently
affecting many Middle Eastern and European societies.
Lastly, they obstruct key initiatives aimed at restoring
and rebuilding Syria's economy and infrastructure.

It is worth recalling that the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, set up by the Human Rights Council,
has spoken out against such sanctions. Brazil has long
held that unilateral sanctions are counterproductive
and incompatible with international law. The Security
Council is the only body with a clear legal mandate
to impose coercive economic measures, and I would
like to recall here that, in its resolution 70/185, the
General Assembly states clearly that unilateral coercive
economic measures constitute a flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and contravene the
basic principles of the multilateral trading system.

The absence of any positive signs of concrete
developments on the question of Palestine is alarming.
The peace process remains stalled, acts of violence
continue to occur and we are witnessing disrespect
for the principle of due process of law, leading to
more violence. Illegal settlements, demolitions and
land expropriations proliferate in the West Bank, and
the humanitarian situation remains dire, particularly
in Gaza. If left unchanged, this intolerable status
quo will continue to destabilize the Middle East and
erode the credibility of the Security Council. Brazil
expects the Council to live up to its responsibilities by
acting decisively to establish parameters for the end
of the occupation. The only viable solution remains a
Palestinian State that is fully sovereign, economically
sustainable and territorially contiguous, with borders
based on the internationally recognized 1967 lines,
living in peace and security with Israel. In that regard,
we are following with interest the initiative of holding
an international conference aimed at garnering broad
support for the peace process, as proposed by France.
Reports of a draft resolution that would require Israel

to freeze the construction of settlements and set a
time frame for arriving at a two-State solution are
also encouraging.
Concerning Yemen, the cessation of hostilities
initiated last week and the resumption of peace
negotiations in Kuwait under the auspices of Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, are a much-needed step towards ending a
conflict that has left innocent civilians unprotected
and exposed them to many extreme forms of strife. As
reported by international human-rights organizations,
air strikes have repeatedly hit protected areas such as
hospitals, as well as populated regions. A particularly
grave incident was the bombing of a market in Mastaba,
which killed at least 97 civilians, including 25 children.
We call on all parties to fulfil their obligation to
respect international humanitarian and human-rights
law, including the fundamental rules of distinction,
proportionality and precaution. Brazil continues to
uphold the imperative of a sustainable and inclusive
political solution to the Yemeni crisis achieved through
non-military means.

While Libya remains deeply unstable, recent
developments suggest that a measure of progress has
been made towards solving the country's significant
political and security challenges. We welcome the
arrival in Tripoli of the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord, endorsed by resolution
2259 (2015), as well as reports that it has already
consolidated authority over key ministries and State
institutions. Brazil reiterates its support for Special
Representative Martin Kobler and urges all the parties
to work to restore peace and national unity in Libya.

As a general thought, and in line with the overall
template that underpins the three reports submitted in
2015 on peace operations (S/2015/682), sustaining peace
(S/2015/560) and on women and peace and security
(S/2015/716), the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, should privilege and revitalize
preventive measures and diplomatic efforts to solve
disputes through peaceful means, especially those in
the Middle East.

