Ms. Edwar: I would like to thank Poland, in its
capacity as President of the Security Council, for
inviting me to participate in this debate.

I have been working for 50 years as a women's and
human rights defender across Iraq. For most of that
time, I have been working to protect civilians living
in conflict and instability, by helping them recover
in the aftermath of violence and supporting the next
generation of Iraqis to do the same. I co-founded the
Iraqi Women's Network in 2004 and the Iraqi Al-Amal
Association in 1992, which focuses on the rehabilitation
of people rather than bricks and mortar.

I come to the Council from a country filled with
horror that has suffered for more than three decades
from the scourge of war and siege. Over the past 15
years, civilians have been plagued by armed conflict,
insecurity and violence. Our people have sacrificed
a lot. We endured crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. We suffered through the
mass executions of tens of thousands of people, ethnic
and religious cleansing of civilians, in particular the
Yazidis, and sexual violence and sexual slavery of
women and girls. Ten million of us have been displaced
from our homes. Essential services, like water and
electricity, are gone. Our hospitals, health centres,
schools and social welfare institutions in Nineveh,
Al-Anbar, Salahadin and Diyala have been destroyed.

The operations to liberate Mosul were extremely
fierce and costly. I was in daily contact with families
and human rights defenders in the city who were
hiding in basements. The fighting took place in densely
populated areas, involving explosive weapons with
wide-area effects. The bombardment waw constant,
destroying hundreds of thousands of homes. People
hiding had nothing to eat, resorting to eating the dirt
around them. Women were forced to give birth alone and
without any medical treatment. Injured people could not
easily access hospitals; many died because they could
not reach treatment in time. The departure of civilians
from those areas during the operation was extremely
risky. Mosul was reduced to rubble and turned into an
open cemetery. There are no data or statistics on the
numbers of the dead. We are now hearing accounts of
bodies appearing in the river around Mosul.

During those dangerous and tragic conditions,
voluntary youth civil society initiatives emerged.
Young people sought to collect medical assistance and
medicine and to cooperate with military forces to deliver
them to civilians. A team came forward to collect the
bodies from Mosul and save the city from the spread of
epidemic. I know of one nurse, Serour, whose sister was
killed by Da'esh. She turned her grief and anger into
spearheading that effort. In an old house, her team found
a room containing 150 stacked bodies - men, women
and children killed by shots to the head. The team has
recovered 1,350 bodies, including the bodies of Da'esh
fighters. The mission is dangerous. The bodies may be
near unexploded bombs, and the smell of the bodies is
unbearable. They collect the bodies and then transfer
them to a cemetery without passing through forensics,
which would facilitate the identification of the dead and
missing. To date, there are still 3,000 reports of missing
civilians in the old city.

All of those efforts require the support of the
Council. We must identify the missing, recover the
bodies and return them to their families. The missing
Yazidi women and children must be liberated and
allowed to return home. They, and many of the
people who have suffered, have deep psychological
trauma from their experiences. They need more help,
which requires particular capacity-building in Iraq to
improve local services, led by local organizations and
local people.

Civilians who have suffered must have access to
justice and accountability. The resolutions in 2017
on Da'esh accountability and the joint communique
committing to prevent and address conflict-related
sexual violence, signed in September 2016, are crucial
documents. We welcome them, and I urge the Council
to support their implementation. But there must be
accountability for all the harm committed in Iraq by
all parties to the conflict. Accountability should not be
limited to some people and some types of violations.
All civilians deserve redress for their suffering. That
must be clearly linked to the reconciliation efforts.

The families of many Da'esh fighters have been
badly treated and isolated in camps. Many of the
children do not have any legal documents. Women's
organizations deal with many cases of women who
were forced to marry fighters and are now widows with
children, but lack marriage and birth certificates. Many
are threatened with death on the basis of honour. Many
are at risk of suicide. Those women and children bear a
huge stigma that must be addressed. They must receive
rehabilitation and reconciliation assistance.

National authorities, United Nations agencies
and the international community must work with
local actors to demand, determine and agree on
an appropriate minimum package of support and
assistance for communities. Humanitarian action, as
well as longer-term assistance, must be conflict- and
gender-sensitive in order to facilitate social cohesion
and actively reduce conflict. It must address the long-
standing structural drivers of conflict, which remain a
problem for communities after return. All populations,
civil society, women, youth and ethnic and religious
minorities must be involved. It must also include
communities affected by extremism. We must build
community capacity for the protection of civilians,
the early warning of conflict and address the legacy
of violent extremism. It is essential to protect civilians
from harm by avoiding it in the first place.

In conclusion, I come to the Council at a crucial
time for the issue of the protection of civilians in Iraq.
Successful elections following the liberation of areas
under the control of Da'esh offer us a chance to move
forward to build inclusive peace and justice. In that
effort, the increase in all women fully participating
should be respected. We must continue to focus on
people, not bricks and mortar.

As we look towards the future, I remain concerned
about many other civilians, in particular in my region.
Many live in great hardship because ofthe many ongoing
wars. They live without protection in places such as
Syria, Yemen, Libya and Gaza. I stand in solidarity
with them and with civilians across the world who are
suffering. I urge the Council to do all it can to ensure
that civilians are protected in line with legal obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and as fellow human beings.

