Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, for his detailed update on the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We also welcome the presence of
the President of Serbia, Mr. Nikolic', and recognize the
presence of Ambassador Citaku.

We welcome the detailed report (S/2017/95/Rev.1)
presented by the Secretary-General on the situation in
Kosovo and on the activities of UNMIK. That should
actually be the main purpose of our meeting today. We
want to stress that the report highlights some progress
as well as some critical issues, and clearly depicts a
situation that continues to remain fragile due to internal
political problems, as well as to an overall deterioration
of relations among western Balkan countries.

We are very concerned by the rising tensions in
recent weeks, leading to the use of heated rhetoric and
hampering the improvement of relations between the two
sides. We call on both Belgrade and Pristina to abstain
from inflammatory statements and backward-looking
language. In that regard, I would like to emphasize our
strong support to the normalization of their relations
and encourage them to constructively advance the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU). We
commend the effort of the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and Vice-President of the European Commission,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, to convene at the highest
level the latest rounds of the dialogue in Brussels on
24 January and 1 February, where the parties agreed
to defuse tensions, refrain from unilateral acts and
continue to work together.

Remarkable progress has already been achieved
with important steps forward in the areas of
integration of the judiciary, freedom of movement and
telecommunications. But much remains to be done to
implement the agreements already reached. We strongly
encourage Belgrade and Pristina to work in that
direction and to find pragmatic and mutually acceptable
solutions to the advantage ofboth communities, starting
with the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo.

The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina will have a crucial impact on regional
equilibrium. Allow me to underscore once again
that key to the path towards the European Union is
durable peace, stability and prosperity in the western
Balkans, which are inherently linked to progress in
the EU-facilitated dialogue. Losing momentum now
could open the way to a counterproductive backlash,
to the detriment of both parties and the entire region.
Our support of this process is unwavering at both the
bilateral level and in multilateral forums.
We stand at the front line to assist in the
consolidation of Kosovo authorities and to improve local
ownership, as seen in our long-standing contribution to
UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force. In that vein,
we welcome the entry into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union.
At this point, it is of primary importance that Pristina
step up efforts in the fight against corruption and
organized crime, and that it ratify the border agreement
with Montenegro. Effective reconciliation is at the
foundation of any democratic and functional society. We
welcome the results achieved so far, with the assistance
of EULEX, in the rule of law and justice sector, and we
look forward to the time when the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers are fully operational.

I have two other main messages. First of all,
international assistance to Kosovo must be based on the
principles of sustainability and ownership. At present,
given the volatile situation highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his report, including the threat of violent
extremism, we acknowledge his view on the current
adequate configuration of UNMIK, and we support
its role in facilitating dialogue and reconciliation at
the community level. Nonetheless, we stand ready to
discuss a reconfiguration of the Mission according to
the evolution of the situation on the ground and that
is consistent with the overall reform of peacekeeping
operations. We look forward to the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in that regard.

Secondly, we emphasize the pivotal role of the
European Union in the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina, and call on both to send
out a message of de'tente and constructive commitment
to the European Union-facilitated dialogue, for the sake
of their own populations and the stability of the entire
region. We attach primary importance to the regional
dimension. Boosting integration in the western Balkans
is crucial to bringing them closer to Europe while
improving their resilience to emerging threats and
triggering their development potential.

As Chair of the Berlin process in 2017, which
will culminate with the western Balkans summit
in Trieste on 12 July, we focus on economic growth,
infrastructure, interconnectivity, innovation, youth and
the rule of law. In these priority areas, shared with the
European Union and at the core of its cooperation with
western Balkans countries, we are engaging all actors
in an inclusive dialogue. We encourage all of them to
actively participate, beginning with the implementation
of soft measures on cooperation with neighbours, which
are essential if the process is to be fruitful.

Within the framework of the Berlin process, we
will also provide assistance to the adoption of reforms
against organized crime and corruption by promoting
the development of a network of anti-corruption
agencies to strengthen Governments' capacity in
confronting the phenomenon at the regional level.

