The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) on the work of the
Committee.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
peace and security and that any acts of terrorism
are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, whenever and by whomsoever
committed.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President of 4 April 2003 (S/PRST/2003/3),
which recorded its intention to review the
structure and activities of the CTC no later than 4
October 2003. The Council confirms the
continuation of the current arrangements for the
Bureau of the Committee for a further six months.
It invites the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
pursue its agenda as set out in the work
programme for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's ninth 90-day period (S/2003/995),
focusing on practical measures designed to
increase the means available to States to combat
terrorism, helping States identify the problems
faced by States in implementing resolution 1373
(2001), attempting to find solutions to them,
working to increase the number of States which
are parties to the international conventions and
protocols related to counter-terrorism, and
deepening its dialogue with international,
regional, and subregional organizations active in
the areas covered by the resolution. The Security
Council invites these organizations to continue to
find ways of improving their collective action
against terrorism and, where appropriate, to work
with donor States to establish suitable
programmes.

"The Security Council notes that 48
Member States are late in submitting their
reports, as called for in resolution 1373 (2001). It
calls on them urgently to do so in order to
maintain the universality of response which
resolution 1373 (2001) requires. By 31 October
2003, the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee will send to the Security Council the
list of the States which at that date are late in
submitting their reports.

"The Security Council invites the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to continue reporting on its
activities at regular intervals and expresses its
intention to review the structure and activities of
the CTC no later than 4 April 2004."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2003/17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage in its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.30pm.
