Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and
Ms. Buku for their briefings.

Last week Belgium commemorated one of the most
tragic attacks in our country's history. On 22 March
2016, no fewer than 32 people died and 340 others were

injured, some very seriously. As we remember the
victims and their families, this anniversary reminds us
how unjust and indiscriminate terrorist attacks are. The
tragic attacks in two mosques in Christchurch on Friday,
15 March, show that no part of the world is immune to
that phenomenon. We must remain vigilant and never
let down our guard. In that context, resolution 2462
(2019), which the Security Council has just adopted,
is essential. Belgium would like to express its deep
appreciation to France for its initiative and its untiring
efforts during the consultation process leading to the
resolution's adoption.

Belgium attaches considerable importance to
combating terrorist financing. There is already an
important set of international conventions calling on
States to combat the financing of terrorism, but the
Council's new resolution, adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, brings them together
coherently and transparently. It also fills important
gaps related to the rapid evolution of the electronic
financing infrastructure.

For Belgium, it is essential, first and foremost, to
understand the nature of the problem. Terrorists abuse
both legitimate and illegitimate means of raising funds
and are constantly finding new ways to do so. Belgium
is particularly concerned about the increasing use of
trafficking in human beings, sexual exploitation and
wildlife trafficking for terrorist purposes. In recent
years, wildlife trafficking, which is a form of organized
crime, has been particularly successful in generating
considerable profits for terrorist organizations in
Central Africa such as Boko Haram. In order to
effectively combat this problem, it is crucial for States
to develop a legal foundation for criminalizing terrorist
financing, as well as effective financial intelligence
services, in cooperation with the private sector and
civil-society organizations. Those services must be able
to share their information with competent authorities
at both national and international levels, in a balanced
manner and in a way that does not affect the fulfilment
of States' obligations under international human rights
instruments. The Financial Action Task Force has done
significant work by establishing international standards
for the creation of legal, regulatory and operational
measures to combat terrorist financing, and we welcome
the fact that the new resolution asks Member States to
implement those standards and recommendations.

We would like to reiterate our view that no measures
taken in the field of counter-terrorism should hinder
the work of humanitarian organizations whose work
is neutral and impartial. Not only are we convinced
that that is the most effective approach for a successful
counter-terrorism strategy since its harmful effects are
limited, but we must also remember that we agreed on
those fundamental principles almost 70 years ago when
we adopted the Geneva Conventions, a legal framework
that is as relevant today as it was then.

While we understand that the reality on the ground
is often very complex and that terrorist organizations
can operate in war zones, we believe it is important to
take into account the potentially harmful effects of our
counter-terrorism policy on the work of humanitarian
organizations. We therefore believe that mitigation
measures should be taken to prevent the possible
negative consequences of this policy, or at least reduce
them to a minimum. Let us prioritize the implementation
of this resolution.

