Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour of the
resolution we have just adopted. We voted thus while
regretting the fruitless outcome of the diplomatic
efforts made to engage the Islamic Republic of Iran
and ensure its pursuit of the peaceful uses of nuclear
activities. We have stated on many occasions that, as a
matter of principle, the United Republic of Tanzania is
opposed to the development or possession of nuclear
weapons by any party, including our traditional friends.

We are therefore opposed to nuclear proliferation
and strongly support the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the non-
proliferation regime it establishes under the auspices of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of
which we are a member. We expect all IAEA members,
including the Islamic Republic of Iran, to uphold the
obligations set forth in the Treaty.

The United Republic of Tanzania firmly believes
in the right of the people of Iran to civilian nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The current resolution
does not in any way seek to constrain that right. It
should be made clear, however, that any such
programme has to be subjected to a verifiable
inspection regime and the safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. In our view, the
provisions of the resolution should also not constrain
other legal and commercial transactions that have no
bearing on non-proliferation.

The United Republic of Tanzania had hoped all
along that the relevant parties would utilize available
avenues to resolve the highly sensitive Iranian nuclear
issue peacefully through negotiations. We place faith in
the capacity of the parties to build on the positive

aspects of the dialogue and to return to the negotiations
under mutually acceptable terms. Unfortunately,
progress has been painfully slow due to the
uncompromising positions pursued by both sides.
Despite tremendous efforts to overcome the
differences, the situation has remained deadlocked,
mainly over the issue of enrichment and reprocessing
activities as a condition for further negotiations. We
believe that this issue can still be overcome by the
negotiators.

The United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour
of the resolution because we believe that the impasse is
reversible if good political will prevails among all the
parties involved in the discussions. The resolution is to
be taken as a signal and a call to revisit the issue at the
earliest opportunity.

