Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to welcome you, Sir, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany to the Council today. I thought he was totally right. As he said, it is ever more difficult to put the human suffering in Idlib into words. It is so true, as we see the terrible human consequences of the escalating violence committed by the Syrian regime and Russia in Idlib province.The representative of Russia asked why humanitarian agencies were finding it so difficult to protect the desperate people out in the open air at the moment. The answer is because they are being bombed, they are being shelled, they are being attacked. It is extremely difficult indeed to provide assistance to people in those circumstances. The intensity and pace of the Syrian and Russian campaign mean that civilians who are able to get out of the way in time have nowhere to go. They have no shelter. They are forced to sleep in the open air. Children are literally freezing to death. At the last humanitarian session, we said that over 358,000 people had been displaced since the first of December. That number is now over 948,000, 80 per cent of whom are women and children. I say to my fellow Council members that we should be under no illusion that this is the worst humanitarian situation thus far in this terrible conflict. The continued attacks not only directly cause civilian suffering, but they also hamper the aid effort, amplifying the scale of this disaster. The representative of Russia also talked about terrorism, and he urged us in a different context not to exaggerate problems. I would simply note that yesterday the Russian Ambassador to London stated in a media interview that terrorists made up | per cent of the population of Idlib. Even were that the case, I would simply say that international law does not permit anyone to attack the 99 per cent to handle | per cent. We remain appalled that civilian infrastructure continues to be attacked. On Sunday, the White Helmets reported that Russian warplanes hit a children's and women's hospital in Balyoun, in Idlib. As the United Kingdom's Minister for the Middle East said on Monday, "The United Kingdom has condemned and continues to condemn these flagrant violations of international law and basic human decency". Let me remind all military forces on the ground, especially their commanders, that following political orders is no defence against war crimes. Accountability will come, no matter how long it takes. I also wish to say as well that we look forward to the report of the Secretary-General's board of inquiry, and we urge Secretary-General to make those findings public. We need there to be an immediate cessation of hostilities. We strongly support the Turkish Government's efforts to re-establish the ceasefire agreed in 2018. We also stand behind the Secretary- General and his Special Envoy for Syria in their efforts to stop the violence and save those many lives now in peril. Turning to the north-east, I thank the Secretary- General for his report (S/2020/139) on _ the implementation of resolution 2504 (2020) and on alternatives to the Al-Yarubiyah crossing, as requested in that resolution. The report makes clear that there is no alternative. Since the loss of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing in the cross-border mandate, those living in areas of north-eastern Syria not under the control of the Syrian authorities have been denied the medicines and medical items they so desperately require. Without access through Al-Yarubiyah or the provision of a credible alternative, medical facilities will see their stocks of vital medicines dwindle, putting their continued operation and the Syrian patients who depend upon them at risk. As many have said, a particular area of concern is reproductive health stocks. We note with great concern the forecast that stocks in the north-east could be depleted by the end of March, preventing vital procedures such as caesarean sections - a preventable tragedy for Syrian women - and, more widely, supplies will run out by May. The Russian Federation has said that we can trust the authorities in Damascus to deliver aid throughout Syria. Well, let us examine that claim. It is, of course, welcome that, in recent hours and days, the Syrian authorities have granted authorization for humanitarian delivery. But we have heard promises before; what matters is what actually happens on the ground, and in that respect we need the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to provide regular and granular data to the Security Council on the Syrian regime's performance when it comes both to cross-line humanitarian aid and that within the areas controlled by the authorities. The Secretary-General's report makes clear that responses to requests are delayed for months; even when approval is given, under half are permitted to proceed. Key medical supplies are routinely removed from convoys. In 2019, there were precisely zero road convoys from Damascus to the north-east of Syria. In areas controlled by Al-Assad, we see humanitarian aid withheld from towns and communities deemed insufficiently loyal to the regime. We therefore place little faith in promises by the Syrian authorities, but we do call upon them again to meet their humanitarian obligations and we call on their Russian protectorsto make them do so. For the sake of the innocent people dying in Syria, there is no alternative to cross border access. The United Kingdom remains the third-largest donor to the United Nations-led humanitarian response across Syria. We have allocated $152 million this financial year to projects implemented by organizations delivering cross-border aid, primarily into north-west Syria. Since the conflict began, the United Kingdom has committed over $4 billion of humanitarian funding in response to the conflict, and we remain committed to providing help to those in need. We want to continue to provide this much-needed assistance. We must be sure that the aid is going to those who need it most, wherever they are, on a principled basis. Therefore, pending clarity about the future of cross-border operations beyond July, and given the clear interference and obstruction of aid by the authorities in Damascus, we will be looking very seriously at this question. As set out in this Chamber before and as others have said today, we will not consider providing any reconstruction assistance until a credible, substantive and genuine political process is firmly under way. Russia's contribution to Syria has been through military hardware and bombs on his people, not development aid, and that will have to change. We are facing the worst humanitarian crisis in the worst conflict in the world. Innocent men, women and children are dying and will die if nothing is done. It is in the hands of Syria and Russia to take or to save lives. It is their choice. The human and humane thing to do is to cease the fighting and let the aid workers and medics in to act. It is in their hands.
