Mr. Brende (Norway): I thank you, President,
for your leadership and for convening this important
meeting.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
has shocked the world with its rapid advance, public
executions and other barbaric acts. ISIL is now not
only a threat to Iraq and Syria, it is also a threat to
the wider region and to the rest of the world. There is
an urgent need to confront that threat. It is time for
us to collectively stand up against ISIL. Together we
can - and must - stop ISIL.

This debate is a promising sign that the Security
Council will live up to its mandate to maintain
international peace and security. I am encouraged by
the common purpose that I see evolving here today,
that we saw in Paris on Monday and also during the
meeting in Jeddah. The unity and urgency expressed
in presidential statement S/PRST/20l4/2O sends a clear
message. Iraq's neighbours and the rest of the world
stand together with the people of Iraq, and we are
acting now.

I am encouraged by the formation of Prime
Minister Al-Abadi's cabinet. I am pleased that the
Foreign Minister is here with us. During my recent visit
to Baghdad, I stressed the fundamental importance of
sharing power. People living in the conflict-ridden
areas must feel that there has been a political shift and
that they finally have a Government that offers hope
and opportunities.

Equally, the country needs the broad and inclusive
support of the region and the rest of the international
community. Iraq and the countries in the region
must have a leading role in driving ISIL back. Peace
and respect for humanitarian rights are absolute
preconditions for prosperity, development and security.
Let us dismantle the arguments of those extremists who
have fuelled ethnic and religious antipathies or have
even created them. Let us work patiently to increase
understanding and tolerance among groups. Extremism
and terrorism must be fought on the ground, in the
courts, in classrooms, in Parliaments, on the Internet
and on the humanitarian front.

Norway will therefore continue to be one of the
main humanitarian contributors in Iraq and in Syria.
So far this year, we have provided $75 million to the
Syrian crisis and $30 million to Iraq. Today, I announce
an additional $10 million to alleviate the suffering
of the people of all communities who have fled the
violence caused by ISIL and other groups in Iraq and
Syria. Furthermore, Norway is ready to send military
planning officers to assist the international fight against
ISIL in Iraq. We will also consider further contributions
to build military capacity. Progress in Iraq will depend
heavily on a move towards a political solution in Syria.

In order to succeed, we need a Security Council
that is committed and united. Without agreement in the
Chamber, the Syrian people cannot be protected and
the destruction of Syrian society cannot be stopped.
There is an urgent need to stop the advance of ISIL
and to start the long-term work needed to eradicate the
roots that allow such groups to exist. That work has
begun in Iraq and in the region. It has begun in the
Security Council, whose mission is to be the guardian
of the peace and security of all nations. We all stand by
the people of Iraq.

