Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations for their briefings.

I would like to address three main points.

First, with regard to the internal situation in
Burundi, we welcome President Nkurunziza's
repeatedly stated intention not to stand as a candidate
in the 2020 presidential elections. At the same time,
we remain concerned about a few issues. The region
and the international community agree on the goal of
holding credible, fair, inclusive and free presidential
and legislative elections in 2020. To that end, we
again stress the need to follow a consensus-based and
inclusive road map, and the importance of respecting
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement.
In that regard, we welcome the substantive work
conducted by Mr. Mkapa, the former facilitator of the
inter-Burundian dialogue initiated by the East African
Community. We share that view. It is unfortunate that
the Burundian Government refused to participate in the
most recent round of the dialogue, despite the fact that
many differences of opinion remain as we approach the
end of the process.

Respect for the freedom of opposition parties will
be an essential part ofthe electoral process. We welcome
the fact that the new party of the main opponent,
Agathon Rwasa, has been officially recognized. That is
an undeniably positive development.

Regrettably, the human rights situation in Burundi
remains a source of concern. We are particularly
concerned about the fact that there is still a considerable
number of arrests, arbitrary detentions, threats to and
restrictions on the freedom of association, freedom
of expression and freedom of movement, as reported
by the Commission of Inquiry, as well as in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1028).
In that difficult context, we deplore in particular the
decision to close the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We call on the
Government to make progress in the area of human
rights and to step up dialogue with a view to resuming
close cooperation with the United Nations and the
African Union on the issue.

From a socioeconomic perspective and in particular
with regard to the national development plan, it is
essential to deepen and intensify dialogue with various
cooperation partners. Belgium certainly stands ready to
do so. I would also like to underscore the participation
of all main actors, in particular women, young people
and civil society. That is why we are concerned about
the measures taken by the Burundian Government
to suspend foreign non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), which, in turn, has led to the departure of
some NGOs.

Secondly, at the regional level, we note several
spin-off developments that are equally important. The
latest report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo (S/2018/1133) appears to indicate
that the activities of some Burundian rebel groups in
South Kivu are on the rise. The report also references
Burundi in the context of the recruitment of fighters
and the transfer of weapons, ammunition and fighters.
I also refer to reports citing cross-border incidents with
Rwanda. Although the reason for such incidents is not
always clear, they have the potential to destabilize
the region. In addition to cross-border incidents, the
ongoing problem of Burundian refugees also requires a
lasting regional solution.
Thirdly, with regard to the importance of the
region, regional problems require regional solutions. It
is for that reason that we support strong and increased
leadership on the part of the East African Community,
as well as the substantial involvement of the African
Union and other guarantors of the Arusha Agreement.
Strong leadership within the region is indeed a
prerequisite for resolving the current crisis, but the
commitment of the Burundian authorities is also vital.
We therefore call on them to demonstrate meaningful
openness and pursue dialogue without preconditions.

Lastly, we remain convinced that the Security
Council can and must contribute to this discussion as
long as the crisis has yet to be completely resolved.
As I said, the situation in Burundi continues to have
ramifications for the entire region. In that regard, we
commend the Secretary-General's proposal to submit
to the Council a list of options as to the role that the
United Nations can play in Burundi. The Council must
remain seized of this issue.

