Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open debate, which provides a
useful forum for the parties concerned to engage in an
in-depth discussion of the situation regarding United
Nations peacekeeping and many challenges faced by
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I thank
Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra for
their briefings. We look forward to the New Horizon
report, to be submitted soon by the Secretary-General.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have
been developing for more than six decades; they have
become an important tool for the maintenance of
international peace and building collective security.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have evolved
from their initial role of supervising ceasefires into
integrated, multisectoral, multifaceted operations that
cover the political, human rights and security areas.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are facing a
situation of increasing demand, expanding scale,
increasingly diverse mandates and growing complexity.
That situation has placed greater demands on these
operations in terms of financing, personnel and
management.
To enhance the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, it is important that necessary
reforms be undertaken.

First, we believe that, in order to increase the
effectiveness of these operations, it is important to
strengthen and enhance their strategic design and
planning. The Security Council should devote attention
to coordination between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Equal attention should be devoted to the political
settlement of armed conflicts on the one hand and to
the dispatch of peacekeeping operations on the other. It
is important to ensure that there is a peace to keep. At
the same time, the Council should devote attention to
other approaches that could result in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, with a view to reducing
peacekeeping costs.

Secondly, in order to increase the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations it is necessary
to ensure that the operation is provided with the
financial resources it needs. Against the backdrop of an
expanding world financial crisis and the continued rise
of peacekeeping costs, the resources available for
peacekeeping have grown increasingly strained. We
urge that United Nations Member States continue to
pay their assessments in full and on time in order to
ensure that peacekeeping operations can be carried out
smoothly. On the other hand, in order to meet an
increasing demand for peacekeeping operations, we
would also welcome exploration of other channels for
the financing of peacekeeping. We favour strengthened
evaluation and monitoring of United Nations
peacekeeping operations so as to effectively enhance
the efficiency of the use of resources and to ensure that
limited resources are allocated to critical areas.

Thirdly, in order to increase the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations it is necessary
to enhance the capacity to raise personnel and
equipment. The key to translating a commitment to
peace into real results on the ground is the ability to
raise adequate personnel and equipment in a timely
manner. We encourage more Member States to
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
At the same time, we believe that the Organization
should assist relevant countries in training their
peacekeeping personnel. We support continued efforts
by the Secretariat to enhance its rapid deployment
capacity and enhance its communication with troop-
contributing countries.
Africa has special requirements with respect to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. At present
75 per cent of peacekeepers are deployed in Africa.
The Council should therefore encourage the African
Union to play a more active role. It is also important to
strengthen strategic cooperation between those two
actors.

Fourthly, in order to increase the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations it is important
to secure the full understanding and participation of the
parties concerned. In recent years, some United Nations
peacekeeping operations have been reproached as
having been less than impartial and fair. Moreover,
peacekeeping personnel are facing severe security
challenges on the ground. There may be many causes
behind that situation, but one of them is host countries'
misunderstandings concerning peacekeeping operations.
Thus, adherence to Dag Hammarskjold's three principles
of peacekeeping is an important basis for carrying out a
successful United Nations peacekeeping operation.

The process of deciding upon and deploying a
United Nations peacekeeping operations involves a
number of actors, including the Security Council, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries. It is
necessary that they be permitted to offer their
comparative advantages and that cooperation and
consultation among them be strengthened. It is very
important to benefit from the wisdom and strength of
all the parties concerned.

Fifthly, in order to strengthen the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, it is
important to improve their management. We support
the Secretariat's continuing efforts to maintain close
contact with the Council and to ensure that the mandate
of the peacekeeping operations is more targeted and
pragmatic. We support improving the management
capacity of peacekeeping operations; at the same time,
any measures taken in this area must be transparent.
United Nations Headquarters must be given adequate
and capable personnel, and it is important to provide
each mission with a highly qualified special
representative of the Secretary-General and troop
commander. On top of that, it is necessary to further
strengthen coordination between Headquarters and the
ground. We support the Secretariat in its continued
efforts to explore adequate means of logistics, and we
also encourage Member States that are able to do so to
give assistance in this area.
China has always actively participated in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and has made its
contribution to the United Nations peacekeeping cause.
We support reasonable reforms to the peacekeeping
operations and are ready to work with other parties to
this end.

