Mr. Tiirk: Pursuant to the request by the Security
Council of 19 December 2002, the Secretary-General
has submitted to the Council his report on the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB),
dated 20 March 2003, in which he reviewed the
activities of UNPOB since the last briefing of the
Council on 21 November 2002. The report also
contains information on the remaining challenges and
benchmarks to be achieved by the parties to the
Bougainville Peace Agreement and on UNPOB's exit
strategy. Today I will provide an update on recent
developments that will assist the Council in its
discussion of the report.

Let me begin with the Plan of Action for the
Completion of Weapons Collection. UNPOB has
continued to focus on the implementation of this Plan
of Action, which was adopted on 17 February 2003 at a
joint meeting of political and former combatant leaders
of Bougainville. The Action Plan is a result of serious
consideration by the parties of the challenges to
weapons collection in each district and of actions that
need to be taken to overcome them. It is very specific
in terms of its objectives, responsibilities and follow-
up activities.

The implementation of the Action Plan seems to
be proceeding well. Additional weapons have been
retrieved and three new containments at Stage II have
taken place. Within the framework of the Action Plan,
direct contacts have been initiated with the persons
responsible for the previous break-ins into the
containers. As a result, we expect that weapons
removed from one of the containers will soon be
returned. All together, there are 22 containers on the
island.

In several other districts, the former combatants,
acting on UNPOB's behalf, have been bringing
antagonistic individuals and groups into contact with
one another, promoting reconciliation, settling issues
and thus creating an atmosphere conducive to the
containment of more weapons.

Let me say a few words about the challenges we
are facing on this path. The resistance of Francis Ona
and his Me'ekamui Defence Force (MDF) to joining
weapons collection efforts represents a major obstacle
to the successful conclusion of the peace process. The
Bougainville parties are persistent in their efforts to
engage the MDF in constructive talks, both at the
political and military levels. However, as the recent
violent incident near Arawa has shown, without Ona's
own direct involvement in these talks, it is not clear
that these exchanges with the MDF have had a
significant impact.

Unfortunately, Ona continues to resist appeals by
the Papua New Guinea Government, the Governor of
Bougainville, the faction leaders and UNPOB to enter
into dialogue. As long as he maintains this posture and
does not encourage his followers to hand in their
weapons, a significant obstacle to the completion of
weapons collection will remain throughout the island. I
would like to emphasize that efforts of the Government
and other actors in the field continue.

Let me say a few words about the process of the
Constitution of Bougainville. We are encouraged by the
work done so far by the Bougainville Constitutional
Commission, which on 1 February 2003 released for
island-wide consultations an official first draft of the
Bougainville Constitution. A second draft will soon be
prepared and reviewed by the corresponding bodies of
the Papua New Guinea Government and Bougainville.
Provided the Bougainville Constitutional Commission
is able to complete the required internal consultations,
the draft Constitution could be finalized by the end of
April 2003 and submitted for adoption by a constituent
assembly of Bougainville. However, the constituent
assembly cannot be established until Stage II of
weapons disposal has been verified as completed.
Assuming that the required certification could be made
by UNPOB by the time the work on the Constitution is
complete, the Bougainville Constitutional Commission
expects that elections could be held before the end of
2003.

In order to enhance the level of security and
confidence required by the Peace Agreement and to
facilitate the constitutional process, the National
Government and the Bougainville parties have signed a
memorandum of understanding that establishes a
mechanism for consultation between them on all
aspects of implementation of the autonomy
arrangements. This involves the transfer of powers -
including the police - functions and resources, as well
as the settlement of disputes. The functioning of this
mechanism and the introduction, as early as possible,
of a weapons regulation and control regime will
significantly contribute to the achievement of that level
of security and confidence.

I wish to also address the assistance of the Peace
Monitoring Group. Given the announced withdrawal of
the Group from Bougainville by 30 June 2003, we
would like to express our deep appreciation to the
contributing countries - Australia, New Zealand, Fiji
and Vanuatu - for their essential role in the peace
process. The Bougainville parties are highly
appreciative of the valuable contributions of the Peace
Monitoring Group. The Group has played a crucial role
in facilitating the political talks that led to the signing
of the Bougainville Peace Agreement. It continues to
support the peace process in numerous ways. Its
logistical and technical support for weapons disposal
has contributed immensely to the progress achieved in
this area, and its very presence has had and continues
to have a stabilizing effect.

We hope that by the end of June 2003, when the
Peace Monitoring Group is expected to leave the
island, most of the weapons collection process will
have been completed. However, at this point we cannot
yet be certain that this will be the case. Therefore, it
would be helpful if, prior to the Group's withdrawal,
the parties to the Agreement reviewed the progress of
weapons disposal and, if necessary - I emphasize, if
necessary - considered the feasibility of establishing a
stand-by arrangement that could continue to provide
technical and logistical support to UNPOB to enable it
to fulfil its mandate and start withdrawing by the end
of 2003.

After living through a decade of suffering and
destruction, the people of Bougainville are working
diligently to achieve a brighter future. This yearning
for peace gives us confidence that despite the serious
obstacles that remain and the existence of potential
spoilers, particularly Francis Ona, the Bougainville
Peace Agreement can be fully implemented before the
end of this year, allowing UNPOB to withdraw, as
requested by the Security Council.

I can assure you that UNPOB will spare no effort
to ensure that its mandate is completed on time. In the
critical months ahead, the support of the international
community and of the regional countries that have
participated in the Peace Monitoring Group will be
more critical than ever.

As the formal peace process draws to an end, it
will be particularly important to demonstrate to the
people of Bougainville that peace will bring rewards in
the form of concrete assistance to rebuild the island
and facilitate the reintegration of former combatants
into society. Progress in those areas will help to ensure
that peace is being built on firm foundations.

