Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of all, like previous speakers, I would like to thank all those at the Secretariat for providing services for this meeting at a risk to themselves. China welcomes the presence of Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de Barberi. We thank Special Representative of the Secretary- General Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Clemencia Carabali Rodallega for their briefings. The Colombian peace process established a standard for resolving disputes through negotiated solutions based on dialogue. In recent months, the Colombian Governmentand other stakeholders have worked together to overcome the difficulties posed by the coronavirus disease and to continue promoting rural reform, poverty reduction through development, the reintegration of former combatants and institution-building, as well as strengthening the judiciary. The follow-up mechanisms to the peace agreement are functioning effectively and peacebuilding is moving forward. China commends and supports the positive efforts of the Colombian Government in that regard. As mentioned in the report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/603) and in the briefing by Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu, the Final Peace Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace is facing challenges in its implementation. China is of the view that, in order to fully, effectively and sustainably implement the peace agreement, the focus should be on the proper balance and synergy between the two interdependent and inseparable pillars, namely, development and security. Security without the support of development is like a river without a spring. Conversely, development without the safeguard of security is like a castle in the air. The development perspective should be stressed to promote peace through development. Rural reform, development programmes and poverty relief and eradication feature prominently in the Colombian peace agreement. They also represent a conclusive approach to tackling the root causes of the conflict. China encourages the Colombian Government to overcome the difficulties, continue to implement development programmes with a territorial focus, and ramp up its efforts to promote balanced, inclusive and sustainable development, especially by helping those who have no land or insufficient land to gain access to it. China supports the efforts of the Colombian Government to strengthen infrastructure development in the territories most affected by the conflict, including transport, irrigation and electricity, and to provide essential public services, including education, health care and housing, in order to narrow urban-rural disparities and those between territories. Capacity-building is needed to ensure lasting peace. In its preamble, the peace agreement states: "Emphasizing that peace has come to be universally described as a superior human right and as a prerequisite for the exercising of all other rights and duties incumbent upon individuals and citizens". The Secretary-General's report notes that the recent fragile security situation in some parts of the country and the ongoing activities of illegal armed groups and criminal organizations have caused displacements. There have been sporadic killings of former combatants and community workers and the recruitment of child soldiers continues. China encourages all parties to the Colombian issue to step up their efforts to combat such criminal activities by making the best use of the mechanisms established under the peace agreement, including the National Commission on Security Guarantees, to support the Government in further promoting illicit crop substitution programmes and to curb the breeding ground for crime. China has been supporting the Colombian peace process with concrete actions. The two countries have had productive cooperation in areas such as agriculture, poverty reduction, energy and mining. A number of joint infrastructure projects, such as highways and coal-fired power stations, are contributing to Colombia's accelerated development. In order to ease the impact of the coronavirus disease, the Chinese Government, from among its provinces, cities and partner businesses, have donated personal protective equipment and medical supplies, including testing kits, face masks, goggles, gowns, infrared thermometers and ventilators, to various communities in Colombia. China will continue to support Colombia in achieving sustainable development and building lasting peace. Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia have been providing valuable assistance to the country in implementing the peace agreement. China commends its efforts. We look forward to the Mission playing a greater role in Colombia's peace and stability, while respecting the country's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. We hope that, for their part, the Colombian Government andother stakeholders will genuinely shoulder their own responsibilities and obligations, work for the greater good of the country and its people and support the good offices of the United Nations and its Verification Mission so that the Colombian peace process can go from strength to strength with a greater amount of tangible deliverables.
