Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): As this is the first time that my delegation has
spoken at a formal meeting under your presidency, Sir,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
leadership of the Security Council.

We are convinced that given your skills and
experience, our work will be crowned with success. We
also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Qin Huasun of China, and to his delegation, for his
effective guidance of our work during the month of May.

The situation in Tajikistan remains tense because the
parties to the conflict are not honouring the obligations to
which they committed themselves under the Tehran cease-
fire agreement. In our View, no effort can succeed without
good faith on the part of the Tajik parties. Solving the
problems of that country depends on the parties'
determination to resolve their differences through a political
dialogue on national reconciliation.

In that context, our delegation is encouraged to learn
that the Tajik Government and the United Tajik Opposition
have stated their conviction that the conflict in their country
cannot be settled by military means. We take note also that
the Tajik parties are prepared to resume talks and have
accepted an unconditional three-month extension of the
cease-fire agreement. We call upon the parties to maintain
the cease-fire for the entire duration of the inter-Tajik
talks, because we believe that this would be an important
element in creating a favourable climate for the overall
political dialogue towards national reconciliation and the
promotion of democracy in that country.

My Government notes with deep concern the
deterioration of the situation in Tajikistan, as recorded in
the reports of the Secretary-General. My delegation
considers that the Tajik parties themselves bear the
primary responsibility for their differences. We call upon
the parties to enable the Joint Commission to resume its
activities without delay; in that connection, we encourage
the Government of Tajikistan to provide the necessary
security guarantees to the opposition members of the Joint
Commission.

Guinea-Bissau attaches particular importance to the
United Nations role in restoring peace to Tajikistan. We
therefore regret the restrictions the Tajik parties have
imposed on the movements of the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT). It is our View that
the parties' cooperation with UNMOT and with other
international organizations operating in Tajikistan is a
precondition for humanitarian activities there.

I wish in conclusion to express my delegation's
satisfaction at the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General,
the Commonwealth of Independent States and all others
who are contributing to the quest for peace in Tajikistan.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Gerd Merrem as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Tajikistan, and we wish him every success in his difficult
task.

Guinea-Bissau will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council in the hope that it will shed
a glimmer of hope upon the impasse faced by the process
of national reconciliation in Tajikistan.

