I thank Special Representative Shearer for his briefing and his tireless leadership in support of stability in South Sudan. We would also like to thank Mr. Yakani for his steadfast commitment to advocating peace in the country. We stand shoulder to shoulder with him and other civil society advocates as they strive for the peace and security the South Sudanese people so richly deserve. The people of South Sudan are facing monumental challenges as they confront both escalating violence and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The United States remains concerned about increasing violence in Jonglei state, including widespread sexual and gender-based violence, which has already killed at least 600 individuals this year and resulted in the abduction of 150 women and girls. The violence, which is spreading to other parts of the country, risks eroding gains in the peace process that the Security Council has sought to support. The continued delays in the peace process are unacceptable. While there has been an agreement on the political formula to be used for appointing governors, the actual appointments and implementation of security arrangements need to occur in short order to have value. A priority in all of this should be the meaningful participation of women. Existing humanitarian programmes must be supported and allowed to continue even in the face of the additional challenges posed by COVID-19. The United States supports South Sudan's efforts aimed at containing the COVID-19 pandemic, but we cannot accept the Government's using the virus as a pretext to curtail freedom of movement for the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). Even more egregious is South Sudan's denials of internal medical-evacuation flights for UNMISS staff. This must stop, and it must stop now. Given these challenges, we look forward to hearing how the United Nations is protecting its personnel who contract COVID-19. As Council members, we must not lose sight of the important progress we have sought to advance in South Sudan, such as the forming of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity, which requires that additional steps be taken for it to become fully functional, and we can no longer tolerate any setbacks. Moving forward, then, we call on the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to appoint a permanent and empowered Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. African political leadership is essential for driving the peace process forward and for ending the violence. The United States is committed to working closely with the Transitional Government and its partners to implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and ensure a better future for the people of South Sudan. However, we expect South Sudan's leaders to govern together as one Government and work in the best interest of its citizens. A Government working together would immediately address outbreaks of violence anywhere in the country. A Government working together would look to UNMISS and the United Nations as valuable partners not only in providing safety and security for its citizens, but also in addressing the COVID-19 crisis. A Government working together would recognize the essential role played by humanitarian partners in delivering much-needed assistance. Unfortunately, we still do not see the Transitional Government working together. We recognize the challenges posed by COVID-19, but we see the pandemic as an opportunity to strengthen cooperation among all parties and stakeholders in the Transitional Government. The United States remains committed to the full implementation of the peace agreement, just as we remain committed to the people of South Sudan at this most pressing time.
