The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Singapore.

Like many of my colleagues here, I too have a
prepared set of remarks, but in the interest of time and
with a view to responding to or building upon the
comments that have been made here, I will try to speak
extemporaneously.

First, I would like to thank very much, like all my
colleagues, the Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sy, as well as the representatives of the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) for their contributions. I would
also like to warmly welcome the Minister for the
Promotion of Civic Responsibility in charge of
Relations with the Parliament of the Central African
Republic, Mr. Agba Otikpo Mezode. We truly
appreciate his presence here after the very long journey
he has made to get here. While we have benefited from
listening to all of you, we hope that all of you have also
benefited from listening to the comments that have
been made today.

As the Ambassador of France said in one of the
early statements, there clearly is a need for an
integrated approach in peace-building, and, as he said,
the Security Council can play a valuable role in
promoting an integrated approach towards peace-
building, and we hope that this debate has contributed
in that sense. Of course, we hope that the Ambassador
of France will elaborate on his comments when we
next discuss the question of the Central African
Republic.

It is clear that the United Nations has been
actively engaged in the Central African Republic for
quite a while. In fact, a lot of praise has gone to the
work of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA). As members know,
MINURCA completed its work, and there is now a
fear, as indeed the previous speaker mentioned, that the
good work done by MINURCA may be lost as a result
of recent developments.

If there is one theme that I think we heard
consistently this morning in the discussions, it was that
it is clear that there is a need to promote national
reconciliation in the Central African Republic, and I
think if there were two words that we heard over and
over and over this morning, they were the words
"national reconciliation".

It is also true that several hurdles need to be
cleared before we can achieve a durable peace and lay
a firm basis for the long-term development of the
Central African Republic. Let me mention four hurdles.

The first hurdle is the need for full and prompt
implementation of the outstanding elements of the
Bangui Agreement and the National Reconciliation
Pact.

These areas in particular remain central to the
post-conflict peace-building efforts. These include,
first, the strengthening of the police force and the
restructuring of the armed forces to achieve greater
ethnic and geographical balance; secondly,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-soldiers; and
thirdly, measures to strengthen the economy. These are
not new elements. These have been mentioned by
previous speakers.

The second hurdle, which was also mentioned by
several speakers, including our colleagues from the
World Bank and UNDP, was the need to raise sufficient
funds in support of peace-building efforts.

The third hurdle that I think we also need to
address relates to the root causes ofthe problems being
faced now. The latest report of the Secretary-General
clearly paints a bleak picture of a political stalemate, a
deepening social crisis and a precarious economic
situation, but it is not clear whether the report analyses
sufficiently what the root causes are of the problems
currently faced by the Central African Republic.

In this regard, I would like also to mention that
one particular point that seemed to surface consistently
in remarks today was the need to address the problem
of arrears in salaries, and the consistency with which it
was referred to suggests that this may be a fundamental
problem that needs to be addressed in finding solutions
to the problems in the Central African Republic.
Here - if we may make one simple suggestion - we
hope that at the next session of the General Assembly's
Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of
Conflict and the Promotion of Durable Peace and
Sustainable Development in Africa, the Group will
look at the experience of the Central African Republic
in this area.

The fourth and final hurdle, of course - and this
again was referred to by several delegations - is the
continuing unrest in neighbouring countries,
particularly the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This point, I think, was made most eloquently by the
Foreign Minister of Mauritius, when he said:

"Indeed, the predicament of the Central
African Republic cannot be dissociated from the
dire conditions prevailing in the Great Lakes
region."

In this regard, I hope that when Mr. Sy returns to
Bangui, he will carry a message, from our delegation at
least, to Mr. Amara Essy, telling him that we fully
support the work he is doing to bring about peace and
stability in the Central African Republic and in the
region.

Finally, in conclusion, it is clear that in
overcoming the hurdles I have mentioned, we need to
establish a clear finishing line. The objectives we need
to work for need to be understood by all of us, and we
hope that the presidential statement we will adopt at
the next meeting will be helpful in that direction.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Sy to respond to
comments and questions raised in this morning's
discussions.

