The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga, Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, for
his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of January 2006. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Mahiga for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council commends the
efforts of the African Union for successful
deployment of the African Union Mission in
Sudan (AMIS) and for significant contribution to
the provision of a secure environment for
civilians and the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
The Security Council welcomes the African
Union Peace and Security Council's recognition
of the partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations in the promotion of peace,
security and stability in Africa.

"The Security Council takes note of the
12 January 2006 Communique of the Peace and
Security Council (PSC) of the African Union in
which the PSC expressed its support, in principle,
for a transition from the African Union Mission
in Sudan to a United Nations operation, and
requested the Chairperson of the African Union's
Commission to initiate consultations with the
United Nations and other stakeholders on this
matter.

"The Security Council therefore requests
the Secretary-General to initiate contingency
planning without delay, jointly with the African
Union, in close and continuing consultation with
the Security Council, and in cooperation and
close consultation with the parties to the Abuja
Peace Talks, including the Government of
National Unity, on a range of options for a
possible transition from AMIS to a United
Nations operation. Such planning should be
undertaken on the basis of a unified, integrated
approach; of maximum use of existing AMIS and
United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS)
resources subject to the agreement of troop-
contributing countries; of an assessment, to be
confirmed by the Council, of the essential tasks to
be carried out in southern Sudan and Darfur with
a view to reallocate existing troops and assets to
the maximum extent practicable; and of a
readiness to review and adjust the current
structure of UNMIS, including command and
control and logistics, at the earliest opportunity to
make best use of available resources when the
African Union deems a transition feasible and
agreeable. The Security Council will be engaged
throughout this process.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of maintaining strong support for
AMIS until any eventual transition is completed.
The Security Council looks forward to an early
decision from the African Union Peace and
Security Council and will keep this issue under
consideration with a view to reviewing the
options submitted by the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of urgently reaching a successful
conclusion of the Abuja Talks and calls on all
parties to negotiate in good faith in order to reach
a peace accord as soon as possible. The Security
Council reiterates in the strongest terms the need
for all parties in Darfur to end the violence and
atrocities. The Security Council demands all
parties to the Darfur conflict to cooperate fully
with AMIS and to fulfil all the obligations to
which they have committed themselves."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

