Mrs. Furman (Israel): Israel welcomes the
initiative to convene a debate on training and capacity-
building for United Nations peacekeepers. Over the
past year, we have taken important steps to address the
current gaps in training and capacity-building, most
recently during the Peacekeeping Ministerial.

If our ultimate goal is the full implementation of
peacekeeping mandates, effective training is critical.
We should establish clear training requirements and
procedures and assist troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) in the implementation of those procedures. We
should also institute an effective process for validating
the quality of training at the predeployment stage, in
full coordination with TCCs.

As Benjamin Franklin once said, "Tell me and I
forget, teach me and I may remember, involve me and
I learn". Member States have collectively committed to
better prepare, train and equip United Nations personnel
through innovative approaches. Israel is committed to
working with the United Nations to share our state-of-
the-art medical expertise and enhance the medical
training of TCCs. We have been working with the
Division of Healthcare Management on two initiatives.

The first of those is the development and
implementation of buddy first aid training. Studies
show that the loss of blood that occurs between the
time of an injury and the arrival of the paramedics is
the leading cause of death in 90 per cent of potentially
survivable field injuries. If all peacekeepers are trained
in basic first aid, they have a much better chance of
saving the lives oftheir comrades in the field. Israel has
been working with the United Nations to develop a first
aid manual for United Nations peacekeepers. We also
provided one of the United Nations first super-trainers,
who has so far taught master trainer courses for TCCs
in Italy and Ireland. Finally, Israel is working with the
United Nations to develop a curriculum for field medic
guidance and training. Those medical capabilities are
crucial for peacekeeping forces.

However, through our work with the United Nations,
we have seen that there are significant differences in
the level of preparedness of TCCs. It is therefore our
duty to ensure that general standards are achieved and
maintained by all forces. The United Nations should
provide guidance and oversight to ensure that those
standards and training materials reflect operational
requirements. The United Nations cannot, however, be
responsible for the individual training of each troop.
Once the standards have been defined, approved and
demonstrated through a limited number of United
Nations-led courses, it is up to Member States and
TCCs to ensure that all troops are trained according to
the guidelines set by the United Nations. One project
that can facilitate this is the Triangular Partnership
Project. Israel hopes to continue to work to strengthen
this initiative as it incorporates medical training over
the next few years.

As we pledged during the Peacekeeping Ministerial,
we intend to continue contributing to United Nations
medical training and plan to host a first-aid master
trainer course in Israel. We also seek to work in
partnership with TCCs to facilitate the implementation
of predeployment medical training.

The United Nations has taken positive steps over
the past few years to improve training, especially in
the medical field. There is much more work to be done,
but we can be sure that working together will make
us stronger. Creating partnerships through innovative
mechanisms will help us achieve our common goals,
as stated in the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. If we expect
our troops to perform their duty in the field, it is our
moral obligation to ensure that they have the necessary
medical knowledge and equipment to fulfil their tasks.

