Ms. DiCarlo: On 17 February, five years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed the package of measures for the implementation of the Minsk agreements. Today that package of measures, together with the Minsk protocol and the Minsk memorandum, remains the only agreed framework for a negotiated, peaceful settlement of the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The Secretary-General has consistently expressed the strong backing of the United Nations for the lead role of the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in finding a peaceful settlement of the conflict in eastern Ukraine and has called for a revitalization of those efforts.I last briefed the Council on Ukraine on 16 July (see S/PV.8575). A number of important developments have since then given rise to hope for long-elusive progress in the implementation of the Minsk provisions, including its key security and political aspects. Most notably, on 9 December, after a three-year hiatus, the leaders of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine met in Paris under the so-called Normandy format. The Normandy Four meeting called for immediate measures to stabilize the situation in the conflict area, measures to implement the political provisions of the Minsk agreements and follow-up steps. The leaders committed to a full and comprehensive implementation of the ceasefire, strengthened by the implementation of all the necessary ceasefire support measures. They also committed to supporting the development and implementation of an updated demining plan, as well as to supporting an agreement within the Trilateral Contact Group on three additional disengagement areas, with the aim of disengaging forces and equipment. They encouraged the Trilateral Contact Group to facilitate the release and exchange of conflict-related detainees and committed to supporting an agreement within the Group on new crossing points along the line of contact, based primarily on humanitarian criteria. Critically, the participants recalled that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission should have safe and secure access throughout Ukraine in order to fully implement its mandate. The leaders in Paris further referred to the so- called special status for certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, as well as the so-called Steinmeier formula, which was accepted by the sides earlier. The Secretary-General publicly welcomed the outcomes of the meeting and called on all concerned to redouble their efforts to build on recent progress towards a resolution of the conflict. He also reiterated his full support for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders. I used the opportunity of my first visit to Ukraine, from 12 to 13 December 2019, to reiterate the Secretary- General's support for the ongoing peace efforts and critical reforms in Ukraine. My interlocutors were clear in their desire to see tangible progress in the negotiations. Many of those I met stressed the need for greater involvement by women in the ongoing peace efforts. I also heard about the need to improve the humanitarian situation for ordinary people living along the contact line and to invest greater attention and political will in enabling and strengthening various dialogue initiatives that could contribute to ensuring sustainable peace. We are pleased that the Normandy Four summit held in Paris was followed by a large-scale exchange of prisoners and progress on discussions of additional disengagement areas. However, those initial encouraging signs remain limited and easily reversible. Today's disturbing reports of major ceasefire violations across the contact line near Zolote, including the alleged use of heavy weapons, are deeply disturbing and a stark reminder that, in the absence of sustained political will, there is a very real risk of backsliding and further violence. Members will hear shortly from the newly appointed Special Representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in- Office in Ukraine, Ambassador Heidi Grau, on the most recent discussions in the Trilateral Contact Group, and from the Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, Ambassador Halit Cevik, on the overall security situation on the ground. It is critical that we support their important efforts. At this pivotal time, I hope the Council will encourage all stakeholders to do their utmost to ensure a sustained positive momentum in the negotiations, display the political will and flexibility to reach agreement on key steps forward and focus on the implementation of agreed commitments, including, first and foremost, the commitment to a durable ceasefire. Despite some steps taken to mitigate its impact on civilians, the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine continues to claim lives, cause injuries, severely restrict the freedom of movement and negatively impact basic human rights, including the rights to housing, health, education and an adequate standard of living. The United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine has regularly reported on the human rights situation; its most recent report is dated 12 December 2019. In 2019, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights recorded 167 civilian casualties - 27 killed and 140 injured - of which 63 per cent were caused by shelling and small arms and light weapons fire and 35 per cent by mines and explosive remnants of war. That represents a 40 per cent decrease from 2018 figures and the lowest annual figures for the entire conflict period. While that decrease is a welcome development, we note that a permanent andcomprehensive silencing of weapons - the best way to eliminate civilian casualties - is still not within reach. The United Nations is particularly concerned about people living along the contact line, who remain the most vulnerable. Civilians pay the highest price in the crisis. A total of 3.4 million people, including the elderly, the disabled and children, require humanitarian assistance and protection services. The conflict has transformed many families into single-headed households. As reported by United Nations agencies, women - who lead nearly 70 per cent of households on both sides of the contact line - face particularly daunting challenges as a result of continued hostilities and volatility along the line. Many of them lack a social network, income, access to housing and opportunities for employment and _ professional development. Female-headed households often have no access to social benefits or psychological support. Humanitarian access and the protection of civilians and civilian assets are everyday challenges. Water, education and health infrastructure continue to be severely impacted by the conflict, reducing access to those facilities for civilians living there. In 2019, there were 50 incidents that damaged education facilities, a 200 per cent increase over 2018, while 88 incidents targeted water infrastructure located near or on the contact line. Attacks on civilian infrastructure must stop. The United Nations and its partners provide assistance in accordance with the universally recognized principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence. As they seek to reach the most vulnerable civilians, humanitarian organizations require unimpeded and sustained access. Since 2014, the United Nations and its partners have been able to reach an estimated 1 million people per year with life-saving aid, thanks to the generous contributions of donors. However, that constitutes less than one third of the total number of people in need. Since the 2019 humanitarian response plan was severely underfunded, the 2020 plan will require $158 million in order to reach 2 million people. As I heard at first hand during my December visit to Ukraine, the conflict continues to exact an unacceptable humanitarian toll on the Ukrainian population. It destabilizes overall peace and security in Ukraine, but also potentially in the region as a whole. The recent positive momentum and the stated commitment of the Normandy Four and the Trilateral Contact Group participants to address the conflict with renewed impetus and a sense of urgency need our encouragement and full support. That must be followed by action in order to restore trust and enable tangible improvements in the precarious humanitarian situation along the contact line. The much-needed and long-awaited peace in eastern Ukraine can be achieved if there is sufficient political will, good-faith negotiations and concrete support for efforts to silence the guns.
