Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by welcoming the presence of President Guelleh in the
Council, together with his delegation, including the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Djibouti. We thank the
President of Djibouti for his statement. We also
appreciate having heard from our colleague, the
ambassador of Eritrea.

The presence of President Guelleh in the Council
is important. We have already been briefed by the
Prime Minister of Djibouti, and today we have been
briefed by the President. This seems to indicate that the
Government of Djibouti feels very strongly that the
issue at hand is very serious and should really come to
the attention of this Council.

South Africa regrets the tension between Eritrea
and Djibouti. Those two friendly countries are
neighbours and would wish to see the tension reduced
by the withdrawal of troops from the border area. We
hope and believe that the visit by the Chair of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, to Asmara
would be a good opportunity for Eritrea to convey its
side of the story.

We regret that the fact-finding mission did not
visit Asmara, because we believe that Eritrea should
also have an opportunity to tell its side of the story. We
believe that mutual trust needs to be developed
between those two countries to enable them to address
the issues at hand, particularly that of the demarcation
of the border.

We note that in his statement Ambassador Desta
referred to the occasion when the President of Eritrea
and the President of Djibouti spoke on this matter, but
we hope that such communications will be intensified
so as to build enough trust to deal with the issues at
hand.

Otherwise, the concerns the President of Djibouti
expressed today echo what was said by the Prime
Minister of Djibouti before this Council and constitute
a cry for the Council to help address them. We hope
that both parties will use the opportunities arising from
being friendly African countries, being neighbours, the
opportunities that are provided not only by the African
Union but also by the Arab League to try to find a way
out of this situation. It would be regrettable if the
situation came to the point where the Council would be
forced to take action on this matter.

Lastly, let me also pay tribute to Djibouti's
contribution to finding a solution in Somalia. Djibouti
has hosted the parties in Somalia, and they produced an
agreement that is currently being implemented. The
situation in Somalia is indeed a nightmare, as President
Guelleh has said. The contribution to Somalis that
Djibouti has made to try to find a way out of that
nightmare is greatly appreciated.
