Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would, first of all, like to
thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting on the
situation in Tajikistan with a View to reviewing the
progress achieved by the parties in the peace process and
the contribution of the United Nations.

It is heartening to note that the people of Tajikistan
have come a long way since 1991 in achieving peace and
national reconciliation. For me personally, it is a matter
of special satisfaction, having been associated as
Secretary-General of a regional cooperation organization,
called the Economic Cooperation Organization, with the
process of securing the fruits of political independence for
the Central Asian republics by leading them on the path
of economic resilience and self-reliance. All sides in the
conflict deserve commendation for their wisdom and
sagacity in choosing the path of peace by abandoning
Violence and destruction.

Since 1993, the United Nations has played a vital
role in encouraging the parties in the conflict to achieve
sustainable peace in Tajikistan. The United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) was in the
vanguard in providing the stability that was required to

 

pursue the peace process. Pakistan actively participated in
the Mission by providing observers.

Another important area in which we contributed
meaningfully was encouraging intra-Tajik dialogue as an
observer to the process. Pakistan hosted the third round of
talks in Islamabad in October 1994, which enabled the
parties to make significant strides as they signed two
important documents: the Protocol on the Joint Commission
for the Implementation of the Agreement on a Temporary
Ceasefire and the Cessation of Other Hostile Acts on the
Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country, and the joint
communique on the results of the third round of intra-Tajik
peace talks on national reconciliation.

When the parties eventually signed the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord on 27 June 1997, Pakistan agreed to become one of
the Guarantor States. In this capacity, we continued to
follow all developments in the political dialogue and played
a positive role in encouraging the parties to remain on
course and to fulfil their commitment to achieve the goals
outlined by them in the General Agreement of 1997.

While we fully share the sense of satisfaction being
expressed today on the advancement of the peace process
in Tajikistan, I must point out here that the report of the
Secretary-General which is under consideration of the
Council at this meeting does not include any specific
reference to Pakistan's contribution. On the other hand, in
paragraph 9 of the report, the role of some countries has
been recognized. We are not sure whether it is a deliberate
omission or an inadvertent error. Whatever may be the
case, the absence of recognition of Pakistan's significant
role in the report and in any resultant statement raises
questions about the objectivity and impartiality of those
who are responsible for the preparation of these documents.
We hope this is only an oversight and will be rectified.

In any case, Pakistan will continue to contribute to the
post-conflict peace-building process in Tajikistan in keeping
with our consistent policy and our commitment to the peace
and prosperity of the people of Tajikistan, as well as for the
entire region. We attach great importance to our relations
with all the brotherly Central Asian Republics with whom
we have historical bonds rooted in common faith, culture
and heritage.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my country's
abiding commitment to the consolidation of the peace
process in Tajikistan.

