I would like to thank you, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, for presiding over this important meeting and for your statement. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, for their insightful briefings. I would like also to express our warmest welcome and appreciation to all Ministers for their statements. We welcome the progress made by the signatory parties in implementing the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is encouraging to note that the Government of Mali, with the support of the United Nations team and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), has quickly responded to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, so that the implementation of the aforementioned agreement has not been delayed. We also welcome the peaceful conduct of legislative elections in Mali. Remarkably, the number of elected women has increased threefold in comparison with the previous period. However, we remain concerned about the security situation in Mali as a result of terrorism and intercommunal violence. The number of terrorist attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and security forces has drastically increased in the northern and central Mali. We would like to extend our deepest condolences to the Government and the families of peacekeepers who lost their lives in recent terrorist attacks. We are also concerned about the withdrawal of the State's presence in the concerned areas, especially with the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic compounding the dire humanitarian and security situation. In total, 3.8 million children in Mali are now affected by school closures, and 1.3 million are expected to face crisis levels of food insecurity. We welcome the support of MINUSMA for the redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Malian army to northern Mali. We also welcome its efforts in response to requests of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). However, the Mission has also been coping with tremendous challenges and difficulties in implementing its mandate against the backdrop of instability and insecurity in the north and centre of the country. My delegation therefore wishes to make the following observations. First, we call on all concerned parties to spare no effort to speed up the reform processes envisaged in the Peace Agreement. It is necessary for signatory parties to strengthen mutual trust and work together to keep up the momentum of the peace process. The full implementation of the Peace Agreement remains the only viable path to a more stable and secure Mali. Secondly, we call on the Government of Mali, regional and international organizations and other partners to strengthen their cooperation to tackle the root causes of terrorism. Thirdly, we urge the Government of Mali and other concerned parties to uphold their obligations and responsibilities to implement international humanitarian law and the protection of women and children in northern and central Mali. All perpetrators must be brought to justice. Fourthly, we call for a coherent and integrated approach to the security, humanitarian, climate-change and development challenges in Mali. We are therefore of the view that there should be more workshops, seminars on capacity- building and training courses for women and youth on sustainable development. The recommendations of the high-level workshop to enhance women's participation should be fully implemented. It is also necessary for all parties concerned to redouble their efforts to meet the most urgent humanitarian needs and mitigate the destabilizing impacts of COVID-19. In conclusion, we commend the tireless efforts of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif and United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel for their commitment to peace and stability in Mali. We support the renewal of MINUSMA's mandate for 12 months on the basis of the needs of the Government of Mali and in line with Security Council resolutions. The renewal will also help MINUSMA to further implement its operations in Mali and to provide logistic services and life support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
