Mr. Celem (Turkey): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of

 

September. We are confident that under your able guidance
the Council will successfully carry out its responsibilities.
I should also like to pay tribute to Ambassador Nugroho
Wisnumurti of Indonesia for the remarkable manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council in August.

For a long time now, the blatant violations of relevant
Security Council resolutions on Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993), have
remained unchallenged. We have even witnessed with deep
indignation the fall of two United Nations-designated safe
areas last July. The inaction of the international community
emboldened the aggressors to continue with their defiance
of international law. They intensified their attacks on other
safe areas. The long-awaited appropriate response to the
aggressor came only after another marketplace massacre in
Sarajevo. We see the United Nations-North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) joint operation, belated as it may be,
as a very important step in the right direction. In this
context, we strongly support the Secretary-General's
statement of 5 September 1995 on the resumption of the air
operation. We hold the view that the operation should not
be terminated until its objectives are fully met. The
involvement of the Rapid Reaction Force in the operation
is also totally in conformity with the mandate as set out in
various Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
998 (1995).

Turkey is strongly in favour of a negotiated settlement.
However, we believe that such a settlement should be just
and viable, and we hold the view that it cannot be
negotiated when the aggression and genocide have been
going on incessantly. First and foremost, an atmosphere
conducive to credible negotiations should be created. This
can be possible only if we remain determined not to let the
aggressor continue with its open defiance of international
law.

We agree with the 12-point programme for peace in
Bosnia, as announced by President Alija Izetbegovic on 18
August 1995. We fully support the ideas contained in this
programme. On the basis of the principles agreed today in
Geneva by the three Foreign Ministers, we hope that a just
and viable peace will be reached on the basis of the multi-
cultural, multi-religious, multi-ethnic character of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We should continue to act resolutely to put an end to
the bloodiest aggression and cruellest crimes against
humanity since the last World War. We must restore the
prestige and moral authority of the United Nations. With
our determination, we will increase the chances of a real
peace process.

With these thoughts in mind, we welcome the
conclusions of today's meeting held in Geneva between
the Foreign Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
and Croatia.

