Mr. Begec (Turkey): The Palestinian issue remains
the core challenge for regional and global stability.
An independent State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital is the only
way for a just, comprehensive and lasting peace that
can also ensure security for both sides.

At the same time, we all should acknowledge the
importance of the preservation of the historical status
and sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The crisis back in
July reminded us once again that attempts to change
the status quo would jeopardize peaceful coexistence.
To prevent further crises, provocative steps in violation
of the relevant United Nations resolutions should be
avoided. In addition, measures in contravention of
international law, in particular continuing settlement
activities that harm the perspective of the two-State
solution, must stop. Above all, Israel is expected to show
political will for a lasting peace, end the occupation
and start working towards a future of harmony with
its neighbours.

We have always emphasized that reaching a
lasting peace also requires the Palestinians to voice
their legitimate demands in unity. Therefore, we
wholeheartedly welcome the reconciliation agreement
signed on 12 October between the representatives
of Fatah and Hamas. We congratulate the people of
Palestine on this significant step towards national unity.
We will continue to support our Palestinian brothers
and sisters in successfully advancing this process. The
agreement clearly refers to ending the occupation and
establishing the sovereignty of the Palestinian State
on all of the Palestinian territories occupied in 1967.
The international community must respond to this
resolute step taken by Palestine. The Palestinian people
deserve a strong confirmation of the two-State vision
and genuine efforts to end the protracted humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.

Last but not least, we welcome the recent
membership of the State of Palestine to INTERPOL.
This was another important step for its full integration
into the international system and a strong message of
solidarity by the international community.

Turkey continues its intensive efforts to achieve a
sustainable ceasefire in Syria and create an environment
conducive to a genuine political transition, in line with
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015). At the latest round of Astana
talks on 14 and 15 September, the guarantor States
declared the establishment of the Idlib de-escalation
area and agreed on the deployment of observers in
the security zones around that area. In line with the
memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas
in the Syrian Arab Republic and its modalities,
Turkey started reconnaissance activities and initial
deployment in Idlib last week. The Astana talks have
helped the efforts to calm the situation on the ground
and created an environment conducive to holding the
latest four rounds of Geneva talks. We hope that the
Idlib de-escalation area will give further impetus to the
political process in Geneva. We are looking forward to
the next round of Geneva talks and expect to see some
concrete results.

The opposition has already displayed its political
maturity by engaging in real talks and increasing its
interaction with the different groups. However, if we
are sincere about achieving a durable political solution,
expecting steps only from the opposition will be neither
enough nor fair. The regime representatives should be
pushed to start talking seriously about the real political
issues pertaining to transition in the next round. We
would like to see a stable, prosperous and democratic
future Syria that preserves its political unity and
territorial integrity. The reconstruction of the conflict-
torn country is important to ensuring proper living
conditions for the Syrians and enable their voluntary
return. However, recovery and reconstruction support
require a credible political process leading to a genuine
political transition. The regime must not and should not
be rewarded for the destruction it has created. Only a
multidimensional long-term strategy can achieve the
dual objectives of eliminating terrorism and stabilizing
Syria. Our aim should be no terrorists and no State terror
in Syria. We cannot achieve that without addressing the
root cause of the conflict or by replacing one terrorist
organization with another.

Turkey's resolve to fight Da'esh and other terrorist
organizations in Syria, such as the Democratic
Union Party/People's Protection Units, remains firm.
Unilateral steps threatening the unity, territorial
integrity and demographic structure of Syria and
efforts to seek territorial expansion for political
leverage are unacceptable. Inclusiveness and local
ownership are essential for the establishment of
legitimate administrations in areas liberated from the
terrorist organizations. While we refocus our efforts
on ceasefire and political talks, accountability remains
a central concern. Reconciliation and sustainable
peace in Syria will be built upon our success on this
matter. We support all efforts to that end, in particular
investigations of the regime's use of chemical weapons.
The Syrian people deserve and will have justice.

Before I conclude my remarks, I would like to
underline that we are closely following developments in
the aftermath of the Kurdistan Regional Government's
unconstitutional referendum. Turkey does not and will
not recognize this initiative. Unilateral moves that
challenge Iraq's territorial integrity and political unity,
as well as the presence of the Kurdish Workers Party
and other terrorist organizations, instigate further
instability. We believe that lasting peace and stability
in Iraq can be achieved through inclusive national
reconciliation within the constitutional framework.

