Mr. Denisov (spoke in Russian): The item before
us today is a topical one in the context of the activities
of the Security Council and of the Organization as a
whole. Experience has shown that attaining lasting
peace and settling regional conflicts are possible only
on the basis of a comprehensive approach; this has to
combine traditional diplomatic and peacekeeping
efforts with measures to achieve post-conflict recovery
in the States concerned. In other words, we need
reliable guarantees for regional stabilization to prevent
the re-emergence of conflicts.

Given those conditions, the peacekeeping
operations conducted by the United Nations or under
its auspices are becoming ever more complex and
multidimensional in nature. The importance of civilian
police and other non-military components is
increasing. They are the ones that bear the
responsibility for helping to establish legitimacy, the
rule of law and a judicial system, as well as to
strengthen effective governmental institutions in States
emerging from the "hot" stage of a conflict. All of
these are important intrinsic elements of peace-
building.

In order to implement all the prescribed tasks,
qualified international civilian staff - combining a
high standard of professionalism with a sensitive
regard for the political, cultural, social and other
features of States undergoing a post-conflict stage - is
required. The United Nations has some significant
experience in this area, but, of course, the decisive
factor is the willingness of Member States to make the
needed personnel and resources available.

In a comparatively short period of time the
United Nations has made significant progress in
resolving a number of complex conflicts. Tajikistan,
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Timor-Leste and Guatemala -
these examples are but a partial list of the
achievements of the productive combination of United
Nations peacekeeping and peace-building instruments.
In all of those instances, success was made possible to
a large extent because of the close coordination among
the military, political, civilian and rehabilitation
components of those operations. This once again
underscores the growing importance of strengthening
interaction between the Security Council and the other
principal organs and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations must be
intensified in the peacekeeping area, in keeping with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
fact, a number of these structures have well-developed
police and other civilian capacities which they could
make available to the United Nations.
However, each crisis situation is unique, and
there is no uniform peacekeeping model that can be
applied to all conflicts. In each specific case there is a
need to choose the best set of peacekeeping
instruments, whether it be a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, a coalition or a regional
operation. Such efforts must be organized in strict
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations,
which clearly stipulates the Security Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and in particular its key political
role at all stages of peacekeeping operations, from the
definition of their mandates to the transition towards
peace-building.

A comprehensive approach to dealing with the
consequences of crises requires a seamless, sequential
transition from one stage of peacekeeping to the next.
Here, the support of the Security Council for civilian
peace-building efforts is of great importance, including
at stages when the central implementation role is
handed over to United Nations specialized agencies or
to international and regional organizations.

Russia is fully cognizant of its responsibility, in
the context of peacekeeping, in the efforts of the
international community. It is our intention to
constantly increase our contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping, including by making available properly
trained police contingents and civilian personnel.

We will continue to help broaden practical
cooperation in the area of crisis management between
the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.

We are prepared to work closely with all
interested international partners in order to reinforce
the lead role of the United Nations in conflict
prevention and management and to enhance its
effectiveness in the interests of strengthening global
security and stability.

