Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic ofKorea): Let me begin
by thanking the Bolivian presidency for convening
today's meeting. My delegation is grateful to be a part
of this important meeting.

The latest ballistic-missile launch by the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea, on 29 May, was
the ninth in the year 2017 and the third in the month of
May alone. In fact, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has conducted ballistic missile launches on an
almost weekly basis since the inauguration of the new
Government in Seoul, on 10 May. Such provocations
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, in
clear violation of multiple relevant Security Council
resolutions, cannot be condoned and should be met
with a resolute response. It is for that reason that the
Republic of Korea supported the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2356 (2017) in response to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's series of ballistic-
missile launches and other prohibited activities since
9 September 2016.

The new sanctions resolution adopted today sends
a clear message that the Council will not tolerate
repeated ballistic-missile launches by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, regardless of their range,
type or intended aim-point. With the adoption of this
resolution, which has somewhat deviated from its usual
response pattern on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea ballistic-missile launches, the Council
demonstrated its united resolve to respond squarely in
the face of the series of ballistic-missile provocations
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Resolution 2356 (2017) builds upon and expands
the scope of the existing Democratic People's Republic
of Korea sanctions regime. The individuals and entities
that will be subject to the travel ban and the assets
freeze under this resolution include the senior officals
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and its
core military apparatus, which are directly responsible
for the regime's illicit nuclear- and ballistic-missile
programmes. Some businesspersons and commercial
entities of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
are also newly designated, which I believe will help
further restrict the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's ability to finance its illicit activities.

I take this opportunity to strongly urge Member
States to fully implement all the relevant Security
Council sanctions resolutions, including resolutions
2270 (2016), 2321 (2016) and 2356 (2017). After all,
the ultimate goal of sanctions and pressure is to bring
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea back to
the negotiating table for denuclearization. In order
to make the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
choose the right path towards dialogue to that end, we,
the international community, should speak with one
voice and act in solidarity by thoroughly implementing
all the sanctions resolutions. I sincerely hope that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea will heed the
concerted demands of the international community and
seize the opportunity, without further delay, to chart a
new beginning in inter-Korean relations, as well as in its
relations with the international community. Given the In conclusion, I would like once again to urge the
possibility ofyet another provocation by the Democratic Democratic People's Republic Of Korea 10 cease all
People's Republic of Korea, we must continue to stand forms "f provocation and immediately take 515175 for
ready to respond to any further provocations in a more dialogue and take action towards denuclearization.

proactive manner. The meeting rose at 5.40pm.
