Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I
would like to first thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Head
of United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We commend him on his devotion
and commitment during his leadership of UNMIK, and
we wish him our best in his future endeavours. I would
like to welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaci, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thank them
both for their statements.

Chad notes with satisfaction recent progress made
in Kosovo in the political and legislative spheres as
well as in terms of regional cooperation. We encourage
the follow-up of high-level technical and political
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina - under
the auspices of the European Union - on issues
concerning telecommunications, energy and the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities, with the aim of forging long-
lasting ties between the two parties.

The signing of the second Compact on Rule of Law
in Kosovo will allow us to make progress on issues of
responsibility, corruption, inter-ethnic crime, organized
crime, gender issues, ethnic inclusion, strengthening
the witness-protection system and pending land issues.
That is an important step in institution-building. We
welcome the effective cooperation between local
leaders in northern Kosovo, especially between the
majors of North and South Mitrovica on issues relating
to budget and the payment of salaries to health care
and education workers. We also welcome the verdicts
handed down in the Drenica I and II war crimes cases.

Given the transnational challenges, particularly
those related to the radicalization of young people
and violent extremism, Chad encourages the Kosovo
authorities in their struggle against socioeconomic
factors that could lead to recruitment by radical
groups. We believe that as Kosovo experienced one of
the most devastating wars in Europe, work on justice
towards reconciliation and confidence-building within
communitiesandsocietiesoftheregionremainsapriority.
To that end, we welcome the adoption on 3 August by
the Assembly of Kosovo of constitutional amendments
for the establishment of a specialist court to try cases
referred by the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force in the context of war crimes and organized
crime allegations contained in the report of January
2011 presented by Dick Marty.

With regard to the issue of returns, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
recorded only 132 individual voluntary returns in
the reporting period. The proposals and initiatives to
build homes in return areas and to validate diplomas
so as to allow people from non-majority groups to
find employment in public institutions could certainly
facilitate local returns. With respect to the 1,654 persons
still missing, Chad calls on the Kosovo authorities to
redouble their efforts to foster conditions conducive
to ongoing investigations and provide follow-up to the
victims' families.

With respect to regional cooperation, important
steps have been taken in the context of security and
promoting reconciliation. However, we regret and
condemn acts of violence, particularly the clashes that
took place on 9 and 10 May in Kumanovo, in the the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, leading to
the deaths of 8 police officers and the wounding of 37
others. We welcome the cooperation of the Kosovo police
in facilitating the conduct of an open investigation into
these incidents with a view to bringing the perpetrators
to justice. We also welcome the State visit ofthe Serbian
Prime Minister to Albania, which allowed discussions
to be launched on joint infrastructure, socioeconomic
development and security projects. We believe that
the adoption by the Assembly of a resolution on the
geographic delineation of the border with Montenegro
will also help to improve the climate of regional
understanding.

In conclusion, Chad is convinced that all these
productive and constructive initiatives will help to
improve the daily lives of citizens in Kosovo and reduce
tensions for the benefit of all communities there. That
progress has been achieved thanks to the readiness of
the parties and the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK,
Mr. Zarif, and his entire team. Chad commends and
encourages UNMIK to continue to support initiatives
for dialogue between the communities, in particular
through capacity-building projects. We also commend
the United Nations entities and the system's partners
on the ground - particularly the Kosovo Force, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Union - for their cooperation and
contributions to reconciliation and stabilization in
Kosovo.

