Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to start by
reiterating Germany's full support for the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Their contribution to the fight against impunity for
serious international crimes is invaluable. We thank
Presidents Meron and Joensen, as well as ICTY and
ICTR Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, for their
recent assessments. We commend their efforts to
implement the completion strategies of both Tribunals.

Let me add that we welcome the progress made
in ensuring a smooth transition to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are
fully aware of the challenges faced by both Tribunals
during the transitional period.

Turning to the ICTR, the report of 5 November
(see S/2012/836) clearly outlines successes and
remaining challenges. We congratulate the ICTR on
having concluded virtually all of its remaining work
at trial level, with only one case remaining at the trial
level and all appeals projected to be completed by the
end of 2014.

We once again commend Rwanda for having
strengthened its national legal system so as to allow
the adjudication of cases transferred from the ICTR.
We are also grateful to the Governments of both Benin
and Mali, which have recently enabled the transfer of
convicted persons to their respective territories for the
serving of remaining sentences. And we reiterate our
call on the international community, and in particular
to concerned States of the region, to undertake serious
efforts in order to bring the remaining nine fugitives to
justice. Likewise, we encourage further efforts to solve
the issue of the five acquitted persons who currently
remain in Arusha under the protection of the ICTR.

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has played a key role in strengthening
the rule of law and promoting long-term stability and
reconciliation in the Balkans. Moreover, it embodies a
unique success story. With the arrests of the last three
fugitives - Mladie, Hadzie and Karadzie - the ICTY
has implemented its mandate to fight impunity and
not to let the perpetrators of outrageous crimes escape
justice.

The jurisprudence of the ICTY and of the
ICTR is a source of inspiration for all national and
international jurisdictions that will have to address
such crimes. Their records show that international
criminal justice does exist; it prevails, and sooner or
later those responsible for serious international crimes
will be held accountable. And let me be clear. We
owe the Tribunals full respect both for their status as
independent criminal courts and for their judgements.
Both Tribunals consistently uphold high standards of
justice, as well as all principles relating to the right to a
fair trial, including the right of appeal.

While we recognize that some recent judgements
of the ICTY have been met with strong emotions, we
call upon all to deal with such emotions in a responsible
manner. Furthermore, statements questioning the
impartiality of the ICTY only serve to undermine
the mandate and authority of the Tribunal and are
detrimental to the process of reconciliation in the
region. This cannot be tolerated. Germany is committed
to continuing its full support for the Tribunal and calls
upon all States to cooperate with the Tribunal to the
fullest extent.

As the ICTY nears the completion of its mandate,
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia must intensify their efforts to carry on the ICTY's
work of prosecuting crimes. This includes cooperation
both with the ICTY and between those three States. We
are aware of the Prosecutor's continued concerns in
this regard, and we are alarmed by the announcement
made yesterday by Serbia, in a letter dated 4 December
2012 addressed to the Secretary-General, that it would
reduce its cooperation with the ICTY to the technical
level, despite the commitment expressed by the new
Serbian Government in its recent meetings with the
Prosecutor.

As Germany is nearing the end of its term as a
non-permanent member of the Council, I would like
to assure both the Council and the principals of both
Tribunals of our ongoing and full support for their work
in the future.

