Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his analysis of
the processes unfolding in Afghanistan. We share many
of the views in the Secretary-General's most recent
quarterly report (S/2019/935) and would like to make
the following comments.

We believe that UNAMA has an important role
to play in coordinating the international assistance
to Afghanistan. We have been carefully monitoring
the country's tense situation. Needless to say, we
are very concerned about the major acts of terrorism
that have been occurring regularly in various Afghan
cities, including with the use of suicide bombers.
Unfortunately, we are still seeing record numbers of
civilian victims, and women and children in particular.
Today Ms. Aisha Khurram shared heartfelt words and
testimony on the incalculable horrors that the ongoing
conflict has inflicted on the Afghan people. Indeed,
Afghan soldiers and police officers are dying at the
hands of terrorists, along with international workers,
including United Nations staff, as we heard from
Mr. Yamamoto. We are seriously concerned about the
continued presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. In spite of some
successes by the Afghan security forces, the insurgents
have been able to maintain their positions and
influence in the country. We are worried about ISIL's
sleeper cells in north-eastern Afghanistan, as well as
their diversifying methods and channels for recruiting
civilians, especially Afghan youths. That represents a
real threat to the security of both Afghanistan and its
neighbours, the countries of Central Asia and Russia's
southern regions.

We are also intensively monitoring developments
regarding the fight against drug trafficking in
Afghanistan. The drug threat remains a serious
problem not just for Afghanistan but for the region
and the whole world. Narcodollars are a source of
significant financial support for terrorism. We believe
it is extremely important to continue and to expand the
international efforts to combat that scourge. We are
ready to fulfil our obligations by assisting the collective
efforts against this threat, including through our active
participation in the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC). Russia has put its promises into
practice through its efforts to train narcotics squads
from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the countries of
Central Asia, as well as regular assistance under the
auspices of UNODC's global Paris Pact Initiative. We
are also upholding our commitments in this area within
the framework of regional organizations, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).

As a friend and partner to Afghanistan for
many years, Russia has traditionally advocated for
restoring the stable peace that this long-suffering
land has desired for so long. We consider promoting
an Afghan-led peace process especially important. We
are sincerely interested in achieving reconciliation and
a subsequent post-conflict settlement in the country
as soon as possible, and we are prepared to continue
providing comprehensive assistance in that regard.
That is what our efforts are aimed at, including
those based on the Moscow format and our help in
launching an intra-Afghan dialogue mechanism in
Moscow. We support a resumption of negotiations
between the United States and the Taliban. In that
context, we believe that the consultations among the
troika of the special representatives of Russia, China
and the United States involving the key regional
players are especially important to creating favourable
international conditions for further progress in the
national reconciliation process. We considered our
Pakistani partners' participation in the troika's past two
meetings, in Beijing in July and Moscow in October, to
be helpful.

Afghanistan is on the threshold of a new phase in
its life, in which the Afghan people themselves must
play the key role in solving the country's problems. We
support efforts aimed at ensuring that the upcoming
Afghanistan peace process is as inclusive as possible
and that all social and political forces in the country,
including the opposition, are involved. The intra-Afghan
meeting organized by the Afghan diaspora in Moscow
in February, with the participation of the leading
political parties in Afghanistan and representatives of
the Taliban, was a clear embodiment of the principle
widely endorsed by the international community of
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned dialogue for the
settlement of the conflict in the country.

It is more urgent than ever to ensure that the
potential of regional organizations is fully utilized,
especially the SCO, and we note the participation of
Afghanistan in SCO meetings as an observer. We want
to particularly highlight the mechanism of the SCO-
Afghanistan Contact Group and its signing of a road
map with the Government of Afghanistan. We also
see opportunities opening up for strengthening the
cooperation between Afghanistan and the CSTO.

The situation following the outcome of the
28 September presidential elections needs particular
attention. It is regrettable that difficulties and delays in
the vote-counting process have led to a destabilization
of the internal political situation and to mass protests.
We affirm our principled position that the expression of
the will of the people should help to unite the country
rather than divide it.

There can be no military solution to the crisis
in Afghanistan. The only way to resolve it is to use
political and diplomatic means to reach an Afghanistan-
wide agreement. We firmly believe that all the peace
initiatives and ongoing negotiations should serve to
unite the entire country and all Afghans, without
exception. It is close international cooperation,
particularly at the regional level, that will enable us to
achieve our common goal of restoring the country to a
land of enduring peace, stability and prosperity.

