Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome the holding of today's open
meeting, which we consider a valuable opportunity to
review the achievements of the international
community so far in the area of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, particularly at this time
when many regions are facing new forms of violence
and turmoil following rapid upheaval among their
peoples and in their political systems.

The United Arab Emirates reiterates its strong
condemnation of the serious and tragic crimes
committed against peaceful civilians, especially
women, children and humanitarian and media workers,
in areas of armed conflict. It wishes to emphasize that
fair trials and proportional punishment for perpetrators
and a system of legal accountability with no impunity
all constitute a critical step in developing strategies and
efforts to protect people.

We therefore call for the adoption and
implementation of clear, comprehensive and achievable
multilateral international and regional strategies that
support the political, security, legal and humanitarian
programmes being carried out by the United Nations in
collaboration with other international and regional
organizations with a view to protecting civilians in
armed conflict and in crisis areas, in accordance with
resolution 1674 (2006).

We also reaffirm that implementation of
international and regional multilateral protective
measures and plans must be based on principles of
neutrality, justice and objectivity, particularly in the
provision and coordination of adequate relief,
humanitarian assistance and protection of humanitarian
corridors, in order to ensure that assistance reaches
affected people in a timely manner and alleviates their
suffering. At the same time, we stress the need to
separate these strategic plans and programmes from the
conflict resolution process, in accordance with the
rules of international law.

The United Arab Emirates has played a
distinctive and transparent role in supporting efforts
aimed at protecting civilians in conflict areas. It was
among the first States to participate in international
humanitarian operations and has made valuable
contributions, including by providing various types of
humanitarian relief and medical assistance to affected
people, regardless of their affiliations or beliefs, in
many conflict areas in the world. The latest of these
tireless efforts is the United Arab Emirates' intensive
and ongoing effort to alleviate the humanitarian crisis
in Libya within the framework of resolution 1973
(2011).

In this regard, while we support the United
Nations efforts to address the critical humanitarian
situation of the Libyan people - including protection
of civilians, accelerating the delivery of humanitarian
supplies and ensuring the safety of humanitarian
workers - the United Arab Emirates affirms its
support for the Libyan people's legitimate aspirations
to determine their future through an inclusive political
process that will bring a lasting peace to their country.

We also affirm our commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Libya. We will continue to cooperate
with other international actors in their efforts to ensure
the protection of civilians in Libya and their access to
humanitarian assistance in accordance with Council
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).

In this context, we also call for all necessary
measures to be taken to protect Palestinian civilians
from the collective punishment and daily acts of
excessive violence committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against them on their own territory. These
measures must include the exertion of the necessary
pressure on Israel to remove its inhumane and illegal
blockade on the Gaza Strip in order to ensure that
adequate humanitarian supplies, including basic
construction materials, are delivered to the people of
the Gaza Strip to enable them to rebuild and
rehabilitate their institutions destroyed by the Israeli
machine since 2006.

We call for strengthening the exchange of
information, monitoring and reporting on crimes
against humanity in armed conflict. We also favour the
strengthening of the system to ensure that those
responsible for such crimes do not enjoy impunity, so
as to ensure that such crimes are not repeated. We also
advocate for the promotion of effective specialized
judicial proceedings to address such crimes and for the
development of national and international capacities in
the areas of verification and prosecution.

In conclusion, as part of its commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, the United
Arab Emirates will continue to actively participate in
and support various humanitarian relief programmes
and peacekeeping, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
mine clearance operations in a number of conflict-
affected areas, with a view to alleviating the suffering
of their inhabitants.
36
We hope that the deliberations of the Security
Council on this topic today will contribute to fostering
and coordinating international, regional and national
efforts aimed at protecting civilians in armed conflict
and violent crises, and to the development of tools and
applications to that end.

