The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and
Slovenia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Nikola S'pirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned

countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
It is so decided.

I invite the High Representative to take a seat at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2008/300, which
contains the text of a letter dated 6 May 2008 from the
Secretary-General transmitting the thirty-third report
on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajcak. I now
have the pleasure of giving him the floor.


