Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate, which enables non-
members of the Security Council to express their views
on the continuing deterioration of the situation in the
Middle East, which poses great danger to the security
of the region.

As the majority of representatives taking part in
this debate have done, the delegation of Argentina
would like to express its concern and sorrow at the
deepening crisis in the Middle East and at the suffering
of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. Extremely grave
events have taken place in recent weeks that have led
to a spiral of violence, revenge and reprisal that has
resulted in dozens of Israeli and Palestinian civilians
being killed or wounded.

Another suicide attack occurred on 4 October
2003, at Haifa, on the eve of Yom Kippur. That attack
set off increased violence on various levels. The killing
at a Haifa restaurant of 20 Israeli Jewish and Arab
citizens - including women, children and older
persons - once again underscored the irrationality and
barbarity of which terrorism is capable. We reiterate
our strongest possible condemnation of terrorism in all
its manifestations. We call for an end to such atrocities,
which do not further the Palestinian cause but which
instead do great damage to it, not only in the eyes of
Israeli public opinion but also in that of the world.

We reiterate that the Palestinian Authority must
take urgent measures to dismantle the terrorist
infrastructure and to arrest the individuals responsible
for planning such brutal attacks. According to the road
map, Palestinian security services are to be restructured
under a Ministry for the Interior that has real powers.
We hope that the efforts of Palestinian Prime Minister
Ahmed Korei to that end will be successful. We also
hope that all Palestinian leaders will ensure that that
objective is irreversibly achieved as soon as possible.

We recognize that Israel has a legitimate right to
defend itself from terrorist acts. However, we believe
that that right should be exercised in conformity with
international law. Specifically, Israel must refrain from
the use of excessive force in densely populated areas
and stop its policy of targeted assassinations and
collective punishment. It should also take steps to
improve living conditions in the occupied territories.
Along the same lines, and in keeping with the road
map, settlement activities on occupied territory should
also cease, including the so-called natural growth of
those settlements. The dismantling of illegal
settlements, which are an obstacle to peace, should also
commence.

Israel's construction of a wall on occupied
territory is one more reason for concern. It is also a
violation of international law. We therefore call for an
end to the ongoing construction of the wall, especially
along areas that do not follow the Green Line.
According to many available reports, the wall is
causing much inconvenience and disruption to
thousands of Palestinians who are being separated from
families, schools, hospitals, places of employment and
agricultural fields. All of that contributes to even
further deterioration of the economic and social
conditions in the West Bank.

Before concluding, I would briefly like to refer to
the situation in the region from the perspective of the
events of recent weeks.

On 6 October 2003, the Government of Argentina
issued a press release condemning the attack
perpetrated in violation of the norms of international
law and specific provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations against Syrian territory by five airplanes of the
Israeli air force. On that occasion my Government also
condemned the terrorist attacks carried out against
Israeli citizens, which leave behind a painful toll in
dead and wounded. The rising tension between Israel
and Lebanon and between Israel and Syria presents a
great danger to security in the entire region. We appeal
to the leaders of all the countries concerned to act
cautiously and to refrain from any measures that will
lead to an escalation of unforeseeable consequences.

The cost in human lives of the current state of
affairs is very high. It has become increasingly obvious
that there can be no military solution, much less a
terrorist solution, to this conflict. The sole route
available is that of mutual concessions, as described in
the road map. With courage and determination, the
necessary measures must be adopted to get the peace
process back and track and to make a reality of the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in the Middle East in peace and within secure
borders.

