Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his maiden briefing. We congratulate him
on his appointment and express our support to him as
he embarks on his heavy responsibilities of facilitating
a diplomatic solution for the Yemeni crisis. We find it
encouraging that he has already started engaging with
the parties and building the necessary cooperative
relationships that will be imperative in the revitalization
of the political process. Listening to the views of the
Yemenis themselves is indeed absolutely important.
We recognize that the crisis in Yemen requires a high
sense of urgency, but we also believe that support,
understanding and patience from all parties, including
the Council, are needed so that the new Special Envoy
can formulate a comprehensive way forward that will
be effective in ending the conflict. The Special Envoy
also emphasized that point in his briefing, and we look
forward to the new framework for negotiation, which he
plans to present in the coming two months.

We also thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his briefing, and we reiterate our
appreciation to the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners for their continued selfless service to provide
aid under difficult conditions.
As the war enters its fourth year, we remain deeply
concerned by the multifaceted and complex crisis in
Yemen, which continues to have a devastating impact
on civilians. In that regard, we thank the United Nations
and the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland
for hosting a high-level pledging event in Geneva
on 3 April. We also thank all donors for pledging to
provide more than $2 billion. We hope that the funds
pledged will be disbursed rapidly to finance the Yemen
2018 humanitarian response plan. As mentioned by
the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock during the event, in addition to the financial
aspect, the success of the plan to reach all Yemenis in
need of aid requires safe, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access.

We are still of the belief that the only solution to
the Yemeni crisis is a peaceful and inclusive Yemeni-
led political process that meets the legitimate demands
and aspirations of the Yemeni people, in full respect of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
We also believe that the concerns of countries in the
region need to be addressed. In that regard, we reiterate
our support for the presidential statement adopted on
15 March (S/PRST/2018/5) and the 28 March press
statement (SC/13270), which enabled the Council to
speak with one voice, underscoring, inter alia, the
need for all parties to return to dialogue as the only
means of delivering a negotiated political settlement.
We call on all parties to fully implement them and
engage constructively with Special Envoy Griffiths
in the resumption of political dialogue and agreement
on the cessation of hostilities. They should seize the
appointment of the new Special Envoy as an opportunity
and demonstrate the necessary political will to work
with him towards reaching a deal, which today he said
is possible, and bring an end to the war.

Finally, we believe that the international solidarity
demonstrated during the pledging event should also
be repeated to find a durable political solution to end
the worst humanitarian tragedy of our time. We cannot
agree more with what the Special Envoy said with
respect to the strategic importance of ending the crisis
in Yemen, not only for the sake of Yemenis themselves,
who have endured so much over the past four years,
but also for the sake ofpeace and stability in the region
and, indeed, the world.

