Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): In addition to
the points reflected in the statement delivered earlier
today on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) Group, of which we are a member,
we would like to contribute the following brief points
on the working methods of the Security Council.

We value the efforts made by the Council over
the past few years, as reflected in presidential note
S/2010/507 and the update thereof (S/20l6/6l9). Taken
together, those measures have led to real improvements
by creating more transparency and accountability in
the Council's work; however, their implementation
often remains inconsistent.

Technical and practical improvements are important.
We will continue working with others to propose
meaningful changes to the Council in order to further
improve its performance. In particular, we would like
to encourage an open process in the appointment of
the Chairs of subsidiary bodies - a change that, in
our view, would be a long-awaited improvement. We
also believe that the most meaningful change that
the Council can make would be in the way that it
handles some of its biggest tasks, in which the entire
membership has a direct stake. I would like to highlight
three of those key challenges.

First, the Council's reputation has been undermined
by its inability to prevent and effectively respond to
mass atrocities. The failures in Srebrenica and Rwanda
are permanent stains on the Council's record. In spite
of all the calls of "never again", little has happened in
practice. The case of Syria in particular illustrates on
a daily basis the continued paralysis and dysfunctional
nature of the Council in the face of a situation that is
destabilizing an entire region and that is characterized
by the systematic commission of mass atrocities by the
parties to the conflict.

Therefore, the code of conduct on mass atrocities
formulated by the ACT group, and mentioned
frequently in today's debate, provides a sign of hope.
It has been supported by 112 States. We call on the rest
of the membership to support that important political
commitment, and we look forward to discussing its
implementation with Council members and the relevant
entities in the Secretariat. We also look forward to
tangible progress in the French-Mexican initiative
on restrictions in the use of the veto in dealing with
situations involving mass atrocities.

Secondly, the process of appointing the next
Secretary-General has generated considerable interest
beyond the confines of this building, not least because
of the significantly improved process in the General
Assembly. For the first time, the entire membership
has an opportunity to engage with the candidates
publicly and to assess their qualifications at first hand.
Important as those steps are, they must be matched
by the Security Council's handling of its part in the
appointment process. As a first step, the results of the
informal voting rounds, in which the Council will start
engaging this week, should be made transparent for the
benefit of the entire membership.

However, the manner in which the Council frames
its recommendation to the General Assembly for
the latter's final consideration of the draft resolution
appointing the Secretary-General will be of the utmost
importance. For the sake of institutional balance, the
Council should limit its recommendation to one or more
names for consideration by the Assembly. In turn, the
Assembly should forge an agreement on such elements
as the duration of the mandate, whether the mandate
should consist ofa single term - as we believe it should
7 and on other issues that we hope will be identified in
the course of the next week.

Finally, we would like to emphasize the need for
the Council to perform more effectively its role as
enforcer of accountability for the most serious crimes
under international law. In situations such as that of
Syria, but also in many other post-conflict situations,
the Council should ask for accountability as part of
a reconciliation process that can lead to long-term
stability and peace. Where it is possible and realistic,
the countries in question should be offered assistance
with their efforts to ensure such accountability under
their national systems, with the help of international
entities where necessary.

Referrals to the International Criminal Court are
of course also an option for the Council, provided that
they be accompanied by genuine political will to ensure
accountability, instead of being the result of transient
political expediency. The referrals made thus far have
produced very limited results and have been a mixed
blessing, both for the victims of the crimes in question
and for the Court itself.

