Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom shares the deep concern expressed around this
table about the violence and bloodshed which, in recent
weeks, have once again visited this troubled part of the
world. The resolution which the Council has adopted today
is one element in a concerted international effort to prevent
a repetition in Kosovo of the cycle of violence we have
already seen elsewhere in the region.

On 9 March the United Kingdom hosted a meeting
of Foreign Ministers of Contact Group countries in
London. The Group agreed a plan of action aimed at
putting a stop to further violence and paving the way for
a serious political dialogue between the authorities in
Belgrade and representatives of the Kosovar Albanian
community.

Meeting again in Bonn on 25 March, the Contact
Group concluded that while there had been some progress
in the intervening period, included the belated agreement
to implement the 1996 Education Agreement, the steps
taken by the Belgrade authorities towards meeting the
requirements set out in London did not go far enough.

In adopting this resolution, the Security Council
sends an unmistakable message: that by acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter, the Council considers that the
situation in Kosovo constitutes a threat to international
peace and security in the Balkans region. It says to
Belgrade that repression in Kosovo will not be tolerated
by the international community; and to the Kosovar side,
it says that terrorism - in whatever guise and for
whatever purpose - is unacceptable.

The United Kingdom's record against terrorism is
firm. But terrorism cannot be a pretext for the use of
force against a civilian population. Belgrade cannot pass
off the repressive acts of recent weeks as purely an
internal affair. Human rights abuses are a matter for us
all. And we have a particular responsibility to reduce
tension in the region before it causes instability in
neighbouring countries.

The United Kingdom does not support separatism or
independence in Kosovo. But we expect Belgrade to grant
Kosovo an enhanced status including self-administration.
Getting the authorities in Belgrade and the Kosovar
Albanian community to start a constructive dialogue
without preconditions about the differences between them
is the only chance of reaching a peaceful settlement.
Repressive police actions of the kind we have witnessed
in recent weeks serve merely to undermine the moderates
on both sides and to increase support for terrorists.

The United Kingdom looks forward to the day when
we can welcome the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into
the family of democratic nations of Europe. But we
cannot do so while Belgrade fails to meet the standards

 

that the rest of Europe has set itself. President Milosevic
has a choice: he must decide whether he wishes to consign
the future of his State and its people to further isolation and
mounting international pressure, or whether he wants to see
progress in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's relations
with the European Union and the rest of the international
community of the kind already being made by its
neighbours.

