Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for this
opportunity to address once again the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome
the Secretariat's ongoing commitment to this matter,
and in that regard I thank Mr. John Holmes for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277) and, in particular, for the tireless work of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), in particular its work on the ground to help
the victims of disasters and catastrophes.

France endorses the statement to be made by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.

We have just marked the 150th anniversary of the
Red Cross and will soon be commemorating the
sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. Yet
despite the commitment of the international community
and the mobilization of the Security Council, violations
of international humanitarian law are increasing in
number and in gravity.

For France, respect for international humanitarian
law is not negotiable. As President Sarkozy recalled on
4 May, on the ninetieth anniversary of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies,
all parties to armed conflict, States and armed groups
alike, must respect such law. That obligation is not
subordinate to the imperatives of combating terrorism;
nor is it conditional on respect for such law by other
parties. We reaffirmed that principle at the time of the
offensive of the Sri Lankan army against the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam, as we do with respect to the
fight against terrorist and extremist movements in
Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Philippines. The Council
could and should intervene more strongly to translate
that principle into reality.

By calling for the 29 January debate on respect
for international humanitarian law, France wished to
initiate a process. We are pleased today that the
Secretary-General has decided to consult with members
of the Security Council with a View to making
recommendations for action at our next open debate on
the subject.

Protection mandates for peacekeeping operations
clearly are among the means for action at the Council's
disposal. In the most recent review of the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
protection of civilians was given top priority for the
Mission. Since then, the Mission has made efforts to
carry out that task more effectively, by seeking greater
mobility and scope for reaction by its troops, deploying
joint military-civilian protection units and establishing
pilot rapid response projects. It has set up a high-level
human rights protection team. If such measures prove
satisfactory, they could be extended to other United
Nations missions.

In Southern Sudan, we call on the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) to continue and expand
its efforts to prevent ethnic confrontation and, when it
arises, to minimize its consequences. I join our Japanese
colleague in recalling that the responsibility to protect
civilians lies first and foremost with Government
authorities. A peacekeeping operation can act when it
those authorities fail to do so or it can support their
action, but that by no means diminishes the primary
responsibility of the States that host such operations.

We welcome progress in the joint study
commissioned by OCHA and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations. We participated in financing
it. We hope that the outcome will be presented to the
Security Council and that it will be followed up in the
more general context of our deliberations on
peacekeeping missions.

Protection of civilians is a crucial element of the
initiative we have launched jointly with the United
Kingdom. Preliminary work is under way in the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Takasu of Japan, to help
us better understand the difficulties in implementing
complex mandates. An initial progress report on the
French-United Kingdom initiative should be issued in
August.

Never have so many humanitarian personnel been
deployed on the ground, yet never have there been so
many constraints on their activities. States have the
responsibility to ensure safe and unimpeded access for
humanitarian personnel, international organizations
and non-governmental organizations and for their
supplies and equipment. We welcome the inclusion in
the report of the Secretary-General of an annex on
constraints on humanitarian access. We hope that in
future reports that general annex will be supplemented
with information on country-specific situations. We
reiterate our request that such reports deal specifically
and in a detailed manner with the question of
protection of civilians.

We welcome the meeting of the Expert Group on
the Protection of Civilians in Cote d'Ivoire, Afghanistan
and the Sudan. There will soon be a discussion on the
adequacy of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for the protection
needs in Darfur. In order to make effective use of the
aide-memoire (S/PRST/2009/ 1, annex) on the protection
of civilians that we adopted in January, the Expert
Group must monitor the growing needs of civilians on
the ground on a more regular basis during the mandate.
Its discussions must also be held sufficiently in
advance of the negotiations drawing up the mandates,
so that the conclusions can be integrated into them.
Lastly, women and children deserve special
attention. The Security Council Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians could broach the issue of
follow-up of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008) in order to ensure better
implementation on the ground.

Effective protection of civilians clearly entails a
resolute fight against the culture of impunity. The
allegations of violations of the international
humanitarian law must be the subject of an impartial
and independent inquiry. Those investigations should
involve all parties. The Gaza conflict showed that. In
that region of the world, as elsewhere, all civilians,
whether Palestinian, Israeli or other, must be protected.

States must try and punish those who violate
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In the Republic of the Congo, for example, that means
in-depth reform of the security, legal and prison
systems. Failing that, international criminal law must
be able to try the most serious crimes, and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's cooperation in
that regard is exemplary.

France calls on all States to adhere to the Rome
Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court. Arms and submunitions do unacceptable damage
to civilian populations. A draft law is being considered
by the French Parliament to authorize the ratification
of the convention adopted in Oslo. France is also at the
forefront of the movement to attain a robust and
binding arms trade treaty that will take full account of
the requirements of international humanitarian law.

To conclude, I would like to underscore that,
while the General Assembly prepares to debate the
responsibility to protect, it is urgent to make that
concept operational. It is an ambitious concept, and it
is not solely a matter of the Security Council
intervening in mid-crisis to stop the most atrocious
crimes, which we are all, of course, determined to do.
Above all, we must act in advance to avert those
crimes and to strengthen the early-warning and
monitoring systems in the risk areas. France will not
spare its efforts to achieve a consensus on that point in
the next few months.

