Mr. Pires (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): Allow me to
express my deepest appreciation for this opportunity to
convey to this highest entity of the coalition of nations,
on behalf of the Government legitimately established
for the eighth legislature and chosen by the majority of
the Guinean people, current realities in Guinea-Bissau,
and to request approval for a targeted resolution aimed
at facilitating the country's return to democratic
normality.

As the Council is aware, on the night of 12 April
a self-proclaimed military command decided to carry
out a violent takeover of the presidency of the country,
after having made an attempt on the life of the Prime
Minister and presidential candidate, imprisoning him
along with the interim President of the Republic. The
latest news indicates that their intention is to dissolve
all institutions of sovereignty and establish new
transitional structures in the country.

At any time and in any circumstances that would
constitute a flagrant violation of the law and would
thus run counter to the universal principle of the
subordination of defence and security forces to a
democratically established political regime. In the case
of Guinea-Bissau, this rebellion is particularly serious
because it is the result of a known pattern of behaviour
that the armed forces have exhibited several times;
because it is designed to reverse the will of the
Guinean electorate regarding their choice for the new
President of the Republic; and because it masks the
unstated intention of promoting certain political
elements.

Although they have not claimed official
responsibility for this action - a perfect illustration of
the nature of those involved - as is well known to all,
the current military leadership are the perpetrators,
headed specifically by the Chief of Staff of the armed
forces, Lieutenant General Antonio Indjai. The
motivation behind it is to undermine the ongoing
process of reform and assure his continuing
collaboration with organized crime and drug trafficking
in Guinea-Bissau. No less serious is the lack of moral
and political authority of the main opposition party and
its leader, who, aware of their inability to attract the
12-30011
popular vote, resorted to this tactic to subvert order and
attempt to impose their will on the Guinean people.

As I stand here before the Council, we do not
know where and under what conditions the interim
President of the Republic and its Prime Minister, the
leader of the largest political party and recipient of
49 per cent of the votes in the first round of
presidential elections, are being held. But the wave of
persecution and fear created by the military junta since
the night of 12 April is not limited to them. The
President of the Supreme Court has taken refuge in a
diplomatic mission; the whereabouts of various
Government members, heads of other institutions and
individuals opposed to this oppression are uncertain,
while their homes are looted by uniformed and armed
elements and their families are attacked.

For informational purposes, let me give a brief
and concise account of the main arguments of the self-
proclaimed military command, the political parties
supporting them and the opponents of the abruptly
interrupted electoral process.

Concerning the elections, there have been
allegations of fraud and that the process left out a
considerable number of voters who turned 18 years of
age after the last census. According to established
practice in Guinea-Bissau, the elections were observed
by national missions from civil society and several
international institutions, notably the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union (AU) and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), as well as a
group of British parliamentarians. All declared that the
process was free, transparent and fair, and that any
imperfections in no way compromised the results of the
first round.

Concerning the exclusion from voting of some
young people, the dissenting parties' commitment to
the truth should compel them to recognize that they
themselves demanded that the 60-day period allowed
for the scheduling of elections, at the end of hearings,
be strictly observed. Furthermore, that position of the
dissenting parties cannot be dissociated from the
statement made by the Chief of Staff at a conciliation
meeting convened by the interim President, in which
he said that he reserved the right to be the arbiter of the
electoral process due to the lack of consensus among
the candidates. In other words, the decision of the
National Electoral Commission and the ruling of the
12-30011
Supreme Court itself should be ignored in favour of an
assessment and decision by the Chief of Staff.

The second accusation of the perpetrators of the
coup d'etat against the Government concerns the
existence of a secret agreement aimed, they said, at
destroying the armed forces of Guinea-Bissau. That is
a ridiculous claim, since the alleged agreement is a
letter addressed to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, in
which the Government requests and justifies the need
for the Security Council to establish a peacekeeping
force for Guinea-Bissau. That letter supports an earlier
one sent to the Secretary-General a few days before by
the President of the ECOWAS Commission, requesting
virtually the same thing. Is a claim that the United
Nations would provide forces to destroy the armed
forces of a State to be taken seriously?

However, the list of insubordinate and
undisciplined acts by the military towards the political
regime is much longer. I invite the Council to refer to
the memorandum supplied on this subject. So as not to
waste members' time, I will summarize them here.

On 1 April 2010, in a display of force and a clear
act of disrespect for the institutions of the Republic,
Lieutenant General Antonio Indjai invaded the
premises of the United Nations in Bissau to "liberate"
Rear Admiral Bubo Na Tchuto. He subsequently
kidnapped the Army Chief of Staff, General Jose
Zamora Induta, and imprisoned Prime Minister Carlos
Gomes Junior for several hours, in order to later put
pressure on the Government and President Bacai Sanha
to appoint him and Bubo Na Tchuto chiefs of staff of
the army and navy, respectively. They were confirmed
in office through coercion and threats to the country's
civil authorities, the Prime Minister and President of
the Republic.

The President of the Republic Joao Bernardo
Vieira, General Tagme Na Wai, General Ansumane
Mane, General Verissimo Correia Seabra, Commodore
Lamine Sanha, Deputy Helder Proenca, Governor
Baciro Dabo and, more recently, Colonel Samba Djalo,
were summarily executed without benefit of a serious
investigation.

Police in Bissau were beaten for intervening in a
traffic accident caused by the son of Chief of Staff
Antonio Indjai. On the eve of the most recent elections,
police were publicly beaten and humiliated, in front of
representatives of the national and foreign press, for
having dispersed, without any use of violence, an
unauthorized demonstration in front of the National
Electoral Commission.

Following that incident with the police, General
Antonio Indjai, in a clear demonstration of force and
with unclear intentions and without consulting the
Government, ordered all police to surrender their
weapons. They were thus prevented from pursuing
their mission of maintaining public order in Guinea-
Bissau.

In terms of financial management and the
payment of military salaries, the military has never
accepted the rules of transparency already in place
across the public service. In that connection, there is no
knowledge of the exact number and names of
recipients and they never deigned to justify the
exorbitant sums regularly withdrawn from the public
treasury, presumably for food for the military.

With regard to the judicial police investigation of
drug trafficking, various military members were
arrested and put in judicial police jails on several
occasions, but military leaders then forced their
transfer to military prisons where they were
immediately released. Their cases remain pending.

Aircraft belonging to drug dealers land on various
improvised tarmacs, with the authorization of the
military leadership and with total disregard for the
legitimate civil authorities of Guinea-Bissau. Recently,
it was reported that an aircraft landed on the
Jugudul/Bambadinca road, counting on the protection
of the military, under the orders of the Army Chief of
Staff.

This is not even remotely the first time that the
Council has convened a meeting to discuss the political
situation in Guinea-Bissau. It is important to note that
the Council's attention and commitment, combined
with the action of the international community, has
allowed substantial progress in recent years, despite the
difficulties, not only in terms of governance but also in
the creation of social and political structures capable of
stabilizing the country permanently. That is seen by
certain elements, particularly by the current head of the
military, as a threat to their excesses and arbitrariness,
and is leading them to commit the barbarous acts that
are being carried out in Guinea-Bissau.

It is therefore urgent that concrete steps be taken.
There is a need to affirm the democratic rule of law in
Guinea-Bissau and that, in the current context,
6

inevitably requires immediate and mandatory reform of
those involved in the coup. It also requires a
re-launching of the defence and security sector reform
programme, under the coordination of the United
Nations and with the participation of the partners of
Guinea-Bissau, in particular the ECOWAS, the African
Union and the CPLP. It also requires the restoration of
legitimately established constitutional bodies and the
completion of the electoral process to elect the
President of the Republic.

I take this opportunity to welcome the clear,
specific and unambiguous manner in which the
international community, with a unified voice,
condemned the 12 April coup d'etat, with particular
emphasis on the pronouncements of ECOWAS, the AU,
the CPLP, the United Nations, the European Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and
many countries at the bilateral level.

We testify to the extraordinary performance of
the Angolan Technical and Military Assistance Mission
in Guinea-Bissau, in the framework of military and
technical cooperation with the sisterly Republic of
Angola, which has been widely acclaimed throughout
Guinean society, at first by the military authorities
themselves. In that context, we welcome the openness
and willingness of the CPLP, ECOWAS and the AU to
coordinate, under the umbrella of the United Nations,
the provision of the operating units necessary for the
continuation of that mission and the implementation of
the memorandum of understanding between the CPLP
and ECOWAS for the reform of the defence and
security sectors.

In the light of those Dantean events that have
occurred over recent years, perpetrated exclusively by
the military in Guinea-Bissau, the Government and
people of my country have no doubt as to the way
forward. I stand before the Council on their behalf and
I beg for the deployment of a peacekeeping force to
Guinea-Bissau, authorized by the Security Council,
with a broad mandate and over an extended period of
time, in order to definitively turn the page and allow
for the establishment of a legitimate democratic State
in the Republic of Guinea-Bissau.

