Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, on
behalf of my Government, I would like to commend
the initiative of the Croatian presidency of the Security
Council to hold this debate, which indeed offers a
timely opportunity to engage in open deliberations with
a view to strengthening international solidarity and the
leading role of the United Nations in global counter-
terrorism activities.

We remember all victims of terrorist acts and
express our condolences to the people of India and the
families of those who suffered as a result of the recent
terrorist attacks on Mumbai. Azerbaijan strongly
condemns terrorism as one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security and is making
sustained efforts to contribute to the international
community's efforts aimed at consistent,
comprehensive and coordinated responses to prevent
and combat terrorism.

In addition to the potential threats facing us as a
result of our proximity to hotbeds of conflict and
regions that harbour major terrorist groups and are
sources of proliferation problems, Azerbaijan is a
direct target of specific externally sponsored terrorist
activity. Since the late 19805, neighbouring Armenia
openly encroached upon the territory of Azerbaijan
and, in addition to launching combat operations there,
resorted to deliberate terrorist attacks against my
country's citizens and critical infrastructure as a way to
implement its annexationist policy. In total, as a result
of the terrorist acts against Azerbaijan, more than 2,000
of Azerbaijan's citizens have been killed, the majority
of them women, elderly persons and children.

Indeed, terrorism is closely related to aggressive
separatism. Areas of armed conflict - especially
territories under foreign military occupation - often
create conditions conducive to exploitation by
terrorists. Thus, the continuing occupation of a part of
Azerbaijan's territory by Armenia provides fertile
ground for terrorist and related activities.

Against that background, we are seriously
concerned, inter alia, by the fact that conventional arms
control mechanisms are not effective in such
territories. The accumulation of a great number of
armaments and ammunition there, beyond the reach of
international control, poses a serious threat to regional
peace and security. Our particular concern relates to the
possibility of the use by terrorist groups of specific
weapons, including individual anti-aircraft missile
systems.
Those trends have had an immediate impact on
the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. It is no
accident that Armenia's military expenditures,
calculated in terms of gross domestic product, are
among the highest in the world. We regret that
members of the international community - especially
those mediating the negotiation process - show a

certain indifference to this problem, which in fact
negatively affects the prospects for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict as soon as possible.

In this regard, we deem it necessary to take more
efficient measures aimed at preventing those who are
in effective military and political control of occupied
territories from acquiring conventional weapons and to
disclose their attempts to deny responsibility. Equally,
reinforcement of existing non-proliferation
mechanisms acquires additional significance and must
be a serious part of the international effort.

An important condition of counter-terrorist
activity is that States refrain from organizing,
financing, encouraging, providing, training or
otherwise directly or indirectly supporting terrorist
activities. Furthermore, insofar as international terrorist
activities still rely on physical movement to reach
another country in order to promote their messages and
in certain instances to collect material resources, it is
important that States take appropriate practical
measures to ensure that their respective territories are
not used for such activities, especially when they are
aimed at undermining the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States.

Terrorists must never be allowed to create a
pretext for their actions. All terrorist acts constitute
serious crimes; they are unjustifiable and unacceptable
and must be unequivocally condemned and prosecuted.

The absence of a clear definition of terrorism in
international law merely hampers the efforts of the
international community to bring not only individual
terrorists and organizations to account, but also States
that promote, support or finance terrorist activities. In
this regard, Azerbaijan reiterates its determination to
make every effort to reach an agreement on a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
that will serve as an effective instrument to counter
terrorism.

The war on terrorism should not be used to target
any particular religion or culture. Today, we are living
at a time of heightened religious awareness, which in
certain instances takes on exaggerated forms and
sometimes is maliciously exploited to fuel conflicts on
ethnic, religious or cultural grounds. In recent years,
unacceptable attacks against Islam in some countries
confirm the vital necessity of joint efforts and dialogue
to counter such defamatory manifestations and
misconceptions.

Constructive interaction between different
cultures and religions, including in the framework of
such initiatives as the culture of peace and the Alliance
of Civilizations, should continue playing a special role
in contributing to peace and mutual understanding and
thus to the efficient implementation of counter-
terrorism measures.

