Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let me
first congratulate you personally, Sir, and wish Italy
every success in its presidency of the Security Council.
I also thank you for your high praise of the French
presidency and assure you of France's full support.

I also thank the High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Filippo Grandi, for his important briefing and pay
tribute more broadly to him and his teams for their
outstanding work and exemplary commitment. In the
words of the President of the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel
Macron, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is for France "the guardian
of our lodestar". It is a compass that must guide our
action, and France will always be at its side so as to
guarantee refugees the protection they need and that it
is our moral, legal and political duty to provide.

The insecurity and massive violations of human
rights that fuel conflicts, as well as the impunity
that accompanies them, are the primary causes of
displacement, which in turn destabilizes States. It is
therefore up to the Security Council to remedy this
situation in the context of its mandate as guardian of
international peace and security. I also recall that the
forced transfer of populations is likely to constitute a
crime against humanity as defined by the Rome Statute.
The Security Council has the responsibility to prevent
such crimes.
As the High Commissioner said, there have never
been more refugees in the world than in 2017 - more
than 66 million people in total, more than 10 million of
whom are stateless. I should like to address a number
of situations he addressed that are of particular concern
to us.

First, I would like to express our deep concern
about the humanitarian situation of the refugees, mostly
Rohingya, who have fled and continue to flee Burma.
France has tirelessly condemned the attacks perpetrated
since 25 August against the civilian population in
Rakhine state. The ethnic cleansing has already forced
more than 600,000 people - the majority of whom are
women and children - to cross the border in the hope
of surviving, without counting the internally displaced,
whose numbers we do not know.

We have three specific priorities for resolving
this crisis. They have been relayed and stressed to the
Burmese authorities, notably at the Security Council's
Arria Formula meeting that France organized with the
United Kingdom, with the participation of Mr. Kofi
Annan, during its presidency last month. The High
Commissioner spoke at that meeting. In the short term,
the military operations of the Burmese army must stop,
and safe and unimpeded access to humanitarian aid
must be restored in order to allow the safe, voluntary
and sustainable return of Rohingya refugees to their
country. The key to a solution lies in compliance with
those three requirements.

I wish to reaffirm France's support for Bangladesh,
which has opened its borders and welcomed hundreds
of thousands of Rohingya refugees. The international
community must continue to support Bangladesh in
its efforts. At the donors' conference in Geneva on
23 October, France contributed almost €3 million.
I would also like to stress the need for the dialogue
between Burma and Bangladesh on the return of
refugees to include UNHCR. That is a critical point
on which I must insist, in support of the statement just
made in that regard by Mr. Grandi.

Finally, the safe, voluntary and sustainable return
of Rohingya refugees will ultimately depend on the
effective consideration of the root causes of the crisis,
and particularly the question of citizenship and equal
rights for all persons belonging to the Rohingya
community. France will remain fully engaged,
together with the United Kingdom and its partners, in
developing a strong and united Council response. It is
time to translate our words into action, and we must do
so urgently in response to the ethnic cleansing taking
place before our very eyes.

In Africa, the situation in the Central African
Republic is particularly worrisome, with the number
of Central African refugees in neighbouring countries
similar to the level we experienced at the height of
the crisis in 2013. This situation is the consequence
of the deterioration of the security situation that has
been observed for several months in the east and north-
west of the country, owing to the growing number of
clashes between armed groups, whose sole purpose is
to monopolize territories and resources and discredit
the Central African authorities and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).

This spiral must be interrupted and a positive
dynamic revived, as the Secretary-General said during
his recent visit to the Central African Republic. In that
context, the forthcoming renewal of the MINUSCA
mandate should allow us to increase the Mission's
human resources and refocus its action on the priorities
of protecting civilians, supporting the political process
and humanitarian access.

Finally, I would like to return to the humanitarian
situation in Syria, which remains extremely worrying.
More than 11 million Syrians have been uprooted by
the conflict, while some 6.3 million are internally
displaced and suffer limited access to humanitarian
assistance. The plight of internally displaced persons in
eastern Ghouta, Idlib governorate and around the berm
is particularly tragic. In addition, 5 million refugees
have taken refuge in Syria's neighbouring countries.
On behalf of France, I again thank Lebanon, Jordan and
Turkey for hosting a large majority of those refugees.

Hosting refugees is not only a moral duty, but also
an obligation under our international commitments.
In meeting these challenges, we have an imperative
to provide legal and safe channels for those in need
of protection, in particular by strengthening the fight
against traffickers and smugglers. It is in that spirit
that last month France established the first protection
missions for the resettlement of refugees in Europe in
the framework of the Central Mediterranean action
plan adopted in August with our partners.

Hosting refugees is also important in terms of
solidarity with countries neighbouring conflict zones,
which are on the front lines of these large-scale
displacements - whether they are the neighbouring
States of Syria, the countries of the Lake Chad basin
or the Horn of Africa, or more recently, Bangladesh.
In order to support their efforts, France has decided
to increase its financial aid to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration by
€10 million in support of such States in the Middle East
and Africa. This solidarity also requires the sharing
of responsibilities. That is why France has made the
commitment to resettle 10,000 refugees from Turkey,
Lebanon, Jordan, the Niger and Chad by 2019.

As rightly pointed out by High Commissioner
Grandi, only a comprehensive approach will deliver an
effective and lasting response to the challenges posed
by the increase in forced displacement. The Security
Council has a particular responsibility to contribute
to identifying and implementing this new approach.
Mr. Grandi may rest assured of France's steadfast
commitment to that end at his side.

