Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): Over the past two weeks,
developments in the north-east of Syria have been the
subject of lengthy discussions. Various views have been
expressed, which is fine. We are all entitled to hold our
own Views. But we are not entitled to our own facts. I
therefore view today's meeting as a platform for me to

set the record straight with regard to Operation Peace
Spring and the ensuing developments.

Operation Peace Spring was a limited cross-border
counter-terrorism operation to fight such terrorist
organizations as the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), the
Democratic Union Party (PYD), the Kurdish People's
Protection Units (YPG) and Da'esh. I therefore flatly
reject and strongly condemn any representation of
our counter-terrorism operations as an offensive or
aggression. We all very well know, condemn and fight
Da'esh, which is responsible for many inhuman actions,
violence and terrorism. Turkey has been at the forefront
of the fight against Da'esh. As an active member of the
Global Coalition against Da'esh since its inception,
Turkey has fought against Da'esh in Syria more than
any other country and paid the heaviest price. Turkey is
the only country that engaged in hand to hand combat
against Da'esh in Syria.

However, there is a deliberate effort to conceal
or forget the realities about the PKK/YPG, so let me
remind the Council about this group with a few facts.
As widely recognized and according to the United
States Intelligence Community's 2018 Worldwide
Threat Assessment, the PYD/YPG is the Syrian militia
of the PKK. This fact was also recently recognized by
the President of the United States. And the PKK, as
we should all know by now, is designated as a terrorist
group by the European Union (EU), NATO and the
United States. However, some Member States have
provided heavy weapons, ammunition and training to
PKK/YPG under the assumption that it was acceptable
to use a terrorist organization against another terrorist
organization, inthis case pitting the PKK againstDa'esh.

Unsurprisingly, those weapons have been used to
target Turkey and civilians in Syria, about which we
have repeatedly warned the countries providing such
weapons, but to no avail. Perhaps a few Turkish and
Syrian civilian souls were seen as acceptable collateral
damage in the fight against terrorism and against Da'esh.
Yet the PKK/YPG did not stop there. They released
Da'esh terrorists so that they could conduct terrorist
activities in Turkey or north-west Syria. According to
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, the
PKK/YPG has changed the demographics of the region
by expelling local Arab, Kurdish and Turkmen people
from their own lands. Hundreds of thousands of Syrian
Kurds have fled their homes for safety in Turkey and
northern Iraq as a result of the oppression by the PKK/
YPG. Those who are opposed to the extremist ideology
of the PKK/YPG either go missing or are killed.

In a very short time, the area controlled by PKK/
YPG became a testing ground for a new totalitarian
terrorist State, so the idea of supporting one terrorist
organization to eliminate another failed once again.
Perhaps that was why the States Members of the United
Nations initially committed to prevent and combat
terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations.

From the very first day, the objectives of Operation
Peace Spring have been clear: to eliminate the long-
standing existential terrorist threat along our border
with Syria, enforce Syria's territorial integrity and
unity, protect the local population and create an
environment conducive to the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of Syrians to their homes. The
Operation was conducted in full compliance with
international law and international humanitarian law. It
only targeted terrorists and their hideouts, weapons and
vehicles. We took all necessary measures to prevent any
harm to civilians and damage to civilian infrastructure.
These are some of the reasons why the legitimate
representatives of the Syrian people - the National
Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces, the interim Government, tribal leaders and
representatives of minorities, including the Syrian
Christian communities - supported the Operation.

On 17 October, we agreed with the United States
on future joint steps to address the legitimate security
concerns of Turkey, including enforcement of a safe
zone by the Turkish Armed Forces, the withdrawal of
YPG and the reappropriation of their heavy weaponry.
On the night of 22 October, the United States side
confirmed that the withdrawals of the YPG from
the safe zone was completed. In response, Turkey
declared that there was no further need to conduct a
new operation outside of the Operation Peace Spring
area because, on the same day, President Erdogan
and President Putin agreed on a memorandum of
understanding. Accordingly, the established status
quo in the current Operation Peace Spring area, whose
width is 32 kilometres, will be preserved. Russian
military police and Syrian border guards will facilitate
the removal of YPG elements and their weapons to a
distance no less than 30 kilometres from our borders
outside the Operation Peace Spring area.

Following the removal of YPG/PKK, we will have
joint Russian/Turkish patrols in the west and east of the
Operation Peace Spring area at 10 kilometres from our
border, except Qamishli city. All PKK/YPG elements
and their weapons will also be removed from Manbij
and Tell Rifaat. A joint monitoring and verification
mechanism will be established to oversee and coordinate
the implementation of the memorandum.

Following the successful conclusion of those
diplomatic efforts, Turkey decided to permanently
halt Operation Peace Spring on 22 October. We would
like to thank both our American and Russian friends
for acknowledging our legitimate security concerns
and accepting to work with us against PKK/YPG. Our
common efforts have prevented the establishment of a
terrorist State in northern Syria. This may not be good
news for some, but it is a very important step in the
political process towards re-establishing peace and
security in Syria.

There are now a number of issues on which we must
all focus. One of them is the future of detained Da'esh
terrorists. We have already announced that we will take
over the custody of Da'esh elements and their family
members held in detention facilities and camps in the
current Operation Peace Spring area. We are ready
to work with the countries of origin and international
organizations for the rehabilitation of spouses and
children who have not participated in crimes. But we
all know that the only sustainable solution remains the
repatriation of all foreign terrorist fighters and their
families to their countries of origin. It is time to have
a frank discussion about this issue. Stripping people of
their nationalities and dumping them elsewhere is not
the way to fight against terror. It is the way to wash
one's hands of the situation.

The second issue I would like to raise is the
importance of ensuring the flow of humanitarian
assistance in coordination with the United Nations. The
first cross-border humanitarian assistance convoy from
Turkey reached Tel Abyad on 15 October. There is now
a continuous flow of humanitarian-assistance items
and services, including food, sanitation, shelter and
health care. We will increase humanitarian operations
in the light of the needs on the ground. We will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations in addressing humanitarian
needs. An office dedicated to coordinating the delivery
of cross-border assistance into the region has already
been established in Akcakale, on the Turkish side of
the border.

Following Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's
visit to the border provinces two weeks ago, we
established a great direct communication channel
on humanitarian issues between the United Nations
and the Turkish Foreign Minister. The first positive
outcome was the reparation of a water-treatment system
servicing more than 400,000 people.

The deconfliction mechanism, already in place with
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) in order to protect civilian infrastructure and
humanitarian personnel in north-west Syria, has also
been expanded to cover the north-east. So far, OCHA
has shared the coordinates of 425 civilian locations
and convoys with the Turkish authorities. Any report
of damage to the civilian infrastructure receives due
attention by our authorities.

Thirdly, we must also focus on how to help displaced
people. Following the two previous operations in Syria,
more than 365,000 people returned voluntarily to their
homes and lands. We will pursue the same model in
north-eastern Syria. We will make every effort to ensure
that those who choose to return to their homeland fully
enjoy their basic rights. I repeat that all returns will be
voluntary, safe and dignified, in close cooperation with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

I must also underline that we are surprised by the
statements of some European States on the idea of a
safe zone. Those countries, which close their borders
with barbed-wire fences to protect against the flow of
refugees, were willing to create a refugee camp outside
their borders. Yes, we are still waiting for them to
honour their obligations arising from the 2016 Turkey-
EU refugee agreement.

Let me put one thing on the record. Turkey reserves
its right to self-defence against terrorist elements that
may have remained in the Operation Peace Spring
area. Our fight against terrorism will always be in
accordance with international humanitarian law. In this
context, I agree with some of the previous speakers that
any military operation, including counter-terrorism
operations, should be conductedin line with international
law and international humanitarian law. This point has
been emphasized by the Secretary-General many times.
Any violation of international humanitarian law should
be investigated, and perpetrators held accountable. Of
course, that is true for every operation conducted by
anybody, including our American and other friends. We
should also keep in mind that this is true not only for
the operations in Syria, but everywhere.

As President Erdogan has emphasized on multiple
occasions, Turkey cannot and will not tolerate any
terrorist activity at its borders. Terrorist organizations
may take different names or forms, and they may adopt
different strategies, but our vigilance in the face of
terrorism will remain the same. Our commitment will
never be shaken for a moment, and we expect the same
from the international community.

It is time for everyone to recover from the self-
imposed amnesia about the PKK/PYD/YPG, which
does not represent the Kurds in Syria, Turkey, Iraq
or Iran. It is a terrorist organization with a separatist
agenda in Syria. We will never allow this agenda
to prevail.

Turkey has never had second thoughts about the
future of our southern neighbour. We have always
supported a United Nations-sponsored, Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned political solution in line with resolution
2254 (2015). We have also agreed and emphasized the
work to be done in the context of the political process
that will resume in Geneva on 29 October, in line with
the United States and Russian agreements. We must all
work for the success of this process. For our part, we
will do so in full and close cooperation and coordination
with the United Nations.

When our Syrian brothers and sisters needed shelter,
the Turkish people never hesitated to open their doors
and hearths. Four million Syrians are living in Turkey,
including 300,000 Syrian Kurds. In some countries,
the mere idea of hosting Syrians was met with hatred
and unveiled all forms of xenophobia and racism. In
Turkey, on the other hand, we have shared our schools
and hospitals. We have shared our present, and we are
ready to share our future. And we will never accept
outrageous allegations or lectures that unfairly target
Turkey and the Turkish people. Unfortunately, in our
world today, shame is in retreat, and double standards
are on the rise.

The foregoing are the facts and the real background
of the recent developments in Syria.

With regard to the previous speaker's statement, I
would like to say a few words. I do not deem the regime's
representative to be my legitimate counterpart. I will
therefore not dignify his delusional accusations with
a response. A regime that has massacred and tortured
the Syrian people for more than eight years lost its
legitimacy long ago and should not have the right to
sit behind the Syrian nameplate in this Chamber. His
mere presence is an insult to the millions of Syrians

who have suffered countless crimes at the hands ofthis
regime. The facts about the situation in Syria speak for
themselves, and whole world knows who is lying.

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.
