At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over the Security Council this month and on all your ongoing efforts to support international peace and security, particularly in the Middle East region. I thank the Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov, for his outstanding briefings on the developing situation in the Arab region and, in particular, the response of the United Nations to the Palestinian question. The Palestinian question has always been and will remain the central issue and fulcrum of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Notwithstanding the proliferation of opinions regarding the best way to reach a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, the League of Arab States and its States members remain convinced that stability in the Middle East region depends on finding a just solution to the Palestinian question on the basis of international law, in accordance with the agreed terms of reference and, in particular, land for peace, the two-State solution, the Madrid and Oslo understandings, the Arab Peace Initiative and the numerous resolutions of the Security Council. The goal is clear - the establishment of a Palestinian State on the borders of 4 July 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, through direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine with support from the Quartet. The League has therefore adopted no shortage of resolutions at the ministerial and summit levels addressing the Palestinian question in all its main aspects, including the refugee issue, which is a major concern for the League and its States members. The League and its States members believe in the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and support any action to ensure that it is effectively fulfilled. The League is strongly convinced that any attempt to thwart or call into question the Agency's mandate would strike at one of the most important of the five main negotiating issues for a final settlement to the Palestinian question. Although Israel is the party that caused the Palestine refugee crisis, and although the international community bears primary responsibility for engaging with Israel to ensure that Palestine refugees can enjoy all their rights in accordance with international instruments and standards, the Arab side has always been proactive in filling gaps in the Agency's funding in order to shore up its material and field capacities. It has done so because of the bonds of solidarity among the Arab peoples and Governments, bonds that reach their fullest expression in the League of Arab States. Similarly, the League supports all efforts to unite Palestinians. It has backed efforts to achieve intra-Palestinian reconciliation. It is convinced that reaching an agreement between Fatah and Hamas, and holding legislative and presidential elections, would strengthen the unity of the Palestinian people and make it better able to negotiate, under united Palestinian leadership, towards the goals to which we aspire. The League stands ready to support the Palestinian vision that has been articulated by President Mahmoud Abbas before the Security Council. President Abbas has warned against rushing into any initiatives that the State of Palestine has had no part in formulating or negotiating. He has insisted that the conflict must be solved by peaceful means, acting through the United Nations and with the effective involvement of the Quartet. He has also called repeatedly for an international peace conference, first in February 2018, when Washington decided unilaterally to move the American embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem and recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, and secondly at the emergency Security Council meeting of February 2020 (S/PV.8717), after President Trump had announced his deal of the century, known as "Peace to prosperity", which did not meet any of the terms for a final settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict and was rejected by all peace-loving international forces. The League supports the initiative presented by President Abbas in his statement before the General Assembly on the occasion of its seventy-fifth anniversary, namely, that the Secretary-General should start preparing to convene an international conference to launch genuine negotiations between the State of Palestine and the State of Israel, in accordance exclusively with the principles and terms of reference agreed under international law. The Security Council would no doubt bear the greatest share of responsibility for effectively preparing for the conference and ensuring that it achieves the desired results, in coordination with the Secretary-General, the League of Arab States and the other regional and international stakeholders. Mindful of the need to break the current deadlock in the peace process, the League of Arab States commends all the efforts made by the main regional and international stakeholders, including the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the European Union. Such efforts include the international and regional endeavours to bring together and unify international forces to support the Palestinian negotiator in preparation for a new round of negotiations with the participation of the Palestinian Authority. The most recent such effort was the meeting held in Jordan, which brought together the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany, France, Egypt and Jordan, and the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, culminating in a statement supporting international law. The League emphasizes the importance of the proposed conference. It calls on the Quarter and international and regional supporting parties to make every endeavour to play a constructive role in bringing the conflict out of its current dire straits and open up prospects for a genuine peace and the just settlement to which we aspire. The League has every confidence that the Secretary-General of the United Nations has the capacity and wisdom to guide international efforts to meet Palestinian and Arab aspirations, and indeed the aspirations of the region and the world. Israel has persisted in its constant efforts to fulfil its settlement schemes on occupied Palestinian and Arab territory. It has taken a series of muted steps towards enacting its plan for stealth annexation. Most recently, it built 2,600 settlement units in Jerusalem and the West Bank, and cut off Area C in preparation for the full annexation of the Jordan valley. It has continued to hamper efforts to reach a settlement by attempting to redefine such core issues as Jerusalem, the refugees and the borders. It has also sought to effectively entrench its policies of racial discrimination, particularly by enacting a new nation-State law turning Arab inhabitants of Israel into second-class citizens. It has sought to impose a fait accompli leading to a one-State solution in lieu of the two-State solution, which is now in grave peril, especially since Israel violated its own stated commitment, which was a fundamental component of its recent agreement with the United Arab Emirates, that it would fully freeze settlement activities. The Secretary-General of the League has forcefully denounced that course of action and expressed the League's fears regarding the repercussions for the future of the negotiations towards an independent, geographically contiguous State of Palestine. Pending genuine negotiations in the peace conference for which President Abbas has called, the League emphasizes that the Human Rights Council and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights must, in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 43/31, press Israel to confront the catastrophic humanitarian repercussions of the annexation and the indiscriminate Israeli settlement activities against the Palestinian people, including racial discrimination. If Israel persists with its settlement policies and its illegal practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, action must be taken, further to the reports compiled by international committees of inquiry, to lay the groundwork for every possible measure to hold Israel legally accountable for all the well-documented violations and crimes against the Palestinian people committed by its leaders and senior officials.
