The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I should like
to condemn in the strongest terms the outrageous,
deadly and totally unacceptable attack perpetrated on
20 January 2019 against the camp of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in Aguelhok, Mali, which resulted
in 10 peacekeepers from Chad being killed and several
others injured. The members of the Security Council
convey their deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and to the people and the Government of Chad,
as well as to MINUSMA. Those brave peacekeepers
were operating under a mandate given by the Security
Council in order to provide a more secure future for
the people of the Mali. We commemorate their ultimate
sacrifice in the cause of peace.

I ask those present to now rise and observe a minute
of silence for those killed.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Cuba, the Democratic
People's Republic ofKorea, Ecuador, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Maldives, Malaysia,
Morocco, Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Arab
Emirates, Turkey, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.

Mr. Mladenov is joining the meeting via video-
teleconference from Geneva.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Martin Prada, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah
Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations; and Her Excellency
Mrs. Anayansi Rodriguez Camejo, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of

the Palestinian People.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I give the floor
to Mr. Mladenov.


