Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): The Security
Council is meeting today in the context of growing
international concern about the rise of terrorism and
violent extremism, with their distorted ideology
and accompanying brutality. South Africa therefore
commends the Russian Federation for holding this
thematic open debate on the matter.

My delegation agrees with the assessment that
the situation in the Middle East and North Africa
is characterized by a vicious cycle of Violence and
instability, fuelled in part by a sharp deterioration in the
socioeconomic conditions of the region and its peoples.
The lack of progress on political dialogue and the
absence of a sustainable long-term solution has created
space for terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria, Al-Qaida and others associated with
them to exploit divisions for the furtherance of their
distorted beliefs. No belief system that requires violent
enforcement can be regarded as an acceptable standard
for civilization, and South Africa condemns such
actions in the strongest possible terms. It is therefore
critical that the discussions on violent extremism and
terrorism in parts of Africa and the Middle East look
into the root causes of the problem, and not just the
symptoms.

The most prevalent cause of the current trend
in terrorism and the breeding ground for violent
extremism is primarily the result of unabated war and
conflict in a region where for a very long time there has
been a preference for military action instead ofpolitical
dialogue. Other factors, including socioeconomic ones,
interference by outside parties and the pursuance of

the regime change doctrine by some has also played a
significant role in perpetuating conflicts and instability.

As terrorism and violent extremism spreads, the
international community must reflect on an appropriate
response, because it is clear that our actions thus far
have fallen short of what is required. Terrorism and
violent extremism continue to kill and maim innocent
people, damage property and infrastructure, foster fear
in local communities, undermine social and economic
confidence and, in many cases, entrench the forces of
poverty.

The Council has a Charter-mandated role to
maintain international peace and security. It must
therefore be at the forefront of the efforts to curb the
scourge of terrorism and violent extremism. South
Africa has long been critical of the one-size-fits-all
approach to addressing conflicts. The current situation
in the Middle East and North Africa requires greater
engagement on the part of the Council, with all the
relevant role-players, including regional organizations.
The proximity of regional and subregional organizations
will allow the Council to broaden its approach to
include important elements that can contribute to the
prevention of conflict, such as cultural orientation,
local preferences and local expertise in developing
strategies.

The Security Council's failure and inconsistency
in addressing the continued unrest and instability in
the region has resulted in multiple and widespread
unintended consequences, such as the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, organized crime,
kidnapping for ransom, cross-border terror attacks
and the bloody persecution of religious minorities at
unprecedented levels. It is also fuelling the refugee
crisis in Europe, the worst since the end of the Second
World War.

While all these factors in themselves constitute
crises, collectively they create a serious threat to
international peace and security. Therefore, South
Africa once again calls on the Security Council to
redouble its efforts to promote the conditions for
inclusive dialogue aimed at achieving sustainable
political solutions to the conflicts in the region.

Nowhere has the Council been as ineffective
as in the manner in which it has addressed peace in
the Middle East. The South African Government
believes that the only way to bring about lasting
peace in the Middle East is to have a comprehensive
and unconditional negotiated settlement to end the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories and an
immediate end to Israel's continued blockade of Gaza.
That will contribute to peace and security throughout
the Middle East. We agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment that we must "guard against the dangerous
drift in the Middle East peace process" and that "it is
essential for Israelis and Palestinians to re-engage and
for the international community to pressure the parties
to do so." (see A/70/PV.13) Similarly, Security Council
action in Syria, Libya and Yemen should be geared
towards promoting inclusive political solutions.

Thematic debates of this nature are necessary in
order to ensure that, as Member States, we agree on
a united strategy to counter terrorism and violent
extremism, thereby maintaining international peace
and security. My delegation stands ready to continue
constructive engagement to uphold the centrality of the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations in that regard.

