The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.

I too take this opportunity to thank my
predecessor, Ambassador Le Luong Minh, for the
excellent work of his team during the month of July. I
also thank members for their good wishes as my
country assumes the presidency of the Council for the
month of August.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
presentation and Ambassador Wolff for his briefing on
behalf of the Multinational Force. My thanks to also to
Ambassador Al Bayati for his participation in the
Council's debate today.

A year after the adoption of resolution 1770
(2007), Belgium reaffirms its support for the expanded
mandate it gave to the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We thus welcome the wish
of the Iraqi authorities to extend the mandate of
UNAMI. That extension will come at a turning point.
We have noted the positive developments in the areas
of security, national reconciliation and regional
dialogue, and more generally we note the increased
assumption of responsibility by the Iraqi authorities.
But that progress cannot eclipse the magnitude of the
challenges that remain; to the contrary, this
underscores the urgent need to consolidate that
progress.

The first way to do this is by deepening the
political dialogue. We welcome the growing political
involvement of diverse elements of Iraqi society, but
the slow progress in the constitutional review and on
the issue of disputed internal boundaries indicate the
ongoing difficulty the Iraqis are experiencing in
finding a comprehensive agreement on power-sharing
and wealth-sharing. Here, Belgium welcomes
UNAMI's constant readiness to provide technical
assistance and mediation. Such assistance should
facilitate the Iraqis' search for responses - responses
that they alone have the legitimacy to make.

In that regard, we echo the Secretary-General's
appeal for the adoption, as soon as possible, of an
electoral law making possible the organization of
provincial elections. That would further enhance the
inclusiveness and legitimacy of the Iraqi political
debate.

I turn secondly to the rule of law. We welcome
the assessments of the Secretary-General and of
Ambassador Wolff regarding the increased capacity
and autonomy of the Iraqi Security Forces. The fatal
attacks of recent weeks in Baghdad and Kirkuk should
make all stakeholders realize the importance of
continuing their efforts to ensure respect for basic
principles of the rule of law, in particular regarding the
protection of civilians, as well as respect for their
fundamental rights, including the rights of detainees.

Thirdly, regarding Iraq's interactions at the
regional and international levels, the close cooperation
between the United Nations and the Iraqi authorities, in
the context of the expanded Conference of the
Neighbouring Countries of Iraq and the International
Compact with Iraq, has made it possible to enhance the
role of those mechanisms. Last month's debate
provided an opportunity to welcome the willingness
shown by the Iraqi Government, along with its
neighbours and the entire international community, to
deepen the dialogue with the common goal of ensuring
the long-term stabilization of Iraq. Although this was
reiterated in Kuwait and in Stockholm, it is nonetheless
important to recall that this mutually beneficial
dialogue must take place in the context of respect by
all for the sovereignty of Iraq.

Turning, fourthly, to humanitarian affairs, it is an
important underpinning of stability that the progress be
reflected in the daily lives of the Iraqi people, starting
with those of the 4 million Iraqis who have been forced
to flee their homes. Belgium encourages the
Government of Iraq to increase its efforts to assist
them, in cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

More generally speaking, we welcome the
willingness of the Iraqi authorities to make better use
of the country's potential, by progressively taking
ownership of reconstruction projects, while relying on
an increased presence by United Nations agencies and
on their expertise. Here, we noted last month's
announcement by the Iraqi Government of its intention
not to seek the renewal of the mandate of the
Multinational Force, as well as the start of negotiations
on a bilateral security agreement.

I conclude by recalling that the Security Council
is duty-bound to ensure that the United Nations
mandate is carried out in adequate security conditions.
Here, it my honour to announce that it is the intention
of my Government to make a contribution of €250,000
to the special trust fund to support United Nations
security in Iraq.
26
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.
08-45136
