Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I should to express my sincerest
thanks to Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her clear,
concise and analytical briefing. She has without a
doubt carried out an outstanding job in a very difficult
situation in a post-conflict country. Essentially, the
report of the Secretary-General that she has just
introduced (S/2010/295) paints a very clear picture of
the atmosphere in the Central African Republic
following the presidential and legislative elections.

Following the inclusive political dialogue, several
recommendations were adopted, including two which
are considered priorities: the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme
and the electoral process. While some progress has
been made, it is true that the implementation of all of
these recommendations has not been as hoped for.
However, the two areas I just mentioned as priorities
have received focused attention from national
stakeholders and international partners. We all agree
that restoring security across the entire national
territory is a prerequisite for the successful holding of
fair, credible and transparent elections, which is why
making progress on disarmament and demobilization is
so important.

However, in a country prone to internal rebellion,
groups of foreign rebels and bandits have not made
things easier, despite the contributions of international
partners to conducting the DDR programme, which is
moving ahead but slowly. Nevertheless, the
Government of the Central African Republic agrees
that the DDR programme is lagging and that it is time
to give it renewed impetus. There is also a need in
terms of logistics in order to cover a number of remote
regions.

The electoral process has also encountered many
obstacles that have roiled political life. However, the
atmosphere seems to be growing calm enough for the
organization of fair and proper elections. The
involvement of national and intentional experts in
assisting the Independent Electoral Commission to
draw up the electoral timetable has been commendable.
The dialogue and consultation framework of 22 June
contained in the draft timeline could be changed by the
Commission if the latter deems it necessary to move it
forward in order to meet the intended electoral
deadlines of 14 October and 29 December 2010. The
Commission estimates that it will need $21.6 million in
order to conclude the electoral process. At present,
there is a shortfall of over $7 million.

On behalf of my Government, I should like to
express our heartfelt thanks to all the bilateral and
international partners who have contributed to assisting
the Central African Republic on our quest for
stabilization and sustainable development. However,
my Government does not understand why financing for
part of this gap should be conditional on the signing of
a presidential decree convening the electoral bodies.
We appeal for greater flexibility on this assistance
because the Central African Republic is at a crossroads.

The Central African Republic is pleased to note
that the new United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) is
taking shape and beginning to fully play its
coordination role under the supervision of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. It is important
to stress that the integrated strategic framework under
development will make it possible for all the
representatives of the United Nations system in the
Central African Republic to coordinate their
approaches and speak with a single voice. Such
harmony of action would avoid duplication and cross-
purposes and give recipient countries a single
interlocutor. We deeply appreciate this partnership.

Another partnership which I must not neglect to
mention is the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Commission covers a vast range of activities and fully
plays its coordination role with the agencies and funds
of the United Nations system that are assisting the
Central African Republic in its peacebuilding and
sustainable development efforts.

On this occasion, I should like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Jan Grauls, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission configuration for the
Central African Republic, who remains devoted to our
cause. He makes the case for the Central African
Republic with an unshakable determination with his
numerous interlocutors. We highly appreciate the
initiatives he has recently drawn up on the
reintegration of ex-combatants and on the secure
launching of disarmament activities in some areas, as
well as his latest letter calling for contributions.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Secretary-
General for having agreed to grant the second tranche
from the Peacebuilding Fund to allow for the
implementation of a number of programmes of the
revised priority plan. We also express our gratitude to
the Peacebuilding Support Office, which assisted the
Steering Committee in its work.

I cannot conclude my remarks without conveying
the encouragement of my Government to you, Sir, in
your role as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. That is an issue close to our
hearts. Therefore, with the support of UNICEF and
other international partners, the Government of the
Central African Republic is working to finalize its
adherence to the two Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.

