Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would like to
thank you and your delegation once again, Mr. President,
for organizing this important meeting of the Security
Council. The meeting on partnership with Africa, held
yesterday under your presidency, was clear testimony of
your Government's commitment to peace and stability in
Africa. We commend you once again for these important
initiatives. My delegation is also grateful to Mr. Miyet for
his comprehensive briefing.

My delegation eagerly awaits the report of the
technical survey team and the report of the Secretary-
General on the future of United Nations deployments to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is a pity, though, that
the technical survey team has been experiencing some
difficulties in carrying out its tasks; consequently, the
Secretariat cannot, for now, submit its recommendations.
We hope that the team will very soon be allowed to
continue its work. We note with satisfaction, however, that
the Secretariat has taken the administrative measures to
deploy the 500 military observers in due course.

My delegation is gratified to note that the Joint
Military Commission (JMC) established by the parties to
the Agreement is up and running. So is the political
Committee. This is a good start, and we encourage the
parties to continue their work. At this juncture, my
delegation would like to place on record its sincere
gratitude to the Government of the United States for its
generous contribution to the JMC. We understand that those
two institutions of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement will
require financing if they are to function effectively. We are
grateful to all those States that have provided financing or
logistical support to the JMC, and we encourage others that
can do so to help.

Notwithstanding the fact that the parties have signed
a Ceasefire Agreement, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo still constitutes a cause of grave
concern. My delegation would like to take this
opportunity to renew its call on all the parties to respect
the Ceasefire Agreement and to use the JMC more
effectively to deal with allegations of violations of the
Ceasefire Agreement. But at the same time, we have to
defeat the negative forces, the forces of evil and darkness.
We would like to emphasize that the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot end without the
full commitment and cooperation of all the parties
concerned. While we hail them for the good judgement
they have demonstrated by signing the Lusaka Agreement,
we urge them to show greater political will and
commitment to the Lusaka process. There can be no
military solution to this fratricidal conflict. The parties
should therefore work together in good faith and
contribute positively to the smooth implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement. That agreement is the most viable one
for the restoration of peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and must therefore be implemented.

But we need to move fast in order to maintain the
momentum that has been generated by the signing of the
Agreement. The longer we wait, the more likely the
Agreement is to unravel and fighting to resume. As with
all fragile peace agreements, the longer one waits to take
the necessary action to back the implementation of the
agreement, the more likely it is to fall apart. The Lusaka
Agreement is no exception. My delegation is of the view
that we are taking too long in trying to get it right. It is
important that we get it right, but we are taking too long
in our planning; we are taking too long to get prepared.
The time to act is now.

My delegation appreciates that there are problems
which must be addressed by the parties; one example is
the appointment of a facilitator. It is our responsibility to
remind them of their obligation to solve these problems.
Again, we commend the United States Government, and
Ambassador Holbrooke in particular, for belling the cat in
this regard and for Ambassador Holbrooke's timely visit
to the region. We hope that former President Ketumile
Masire of Botswana, who has now been identified by the
parties as a potential facilitator, will accept that position
so that we can move on.

My delegation believes that as we remind the parties
of their obligations and of the need for commitment, we
should equally remind ourselves of our own obligations
and should see to it that we measure up to them. The

 

Security Council, we hope, will make good on its promises
and act expeditiously with a View to deploying a fully
fledged peacekeeping mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo when the time is ripe. Half-hearted measures
or an unduly delayed response will receive severest
criticism from Member State. The horrors of Rwanda are
a grim reminder, and must not be allowed to repeat
themselves in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Not too long ago, President Chiluba of Zambia
participated in a Security Council meeting similar to this
one. One of his main contributions to the debate was to
note the need for the Security Council to deploy
peacekeeping troops to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as soon as possible. Yesterday, during our debate
here on partnership with Africa, the Permanent
Representative of South Africa told us that the litmus test
of the Security Council's commitment to conflict resolution
in Africa is the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It could
not have been clearer.

We have seen how conflicts in other parts of the world
have been addressed. We are not trying to draw parallels
here, but let us face the facts. We are not asking the
Council to do the impossible. We have seen resolutions for
the deployment of a peacekeeping operation prepared and
adopted within as few as two days. To ask for the same
treatment might be seen as unrealistic, and we would accept
simply that African issues, like all other issues, should be
given the urgent, full and proper treatment they deserve.
We have said so over and over again in the Council:
approach all issues, irrespective of where the conflicts are,
with the same zeal, with the same enthusiasm. My
delegation has always said in the Council that a life in
Angola or the Democratic Republic of the Congo or
elsewhere in Africa is no less precious than a life in
Kosovo or East Timor or elsewhere in another continent.

Nobody is saying that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is simple: nobody is saying that. All
we are saying is that the situation is bad enough and that
we should therefore act now to prevent the situation from
worsening. That is all we are asking for. We hope we will
not be misunderstood.

We need the Council's partnership; we need its
support; we need its cooperation. We said this here
yesterday, and we said it when we had our lunch together.
We have been encouraged by the signs we are seeing in the
Council. We have talked to some of our colleagues, other
African representatives, who asked us as African members
of the Council about the prospects for the Council resolving
conflict situations in Africa. We told them that the trend
is positive, and that we are hopeful. The signs are
positive.

So, all we are asking of the Council is to make good
on its promises. The whole of Africa is watching, and I
am sure that the Council will not let us down.

