Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I join previous speakers in
thanking the Permanent Representative of Colombia,
Ambassador Nestor Osorio, for his briefing, and pledge
Brazil's full support to him as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

My delegation values the work undertaken by the
Committee. In particular, we support efforts to clarify
the circumstances surrounding reported violations of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), as pointed out
in the Committee's most recent report. It is important
that the Committee receive timely and adequate
information from Member States so that it can properly
fulfil its mandate. We also stress the need for all
Member States to fully implement their obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions.

Brazil has incorporated into its domestic
legislation the provisions contained in all resolutions
regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran. We have always
been firmly committed to doing so as a matter of
principle and respect for the United Nations decisions.
We believe that bona fide cooperation between
Member States and the Committee can contribute to
effectively addressing pending issues and, more
broadly, to strengthening the United Nations and the
multilateral system as a whole.

The Committee has been tasked by the Security
Council to apply the measures decided in resolution
1929 (2010). Such measures include a work
programme covering several areas and the creation of
the Panel of Experts to carry out a number of activities
in connection with the implementation of the
resolution. We took note of the interim report of the
Panel of Experts circulated to Council members in
February. We welcome the Panel's willingness to
engage in consultations and exchange views with
Member States on issues pertaining to its mandate.
With this in mind, we have invited the Panel of Experts
to visit Brazil. This two-day collaboration is necessary
to take into account not only concerns over the
implementation of the resolution but also other matters,
such as the side effects of sanctions on legitimate trade.

The lack of progress in the latest round of talks
with Iran, particularly during the January meeting in
Istanbul, is cause for concern. The trust deficit is still
high. We can only regret that situation. Brazil
continues to encourage the Iranian Government to fully
and promptly cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) in order to clarify all
outstanding questions. At the same time, we reaffirm
Iran's right, like that of any State, to the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy under IAEA safeguards. We share the
goal of ensuring that Iran's nuclear programme is
entirely peaceful. We want Tehran to fully clarify
legitimate doubts regarding its nuclear activities. If that
is to happen, Iran's cooperation is required.

Brazil believes that negotiations, understanding
and persuasion constitute the only viable way to
resolve disagreements over the Iranian nuclear
programme. We regret that an opportunity to create
mutual confidence through the implementation of the
Tehran declaration of May 2010 was missed. We hope
that dialogue will continue and lead to the desired
results.

