Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece for coming to
the Council to present an informative and
comprehensive briefing. I welcome her.

The priorities identified by Greece for its
chairmanship-in-office are indeed important and
pertinent. In the current security environment, in which
we are increasingly faced with various threats and
risks, the need for a multidimensional approach to
security is evident. In that respect, the comprehensive
concept of security of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) responds
effectively to that need.

As the largest regional security organization in
the Eurasian-Atlantic space, the OSCE brings much
added value to our common quest for international
peace and stability. The activities of the OSCE, as a
regional organization cooperating closely with the
United Nations system, complement those of the
United Nations. The fact that their security agendas
overlap necessitates cooperation between the two
organizations. The OSCE has been making important
contributions to the efforts of the United Nations, and
we strongly support the continuation of that close
cooperation.

That having been said, one of the pressing issues
that require close cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE is the situation in Georgia. We
very much hope that the parallel efforts of the two
organizations will contribute concretely to the
resolution of that important issue.

The OSCE can continue to have a unique and
exclusive role to play in the European security
dialogue. In that respect, we need to carry out our
commitments, effectively implement the existing
mechanisms and, wherever needed, overcome
deficiencies. At a time when difficult security issues
are starting to prevail in the European agenda, it is the
duty of the OSCE to make the Treaty on Conventional
Armed Forces in Europe relevant and responsive to the
current requirements.
We wish Minister Bakoyannis every success in
tackling the priorities that she has set. I assure her that
she can count on our assistance and cooperation in
discharging her important duties.

