Mr. Minton (United States of America): The
United States delegation would like to join our
colleagues here today in thanking our guests for the
very useful briefings they provided and also in
welcoming the Minister for the Promotion of Civic
Responsibility in charge of relations with the
Parliament of the Central African Republic and the
Foreign Minister of Mauritius and thanking him for his
comments, which led off this discussion.

I would like to briefly touch on some of the
themes that have already been mentioned around the
table here today with which we agree. In our view, the
overarching issue in this discussion is, of course, good
governance. Good governance is the necessary
foundation for the creation of a peaceful, democratic
and self-sufficient society. In the end, the Government
of the Central African Republic must take the leading
role, albeit with the support of the international
community, in resolving the country's political and
economic hardships.

We are encouraged at the positive actions taken
by President Patasse in the area of disarmament and the
restructuring of defence and security forces. These
efforts should continue.

There is justified concern, however, at the
absence of political dialogue in the Central African
Republic. We urge President Patasse to take the
necessary steps to resume talks between his
Government and members of the opposition parties. We
urge the opposition as well to be willing to work
towards a peaceful solution to the existing stand-off.
Both sides must refrain from inflammatory accusations
and actions and approach negotiations in a spirit of
consensus-building and national reconciliation.

The United States especially appreciates the
efforts of Prime Minister Doleguele and others in the
Government to implement economic reforms. We
strongly urge them to stay on the path of economic
reform proposed by the Bretton Woods institutions.
Controlling expenditures, safeguarding the use of taxes
and other revenues to alleviate poverty, eliminating
corruption, and strictly adhering to the sound economic
planning set forth are actions which are vital to the
development of a strong and stable Central African
Republic.

I should like to second the delegation of Ukraine
in taking note of Mr. Karlsson's comments about the
efforts of the Government in dealing with the threat
posed by HIV/AIDS to the social structure of the
country. The efforts of the Government, supported
enthusiastically by the World Bank, should be
commended. This is a necessary commitment to
addressing this problem in an area that has been
ravaged by HIV/AIDS. This is a very serious
commitment, and we take note of it.

Although the people of the Central African
Republic themselves bear primary responsibility for
their own political and economic reform, we must
recognize that no country exists in a vacuum. The
Central African Republic is directly affected by events
occurring in neighbouring States, particularly the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United States
is particularly concerned about the large number of
refugees on the southern border of the Central African
Republic and their potentially destabilizing impact on
the economic and political situation in the country. In
this regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's
initiative to send Mr. Amara Essy, former Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire, to the region to assess
the impact of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo on the Central African Republic.

Both the international community at large and the
countries of the region must provide assistance to the
Central African Republic in its efforts to become a
self-reliant and democratic State. We especially call
upon regional actors to take all necessary steps to
reopen the Congo and Ubangi rivers in order to ease
the disruption of river traffic and alleviate the fuel
crisis that threatens the fragile economy of the country.
The reopening ofthese rivers is of critical humanitarian
and economic importance for all residents of the river
basin.

The Central African Republic, in a larger sense,
represents an important test case for the United Nations
and the international community to assist a struggling
government in institution-building and reform
measures following the resolution of conflict and a
successful United Nations peacekeeping mission. We
congratulate Representative Sy and his staff for
recognizing this fact and for their hard work to make
this endeavour a success. In our View, the outcome of
these efforts will have an impact and an influence
transcending the Central African Republic and set an
example for similar partnerships between
Governments, this Organization and the international
community in future.

