Mr. Skoog (Sweden): The year 2018 marks the
50-year anniversary of a historic and tumultuous
year in the history of many of our countries. The year
1968 heralded the arrival of a new generation, whose
members marked their arrival loudly with protests
and demonstrations, including the occupation of
universities, aimed at challenging elites and changing
the status quo. Many of the young leaders of those
movements would go on to be leaders in their countries,
bringing the "spirit of '68" to the organizations they
once railed against. Since then new generations have
been constantly challenging the status quo - just one
reminder of how the power of youth can, and will,
herald change.

During the open debate on youth, peace and security
in April (see S/PV.8241), my delegation underlined the
need to harness the power and leadership of youth as
effective peacebuilders in all aspects of sustaining
peace. I am therefore delighted to introduce, along
with Peru, today's draft resolution on youth, peace and
security (S/2018/532). The draft resolution builds on
the ground-breaking resolution 2250 (2015)), so ably
shepherded through the Security Council by Jordan
in 2015. I would also like to acknowledge again today
Jordan's continued leadership and championing of the
youth, peace and security agenda at the United Nations.
The draft resolution before the Council today builds on
and complements resolution 2250 (2015). It does so in
several ways.

First, it underlines the contribution that young
people can make to peace and security if they are
actively engaged and their knowledge, strengths and
enthusiasm are unlocked and taken seriously.

Secondly, it recognizes the diversity of youth and
the need to counter any stigmatization of youth as having
different aspirations, opportunities and challenges.
Every voice must be heard. The draft resolution also
highlights the need to recognize the specific challenges
and discrimination young women face.

Thirdly, it highlights that youth are a crucial part
of implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and in advancing peaceful, just and
inclusive societies.

Fourthly, the draft resolution calls on both Member
States and all United Nations entities to enhance the
level and quality of dialogue with youth. That means
inviting, including and listening to youth and youth-led
civil society in our work.

I would like to thank all delegations for their
positive contributions to the negotiations on the draft
resolution. I want to pay a special word of thanks to the
initiator and co-penholder, Peru, as well as to express
my gratitude at the fact that so many countries decided
to become co-sponsors of the draft resolution.

Today's draft resolution marks an advance in
our collective determination to ensure that youth can
play their rightful and necessary role in the work of
the Security Council and in building peace across the
world. We have heard their voices here in the Chamber,
most recently in April. We should not only listen to
them and heed them, but also learn from them.

Let me conclude with a quoteation from United
States Senator Robert Fitzgerald Kennedy, who died
50 years ago today.

"This world demands the qualities of youth: not a
time oflife but a state of mind, a temper of the will,
a quality of the imagination, a predominance of
courage over timidity, of the appetite for adventure
over the life of ease."

We must never seek to quell those qualities of youth,
either in the next generation of leaders or in ourselves.

