Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Argentina for having organized this important debate
and for the excellent concept note (S/2014/ 725) provided
to guide our discussions. I also thank Prosecutor
Bensouda and Ombudsperson Prost for their briefings.

My delegation welcomes this opportunity to share
ideas on the working methods of the Security Council
in the format of an open debate, where the views of
the broader membership of the United Nations can be
heard.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Saint Lucia on behalf
of the L.69 group.

As it is the main organ of the United Nations
charged with the maintenance of international peace
and security, the way the Security Council conducts its
work is a matter of great interest to the States Members
of the United Nations and, indeed, to the international
community at large. We are therefore pleased to see
that that the Council's working methods have evolved
over the years to accommodate the concerns of the
broader membership for greater transparency and
closer engagement with non-members. Even then, there
is still considerable room for improvement.

Enhancing due process and sanctions regimes
is a matter of importance to Nigeria. While targeted
sanctions are the critical tool at the disposal of the
Security Council, we see a need for them to be employed
with clarity as to the procedures for listing and
delisting individuals and entities. That is where the role
of the Ombudsperson becomes crucial. In the current
dispensation, the role of the Ombudsperson is limited
to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime by the resolution that
created the office. That means that only individuals
listed on the Al-Qaida sanctions list can benefit from
due process; other sanctions regimes do not have such
a vetting mechanism for individuals and entities facing
targeted sanctions.

In the interests of fairness, and to address the
concerns of Council members and the broader
membership, we believe that the Council should
take steps to improve due process in other sanctions
regimes. One way to do this would be by placing
all sanctions regimes under the purview of the
Ombudsperson. We note the concern expressed in the
seventh and eighth reports (S/2014/73 and S/2014/553)
of the Ombudsperson that, while the Ombudsperson has
operated independently in practice, no separate office
has been established for the post, as mandated by the
resolution establishing it. This situation is clearly not
conducive to the autonomy that the Office requires in
terms of administrative independence. Nigeria strongly
supports the establishment of a separate office of the
Ombudsperson, as mandated, as well as measures that
would strengthen its autonomy.

In terms of follow-up action by the Security Council
to its own referrals to the International Criminal Court,
we note the concerns of Member States that the Council
has not been effective. The fact that the Council has
failed to respond to the seven letters it has received from
the President of the ICC on the obligation to cooperate
of the Court would seem to validate this point.

Our View on this is that the Council may benefit
from having a mechanism to handle follow-up action
on referrals similar to the way in which the Council's
informal working group on international tribunals has
been dealing with issues pertaining to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and that for Rwanda.
That may help to protect the credibility of the Council
and the integrity of the ICC.

Nigeria would like to acknowledge the value
that the briefings of the Secretariat add to the work
of the Council. These briefings, by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the heads of
special political missions, the heads of peacekeeping
missions and other senior staff, have been timely and
highly informative.

We would like to make special mention of the
briefings by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide, which have
alerted the Council to situations where populations may
be at risk. The briefings have also allowed the Council
to gain greater insights into the underlying causes
of conflicts while highlighting the need for civilians
to be protected against the risk of mass atrocities.
Accordingly, the Council has emphasized the protection
of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping missions
where the State lacks the capacity to offer protection.

I would like to conclude by commending you,
Madam President, for your astute leadership, as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. Your efforts at making the
Council more responsive to the concerns of the broader
United Nations membership and the adoption of four
presidential notes under your leadership attest to the
commitment you have shown in the attainment of your
mandate.

