Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening by the United Kingdom of this
meeting on the protection against the destruction and
trafficking of cultural heritage by terrorist groups and
in situations of armed conflict.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Director-
General Bokova, Executive Director Fedotov and
Brigadier General Parrulli for their briefings.

As we speak, in some parts of the world, ongoing
armed conflicts and rampant terrorist activities not only
seriouslyjeopardize the lives and properties in affected
countries, but also add invaluable cultural heritage as a
target of attacks and as a source of terrorist financing
through smuggling and trafficking, thereby causing
heavy losses to human civilization. The international
community needs to scale up its support for countries
in conflict areas and cut off the channels for terrorist
groups smuggling and trafficking in cultural heritage
in ajoint effort to protect cultural heritage against harm
caused by conflict.

First, efforts need to be scaled up to support States
in situations of conflict in building up their national
capacity for protection. Countries in conflict areas
need to focus more attention on the protection of
their cultural heritage, formulate relevant protection
policies, establish early warning mechanisms, join
relevant international cooperation frameworks and
continuously enhance capacity-building for the
protection of cultural heritage in armed conflict.
The international community, while respecting the
sovereignty of the countries in conflict areas, needs
to provide constructive support and fully respect the
national ownership of all cultural heritage.

Secondly, efforts to combat terrorism need to be
intensified. Terrorism has become the main threat
to cultural heritage in conflict areas. Resolution
2347 (2017), which was just adopted by the Council,
provides a framework for cooperation in preventing
terrorist groups from destroying cultural heritage
and smuggling or trafficking in cultural heritage for
terrorist financing. All countries should effectively
implement the resolution and maximize the role of the
relevant Council mechanisms and build an information
network against the destruction and smuggling of
cultural heritage by terrorist groups and resolutely
crack down on terrorist activities to destroy, smuggle
and traffic cultural heritage.

Thirdly, international cooperation should be
further strengthened. All countries should strengthen
cooperation in the field of cultural heritage protection
and cooperate in information-sharing and law
enforcement cooperation in the fight against the
destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage by
terrorist groups and in situations of armed conflict.
The United Nations, the Security Council and the other
specialized agencies, such as UNESCO and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, should leverage
their respective professional advantage and strengthen
their coordination in accordance with the division
of labour to form an international synergy for the
protection of cultural heritage in conflict areas.

China has been actively supporting and
participating in international cooperation on
endangered cultural heritage and will continue to work
with the international community to make a positive
contribution to the prevention of the destruction and
trafficking in cultural heritage by terrorist groups and
in situations of armed conflict.
