Mr. Motoc (Romania): Allow me, at the outset,
Sir, to congratulate you very warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I wish
you every success in that capacity, and I am confident
that you will indeed be successful. I pledge my
delegation's full cooperation in that regard.

I would like to voice a very special word of
appreciation with regard to the excellent performance
of Ambassador Adechi and his team during Benin's
presidency in the month of February.

Turning to our business for today, I have a short
comment to make and two questions to pose. I would
like first to congratulate Foreign Minister Dimitrij
Rupel on his very insightful and straightforward
statement. Slovenia is one of Romania's valued
partners in NATO, in the European Union and in
regional affairs, and I would like to wish Mr. Rupel,
from this particular perspective of our bilateral
relations, a very successful term as Chairman-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). Two months into that mandate, we can
already see an energetic and ambitious frontal
approach to the most pressing matters on the
organization's agenda. Romania is particularly pleased
with the attention paid to the Kosovo issue, which is a
challenge for the western Balkans and for the whole of
Europe in the coming period.

Mr. Rupel raised some insightful points today,
which also will remain the focus of our attention
throughout 2005. One of those points refers to the
degree of effectiveness of the multilateral handling of
so-called frozen conflicts. Those protracted conflict
situations are terrible problems for the regions in which
they linger. I am sure that the "glass is half full"
approach would suggest that it is at least good that
those people are no longer fighting each other.
However, the "glass is half empty" view shows that
those situations confront the international community
with constantly growing threats. Those areas that are
outside international writ and settlement are strong
impediments to the development of the countries and
regions to which they belong and often tend to become
hotbeds of organized crime, illegal trafficking,
smuggling, proliferation and, not least, terrorism.

Romania believes that the United Nations and its
Security Council, which has primary responsibility
under the United Nations Charter for maintaining
international security, and organizations such as the
OSCE can and should do more to advance the
settlement of such situations. Along those lines, I
would like to kindly ask for Mr. Rupel's views on two
issues. First, I would ask if he would elaborate on the
objectives of the OSCE chairmanship regarding further
steps in the settlement of frozen conflicts. Also, at this
point, how does he assess the potential of the
relationship between the United Nations and the OSCE
in dealing with protracted, frozen conflicts, and also in
terms of conflict prevention? Secondly, perhaps he
could further elaborate on the OSCE chairmanship's
approach to the Transdiestrian conflict in the Republic
of Moldova?

