Mr. Kusljugic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): The
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
report of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY),
presented yesterday to the General Assembly by its
President, Judge Claude Jorda, as well as the
achievements of the Tribunal over the past year. I also
take this opportunity to thank the ICTY President,
Judge Jorda, and the ICTY Prosecutor, Ms. Del Ponte,
for their clear and straightforward messages regarding
the current and the future work of the ICTY that they
have expressed today in their statements to the
Council.

The presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the central-common institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully support the activities of the ICTY,
not only with words, but also with their deeds. We
consider that the ICTY has played an important role in
the process of reconciliation and the maintenance of
peace and stability, in both the country and the region
as a whole. We especially acknowledge the
apprehension and trial of Slobodan Milosevic. We see
it as a clear sign that the Tribunal will prosecute the
high-level perpetrators, the strategists of the war
crimes, which we consider to be its primary role. The
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina also
underlines the role of the ICTY in the individualization
of war crimes, as a precondition for inter-ethnic
reconciliation in the region.

Yesterday, in addressing the General Assembly, I
also conveyed our expectations for the future role of
the ICTY. In short, we consider that the work of the
ICTY will substantially, directly or indirectly,
influence the following processes in my country and in
the region as a whole: the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons; inter-ethnic reconciliation
and confidence-building; regional security and
cooperation; political and economic transitions;
European integration processes; and full
implementation of human rights standards.

I also conveyed to the General Assembly several
proposals aimed at complementing or enhancing the
current ICTY activities. Today, in addressing the
Security Council, I would like to underline the most
important subjects upon which I elaborated yesterday.

The political parties, citizens and especially war-
crime victims and witnesses in my country, have
carefully followed the work of the ICTY, reflecting the
impact it has had on their everyday lives. Many
families, in all ethnic groups in the region and
especially in my country, suffered during the 1991-
1995 war. Every just decision of the ICTY helps in
some way to lessen the pain and suffering of the war-
crime victims and their families. Let us never forget the
atrocities that were committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina: mass murder, mass rape, ethnic cleansing
and even genocide, which the ICTY proved to have
occurred for the first time in Europe since the Second
World War: the Srebrenica massacre. This also is
included in the indictment against Milosevic.

For many in Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
for the war-crime victims, their relatives and friends,
ICTY activities are the only hope that justice will be
attained. We also expect that the work of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will complement the Tribunal's activities.

However, we are very disappointed and seriously
concerned by the fact that 26 publicly indicted war
criminals still remain at large. We should not forget
that Slobodan Milosevic' was extradited to the Tribunal
after his political programme had failed and after he
had lost the presidential elections. The fact that 26
publicly indicted war criminals in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic, and many more in the region, remain not only
at large, but also in position to influence political and
economic developments, is a sign that their political
programmes based on ethnically cleansed territories are
still alive.

The extreme radical nationalists in the region lost
the last elections. They have temporarily hidden their
wartime objectives, mainly because of the international
pressure and fear of ICTY activities. However, the fact
that the 26 accused and the many who orchestrated
ethnic cleansing remain at large means that the seeds of
new conflicts and violence in the region remain. Recent
evidence of public unrest recorded in the region has
clearly shown that the extreme nationalists strongly
oppose the work of the ICTY. They publicly argue that
the ICTY should prosecute "their war criminals",
instead of the "unjust" indictment of "our heroes".

Today, a changed political environment exists in

South-Eastern Europe, reflected in the improved
cooperation between the ICTY and the States in the
region. However, the international community should
not ignore the fact that the parliamentary majorities, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, on the issues related to the
work of the ICTY, are fragile. Therefore, the
international community should continue to support,
both politically and financially, the work of the ICTY,
stressing again and again that the activities of the ICTY
are based on human rights and the rule of international
humanitarian law, thus preventing political
manipulation of the work of the Tribunal.

It is crucially important that the international
community take a leading role in the arrest of the
already-indicted war criminals. At the same time, it
will be proof of its credibility in the region. Its
readiness to attach the utmost priority to making their
arrests will be proof of its commitment to universally
accepted ethic and moral values.

In principle, war criminals and terrorists are the
same sort of people. The anti-terrorist alliance has
shown that it is possible to organize coordinated
actions against terrorists who use barbaric acts against
innocent civilians to achieve their political objectives.
A similar alliance to accompany the work of the ICTY,
incorporating local institutions and international
organizations in a just fight against war criminals, is
needed now more than ever in South-Eastern Europe.

We are aware that many more suspected war
criminals in the region have to be prosecuted either by
the ICTY or by the authorized national courts. The
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
ICTY initiative to process some of the cases by the
local judiciary structures under the auspices of the
ICTY, suggesting that the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which was established by the High
Representative's decision, should be the first institution
in the country for delegating such a task.

The United Nations is planning to conclude its
current Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina by the end
of next year. Plans for transferring United Nations-led
activities to the other regional organizations already
active in the country are being prepared now. The
position of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is that the prosecution and trial of the indicted war
criminals in the region should continue to be a United
Nations responsibility, especially in light of the
universal importance of the ICTY mandate after the
tragic events of 11 September. The remarks and the
proposals I have expressed on behalf of the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina in this address
to you today should have justified this stand.

