Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We, too,
welcome the presence of Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, to whose
statement we listened very carefully. We also thank
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General in Sierra
Leone, and Ambassador John McNee in his capacity as
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission's Sierra
Leone country-specific configuration for their briefings
this morning.

We are grateful for the work undertaken by
Mr. Von der Schulenburg in the very complex situation
in Sierra Leone. As this is the first time that
Ambassador McNee has appeared before the Security
Council in this capacity, we also wish to congratulate
him on having assumed the chairmanship of the
configuration and for the very active work that he has
carried out since assuming that job.

We believe that it is important to highlight the
efforts of the actors involved in fighting the socio-
economic problems that confront the country through
the implementation of concrete measures in the
economic and social sectors, in particular the launch of
agriculture and national production development
strategies, the youth employment scheme and various
programmes for police force training that help to
entrench the rule of law.

We also believe it important to underscore the
importance of launching the private sector
development strategy in order to promote commercial
activities conducive to socio-economic development
and job creation. Such endeavours will undoubtedly lay
the foundations for the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and boost the development of the population.

However, we would like to express our concern at
the various outbreaks of political violence and
intolerance that have had an impact on the nascent
democratic process in the country. We draw attention to
the role played by the media, in particular by the radio
stations of the political parties inciting violence. That
is a clear sign of the prevalent attitudes among the
main political forces of the country, and it seems to us
that monitoring the role of the mass media is crucial to
the peacebuilding process there.

In that regard, we also believe it essential to
implement the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, which are of great
importance to ensuring that the mistakes of the past are
not repeated. Likewise, Mexico acknowledges the
positive work carried out by the Special Court and its
major contribution to transitional justice in the country.

We believe it imperative for the Government to
resume the unfinished process of revising the
Constitution through an exercise of transparent and
inclusive dialogue in order to achieve the ultimate
objective of consolidating the institutionalization of the
rule of law, human rights and the democratic system.

Conversely, we are also concerned by the fact
that in the context of globalization of organized crime,
Sierra Leone is increasingly being used as a bridge for
trafficking in drugs and the illicit arms trade. We
therefore feel that it is vital for the United Nations
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) to
bolster its assistance to the Government of Sierra
Leone in promoting dialogue and coordination with the
countries of the region in order to combat the illicit
trade in drugs and weapons by means of a focus on
shared responsibility in the face of a threat to the
security and stability of the region. That approach can
scarcely be successfully tackled without the support of
the international community.

My delegation awaits with interest the high-level
special session of the Peacebuilding Commission on
Sierra Leone on Wednesday, 10 June. We think that it
is of the greatest importance that this event may
enhance the international attention paid to Sierra Leone
in order to generate sufficient backing for the joint
communique of 2 April, mobile economic support for
the implementation of the United Nations Joint Vision
for Sierra Leone, and launch the United Nations
multi-donor trust fund. We also attach great importance
to the resolute support that can thus be generated for
the initiative to fight poverty and to promote
socio-economic development through the Agenda for
Change, which will guide the actions of the
Government until 2012.

The report of the Secretary-General before us
today (S/2009/267) describes the very heartening
political events of recent weeks, but also underlines the
fragility of conditions in the country. A leitmotif
throughout the report is the need, on the one hand, to
maintain a sustained effort to consolidate achievements
while on the other hand, to extend broad political
support for the initiatives launched out of Sierra Leone.

We think that it is essential for UNIPSIL to
continue to stand by the political dialogue given the

signs of disagreement among the political parties and
of potential violence while, at the same time, backing
that process with the purpose of making progress in
national reconciliation and the consolidation of
democracy.

