Mr. Mukongo Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset, Sir,
to say how pleased I am to see you preside over the
Security Council this month. I am convinced that you
will accomplish your lofty objectives selflessly and
successfully. Allow me also to commend your
predecessor, the representative of Pakistan, for the skill
and competence that he brought to bear on his difficult
work during his presidency last month. I would also
like to thank you for the welcome initiative of
convening this important Security Council meeting and
to hail all members of the Council for agreeing to add
today's debate to their programme of work.

The issue of renewing resolution 1422 (2002)
requires my delegation to take up the following three
essential points in its statement: first, the importance of
the International Criminal Court; secondly, my
country's commitment to the Court; and thirdly, the
advisability or necessity of renewing resolution 1422
(2002).

The International Criminal Court, whose Statute
entered into force on 1 July 2002, is for us an
unprecedented instrument in the world judicial system,
especially given its permanent nature, which
distinguishes it from previous institutions, in particular
the ad hoc tribunals that are now responsible for
examining the consequences of civil wars. This is an
important historical step forward that marks the end of
the Stalinist aphorism, which Secretary-General Kofi
Annan once described as a cynical vision, according to
which one death is a tragedy whereas 1 million deaths
are a statistic.

For humanity, the International Criminal Court is
the crowning achievement in its struggle against
impunity for the most serious crimes that have long
shocked our collective conscience. The concept of
combating impunity is in no way opposed to the
mission of the Council. On the contrary, it
complements the maintenance of international peace
and security, a principle that is cherished by this body.

As one speaker said during the ceremony marking
the deposit of the sixtieth instrument of ratification of
the Statute of the Court, on 11 April 2002, it is an
illusion to believe that a society can attain peace and
stability without trying to bring to light crimes
committed, determine the responsibility of the
perpetrators and give restitution to the victims.

At a moment in history such as this, when the
trend towards creating ad hoc courts seems to be

waning, countries such as mine - where the gravest
crimes have been committed and are still being
committed - must re-establish the rule of law by

prosecuting the perpetrators of such crimes in their
own courts, by virtue of the sacred principle of
complementarity instituted by the Statute of the Court.

My country will never cease to recall that its
commitment to the International Criminal Court
freedom reflects a true attachment to the principles of
freedom, democracy and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Accordingly, my country was
among the 120 States of the 160 present that voted to
adopt the final text of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court at the conclusion of the July 1998
Rome Conference. That commitment was reaffirmed on
11 April 2002, when my Government decided to offer
to the international community the sixtieth ratification,
which marked the Statute's entry into force.

My country wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
and support for the International Criminal Court, a
Court whose independence in relation to the Security
Council bodes well for the attainment of the objectives
of its mandate. Moreover, it continues to hold that an
International Criminal Court provided with every
possible guarantee that it will function well and cleared
of suspicions of political influences and partiality will
eventually rally the whole world to its cause. That is
why my country appeals for respect for the integrity of
the Court's Statute.

Because Council members will vote shortly on a
renewal of resolution 1422 (2002), I should like to
remind them of history. On 9 December 1948, the
General Assembly, one of the principal organs of the
Organization, in its resolution 260 B (111), requested
the International Law Commission to create an
international jurisdiction charged with trying persons
charged with genocide or other crimes under its
jurisdiction. The international community's efforts to
give effect to that request resulted in the holding at
Rome in 1998 of the historic United Nations
Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the
Establishment of an International Criminal Court. The
Statute that was adopted entered into force on 1 July
2002. As of today's meeting, the 18 judges mandated to
sit upon the Court have already been elected. The
Court's inauguration took place on 11 March 2003,
along with the swearing in of the judges. The first
Prosecutor of the Court has been elected and is to be
sworn in next Monday; 90 States have now ratified the
Court's Statute.

As one can see, the essential steps have been
completed, and the Court's establishment has drawn to
a close. So, will the Security Council be ready to
assume the historic responsibility of steadfastly
assisting the Court? In the wake of the Second World
War, it was believed that such an institution must be
established.

Because paragraph 2 of resolution 1422 (2002) is
only an optional clause and not a mandatory provision,
my delegation wonders about the advisability or the
real necessity of renewing resolution 1422 (2002) at a
time when our generation wants to have a chance to see
the functioning of the first international and permanent
legal jurisdiction charged with prosecuting the most
odious crimes, which are revolting to the conscience of
humanity.

Now that the Court's establishment is complete,
we think that we should give it the opportunity and the
freedom to prove itself, in particular by initiating the
prosecutions of those who are still massacring civilian
populations and engaging in massive violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law
throughout the world. Above all, it should play the
greatest role that the world can expect of it: preventing
criminals, through the threat of prosecution, from
accomplishing their filthy work.

Finally, my country hopes that the International
Criminal Court will truly be a gift of hope for future
generations and a giant leap forward in the march
towards the universalization of human rights and the
primacy of law, as Secretary-General Kofi Annan has
stated. The International Criminal Court fights against
impunity; the Security Council maintains international
peace and security. We favour the full functioning of
both bodies.

