Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to discuss the situation in
the Middle East. Escalations in different parts of the
region and political paralysis in the Council make the
participation of the entire membership in this debate
particularly important.

The ongoing paralysis of the Security Council with
respect to the situation in Syria is a reason for deep
concern. No less than 12 vetoes have been cast on
proposals before the Council to deal with the situation.
Moreover, its rare decisions have been ineffective, such
as the ceasefire mandated under resolution 2401 (2018),
which continues to be disregarded by conflict parties.
The conflict has turned from an internal armed conflict
into a threat to the stability of the region and beyond.
It continues to be characterized by massive violations
of international humanitarian law, including the use of
chemical weapons and large-scale displacement. Both
the briefing we heard yesterday (see S/PV.8242) and the
Brussels Conference have made it clear just how far we
are from a political solution to this conflict.

Accountability must be an integral part of any
peace process for Syria, as evidenced by the situation
on the ground and called for consistently by Syrian civil
society groups. We continue to strongly support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, whose mandate
encompasses crimes committed by all parties and, of
course, the competence to investigate the use of chemical
weapons which is, under all circumstances, a war
crime. The Mechanism will soon be fully operational
and is already in a position to receive information and
evidence. We call on all States to extend this type of
cooperation to the Mechanism. We reiterate our view
that the Council should refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), as called for by
the Secretary-General and supported yesterday at the
Brussels Conference.

The peace process in the Middle East, having
already been stalled for a considerable time, is now
further jeopardized by recent developments in Gaza.
We are deeply concerned by the recent violence, in
particular the excessive use of force and extrajudicial
killings by Israeli security forces. We support the
call of the Secretary-General for an independent and
transparent investigation and echo the ICC Prosecutor's
reminder that the situation in Palestine remains under
preliminary examination.

According to the principle of complementarity,
the primary responsibility to investigate lies with the
national judiciaries concerned, with a role for the Court
to monitor such proceedings, which have to be conducted
in conformity with relevant standards of international
criminal law. We also closely follow discussions
on possible action by the Human Rights Council in
Geneva. Liechtenstein continues to support a two-
State solution, within an international legal framework
based on applicable international humanitarian law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The catastrophic humanitarian crisis and the
systematic disregard for international humanitarian
law in Yemen remain alarming. It is crucial that
humanitarian aid have unimpeded, sustained and safe
access, as over 20 million people urgently require help.
We welcome the Council's call for increased access for
humanitarian aid to Yemen through sea and air ports.
Nevertheless, we are concerned that hostilities on all
sides continue and will lead to a further escalation of
the situation. The Security Council must live up to
its responsibility and protect civilians from the most
serious crimes under international law, including
the deliberate targeting of civilian populations and
infrastructure. We support the new Special Envoy's
initiative to recall inclusive peace talks. Council
members, in particular those nine that have signed the
code of conduct on mass atrocity crimes elaborated by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
should use their procedural majority in the Council to
address the situation in Yemen.

One of the few positive developments in the recent
past with respect to the situation in the Middle East
was the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), a highlight of multilateral diplomacy
and a testimony to the effectiveness of the Council,
which has endorsed that important agreement. We
continue supporting the JCPOA and hope that its terms
will be honoured by all parties.

