Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The presidency's choice of this theme at this
time is of the utmost importance, because the issue of
the rule of law, particularly at the international level, has
become a genuine concern to many States, especially
developing States. The law has been neutralized - in
spirit in most cases, and in letter in many cases - to
serve interpretations in the interest of certain States
and groups of States.

We are not trying to reinvent the wheel and start,
regardless of the Charter's provisions, to lay down
the bases of international relations and national
commitments and their rules anew when we talk about
the rule of law as a means to maintain international
peace and security. Instead, we must evaluate what has
been achieved and identify shortcomings in order to
find the ways likely to deal with them, to establish the
rule of law pursuant to the Charter's provisions and the
values of our international organizations.

The rule of law is an indivisible whole. It is
unreasonable and unacceptable to concentrate on the
rule of law at the national level only and ignore it at
the international level. Respect for the principles of
international law and the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations is the cornerstone on which to
establish the rule oflaw in general.

Furthermore, respect for the rule of law at
the international level could create the necessary
environment to achieve the rule of law at the national
level. The rule of law at the international level can
help to maintain international peace and security, for it
helps prevent conflicts and contributes to active efforts
to resolve whatever conflicts might break out before
they become worse. The absence of the rule of law at
the international level would open wide the door to
foreign intervention in the affairs of States and to their
destabilization. That has happened since the end of the
Cold War, and unfortunately it continues to happen.

Experience has shown that the challenges to the
rule of law at the international level have not resulted
from a lack of international mechanisms or instruments.
Rather, they have been caused by the selectivity
and double-standards approach adopted by certain
influential States in dealing with international law.
Those States have attempted to impose their hegemony
and unilateral decisions on other States, using flagrant
interventionist methods, provoking trouble and sedition
and threatening to use force or actually using it,
devising pompous concepts that serve their interests
while at the same time politicizing other concepts that
are already established.

The crisis in my country, Syria, is clear evidence
of the policies of flagrant intervention in the internal
affairs of States and the endeavours to destabilize
its security, stability, unity and territorial integrity
through the actions of Governments of States - which
have become known to all - to support, fund and arm
extremist terrorist elements and foreign mercenaries
and send them to Syria to ravage, terror and devastate.

Is the reason behind that behaviour the alleged
concern by those States forthe rule oflaw? Is the targeting
of national law enforcement institutions - police
stations, courts and civil archives and real estate
records- the work of those who are concerned for
the rule of law? On the other hand, can we consider as
implementation of the rule of law the unilateral coercive
measures imposed by some States Members of this
Organization against my country, which have negative
effects on the livelihood of Syrians and deprive them
of the basic daily needs of life? Can we consider the
continuing Israeli occupation of the occupied Syrian
Golan and other Arab occupied lands - for decades
now - or their continuing violation ofhuman rights and
international humanitarian law to be implementation of
the rule of law?

The answer to such questions is clear and does not
call for any interpretation or explanation: those acts are
a flagrant violation of the most fundamental principles
of international law, the Charter of the United Nations,
the principles of friendly relations among States and the
international instruments on counter-terrorism.

The fundamental objective behind enacting
laws, signing of treaties and adopting United
Nations resolutions on counter-terrorism is to ensure
commitment from the very outset to preventing the
spread of terrorism and combating its existing forms.
However, some Member States in this very Council
and outside it have Closed their eyes and ears to our
repeated calls - for more than two years - in our
statements and through hundreds of formal letters, for
the United Nations to shoulder its responsibilities in
confronting the terrorist threat facing Syria, as a State
and as a people.

This is a terrorist menace that threatens security and
stability in the region and in the world. Those Member
States have turned a blind eye to the need to ensure
the rule of law through their failure to hold accountable
the Governments of Member States that support
such terrorism with money, weapons and disgusting
extremist Takfirist fatwas. The danger of terrorism in
Syria has been heightened and its impact has become a
threat to peace and security in other States, including
Kyrgyzstan, which announced few days ago the arrest

of a network of terrorists returning from Syria who had
been plotting terrorist acts in the country.

After all that, some States very belatedly have
begun to take measures to address their failure to
commit to the international instruments on counter-
terrorism, such as stripping citizenship from those
of their citizens involved in terrorist acts in Syria
and preventing them from returning to their home
countries, as if they are saying to them - to those
terrorists - "continue fighting in Syria until you are
killed or until whomever sent you to Syria moves you
to another State whose stability and security are to be
destabilized".

As for those States that export terrorism and
blind extremist ideology - with Saudi Arabia at the
forefront - following the exposure of their role in
supporting terrorism, they have attempted to improve
their image with regard to international public opinion
by adopting sham legislation, threatening to prosecute
terrorists returning from Syria but not those who are
being sent to it.

Nevertheless, can any reasonable person believe
that the Saudi regime and its intelligence apparatus
were not aware that thousands of Saudi extremists had
joined what they call "the holy war in Syria" with the
blessing of the promoters of the Takfirist fatwas and
direct incitement from the Saudi regime's Foreign
Minister?

We have heard recently, following the killing of
thousands and of innocent Syrians, many statements
by Ministers for Foreign Affairs and security affairs
in many Member States warning against the danger of
terrorists active in Syria. In that context, the Director
of National Intelligence in the United States, James
Clapper, confirmed that 20,000 to 26,000 extremists are
working in the terrorist armed groups active in Syria,
including 7,500 foreign terrorists from 50 countries,
including some former elements from Al-Qaida who
had participated in wars in Afghanistan and Pakistan
and are looking forward to attacking Europe and the
United States.

The Kuwaiti Member of Parliament Nabeel Al-Fadl
also stated recently that his country for two decades
had suffered from the loss of its sons in Afghanistan
and Chechnya, after instigators managed to mislead
and send them to fight under so-called legitimate
justification. He added that Kuwait continued to receive
the bodies of its dead sons who were sent with the
same misleading fatwas to Syria. His colleague Saleh
Ashour warned that no less than 20,000 Gulf and Arab
fighters had decided to move to Kuwait completing
their terrorist actitivies in Syria, stressing that changes
on the ground in Syria were rapidly evolving, forcing
many non-Syrians to exit the struggle there.

That is all a drop in the bucket. Instead of hearing
about efforts to promote the rule of law - the subject
of this meeting - and to coordinate efforts to combat
terrorism, the United States media informs us of a
secret meeting held in Washington, DC, recently that
included heads ofArab and Western intelligence organs,
including members from this Council, to provide
military support to the so-called Syrian opposition, in
a clear breach of the rules of international law and its
principles.

In conclusion, my country, Syria, stresses its
support for efforts aimed at promoting the rule of
law internationally and nationally, and underscores
that providing assistance to achieve that objective
necessarily requires that we abstain from turning the
issue into a pretext to to interfere in the internal affairs
of States or undermine its sovereignty.

