The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now resume its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf ofthe Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms the
statement of its President of 24 September 1999
(S/PRST/l999/28) and its resolution 1209 (1998)
of 19 November 1998, and notes with grave
concern that the destabilizing accumulation and
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light
weapons in many regions of the world increases
the intensity and duration of armed conflicts,
undermines the sustainability of peace
agreements, impedes the success of peace-
building, frustrates efforts aimed at the
prevention of armed conflict, hinders
considerably the provision of humanitarian
assistance, and compromises the effectiveness of
the Security Council in discharging its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council expresses grave
concern at the harmful impact of small arms and
light weapons on civilians in situations of armed
conflict, particularly on vulnerable groups such as
women and children, and recalls in this regard its
resolutions 1296 (2000) of 19 April 2000 and
1314 (2000) of 11 August 2000.

"The Security Council further notes with
satisfaction the growing awareness within the
international community of the problem of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons as a
challenge that involves security, humanitarian and
development dimensions. In this regard the

Council welcomes recent global and regional
initiatives such as the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects; the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
their Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime; the
document on small arms and light weapons
adopted by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE); the resolution on
small arms of the Council of Ministers of the
European Union; the Bamako Declaration on an
African Common Position on the Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of
Small Arms and Light Weapons; and the
extension of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on the
Production and Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons.

"The Security Council welcomes the
adoption of the Programme of Action of the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, and calls on all Member States to take
the required measures to promptly implement the
recommendations contained therein. The Council
recognizes its responsibility in assisting in the
implementation of this Programme of Action and
stresses that the success of this Programme
depends on the political will and efforts of
Member States to implement its measures at the
national, regional and global levels, as well as on
the provision of international cooperation and
assistance and on the follow-up agreed by the
Conference, including the convening of a review
conference no later than 2006.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
inherent right of individual or collective self-
defence in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations and, subject to the
Charter, the right of each State to import, produce
and retain small arms and light weapons for its
self-defence and security needs. Bearing in mind
the considerable volume of licit trade in small
arms and light weapons, the Council underlines
the vital importance of effective national
regulations and controls for this trade. In this

regard, arms-exporting countries should exercise
the highest degree of responsibility in small arms
and light weapons transactions, and all countries
have the responsibility to prevent their illegal
diversion and re-export, so as to stem the leakage
of legal weapons to illegal markets. The Security
Council also stresses the importance of
international cooperation to enable States to
identify and trace in a timely and reliable manner
illicit small arms and light weapons.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of practical disarmament measures in
averting armed conflicts and encourages States
and relevant international and regional
organizations to facilitate the appropriate
cooperation of civil society actors in activities
related to the prevention and combating of the
excessive and destabilizing accumulation of and
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
including facilitating greater awareness and better
understanding of the nature and scope of this
problem.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role of regional and subregional
organizations in providing useful information and
perspectives on the regional and subregional
dimensions that characterize arms flows to
conflicts, and underscores the importance of
regional agreements and cooperation in this
regard.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the effective collection and control
of small arms and light weapons and of their
storage and destruction, as appropriate, in the
context of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, as well as other
measures that may contribute to the effective
disposal of small arms and light weapons and to
prevention of their spreading to other regions. To
this end, the Council welcomes the publication by
the Secretary-General of the Handbook on
Environmentally Sound Methods of Destruction
of Small Arms, Light Weapons, Ammunition and
Explosives. The Council stresses the importance
of incorporating, on a case-by-case basis, in the
negotiation, consolidation and implementation of
peace agreements, as well as in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations,
appropriate provisions for the disarmament,

demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants, taking into account the special needs
of child soldiers.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the effective implementation of arms embargoes
imposed by the Council in its relevant
resolutions, and encourages Member States to
provide the Sanctions Committees with available
information on alleged violations of arms
embargoes. The Council expresses its
determination to continue to improve the
efficiency of the arms embargoes imposed by the
Council on a case-by-case basis, including
through the establishment of specific monitoring
mechanisms or similar arrangements as
appropriate. The Council stresses the need to
engage the relevant international organizations,
non-governmental organizations, business and
financial institutions and other actors at the
international, regional and local levels to
contribute to the implementation of arms
embargoes.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
cooperation and sharing of information among
Member States and among the different Sanctions
Committees on arms traffickers who have
violated arms embargoes established by the
Council. This information could also be provided
to Interpol's International Weapons and
Explosives Tracking System (IWETS) database
or any other relevant database that may be
developed for this purpose.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
innovative strategies to address the relationship
between the illicit exploitation of natural and
other resources and the purchase of and trade in
illegal weapons in those situations under its
consideration. The Council expresses its intention
to continue to consider employing effective
measures to prevent the illicit exploitation of
natural and other resources from fuelling those
conflicts. In this regard, information on financial
or other transactions fuelling the illicit flow of
arms to those conflicts should be made available
to the Council.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to include in his reports
regarding relevant situations under consideration

in the Council, analytical assessments on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
including, to the extent possible and within
available resources, the availability, stockpiling,
lines of supply, brokering, transportation
arrangements and financial networks for these
weapons, as well as their humanitarian impact,

especially on children.
the

"The Security Council recognizes the role
of the Secretary-General in supporting the
coordination of all United Nations activities to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. In this connection, the Security Council
requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the Council by September 2002 containing
specific recommendations on ways and means in
which the Council may contribute to dealing with
the question ofillicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in situations under its consideration,
taking into account the views of Member States,
recent experiences in the field and the contents of
this statement."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/2l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
