Ms. Sarabi: It is indeed an honour for me to be
here today to represent Afghan women. I thank the
delegation of the Netherlands for the opportunity to
participate in this meeting.

I am very hopeful that the Security Council gained
a very clear picture of the situation during its their last
visit to Kabul. I thank the Council for coming to visit
us. Surely, that will pave the way for new opportunities
to reiterate the Council's support for the people of
Afghanistan, especially women. Women's lives have
changed remarkably in the past 17 years, and two
factors are responsible for that change.

One of them is the tireless efforts and persistent
struggles of women themselves; the other is the
Afghanistan's Constitution, which includes important
articles in favour of women that have enabled them to
become engaged in political and social issues in the
country. In addition to the Afghan Constitution, which
provides equal rights for both Afghan men and women,
on 5 March 2003, Afghanistan joined the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. In addition, laws were adopted on
eliminating violence against women and preventing
sexual harassment.

Afghanistan today is well equipped with national
policies and international commitments to support
women's empowerment. Afghanistan's Constitution
guarantees equal rights before the law for both women
and men. Similarly, the Constitution guarantees
women's access to education, health care and social
inclusion. After 17 years, Afghanistan has in place
key legislation, policies and national plans that further
increase the Government's obligation to strengthen
women's participation and equal rights.

Afghan women's inclusion in some of the key
decision-making roles at the central and provincial
levels is remarkable. Women's presence today in
the Cabinet, the Parliament, the Senate, provincial
councils, the High Peace Council, the security sector
and civil society is also remarkable. The post of Deputy
Attorney General for the prohibition of violence against
women has been established, and there are currently 242
women prosecutors working in different departments,
including that on the elimination of violence against
women. There are also 300 female judges, who are
working to ensure the rule of law and prevent violence
against women. In addition, 800 out of 4,000 defence
attorneys are female. In addition, family response units
are actively working throughout all 34 provinces. With
regard to the security sector, a total of 3,144 female
police officers are working in the Ministry of the
Interior, with a target to increase that number to 5,000.
And 1,500 women are currently playing an active role
in the Ministry of Defence.

The Government's initiatives have led to significant
achievements in education and training, which translate
into an increase in the number of girls attending school
from 3.5 million in 2013 to 3.6 million in 2015 - 40 per
cent of the total number of students attending school.
Young girls continue to pursue higher education after
graduating from school, either in the country or abroad.
The number of professors in governmental universities
increased from 3,159 to 5,582 in three years, of whom
774 are female. It is worth mentioning that the National
Unity Government has not limited women just to the
Ministry of Women's Affairs, and that the role of
women in governance has expanded to all departments.
For example, a 50 per cent presence of women in
the Citizens Charter National Priority Programme
is guaranteed.

In July 2015, the Government of Afghanistan
launched its first national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
plan involves collaboration with other Government
agencies, civil society organizations and international
organizations to implement resolution 1325 (2000). In
Government leadership, there are 3 female Ministers
and 11 female Deputy Ministers, but what is worth
mentioning is the significant presence of women at the
middle-management level.

Afghan women have made significant progress in
small and medium-sized businesses. For example, the
Chamber of Commerce for Women has been established
to empower and support Afghan women in business.
We are proud of the growth of the role of women in civil
society. Although they are still young, their advocacy
skills are commendable. An estimated 2,000 female
employees are actively working in the media sector,
where up to 50 print, video and audio media outlets are
run by women.

Women's participation in sports is another tangible
achievement. The number ofAfghan girls in sports now
exceeds 12,000, and in the past three years they have
won 50 foreign medals. Sportswomen have been well
represented in various sports, especially the Bamyan
Mountain Peace Cup bicycle-racing championship.

Women are actively engaged in the peace process.
Out ofa total of 65 members ofthe High Peace Council,
one in a leadership position, four in the executive and
twelve in the General Assembly are women. Sixty-three
women out of 320 are also members of the Provincial
Peace Committee. Right now, women are represented at
all levels of the High Peace Council. In the High Peace
Council, the leadership and all members - including
myself as a Deputy Chairperson - have always
maintained and respected the idea that peace without
women's meaningful participation is impossible.
Therefore, we are committed to boosting women's role
at all levels of the peacebuilding process, ensuring
their participation in leadership and safeguarding
their rights.
The High Peace Council and I also believe that
social peace is paving the way for political peace. That
is why we initiated the Women's Peace Network, which
we call the "mothers of peace". The first phase is now
complete and the second will start very soon, in late
March. The Network will bring changes to the mindset
of the people from one of violence to one of peace.

The High Peace Council has also created a women's
advisory board, where rural women from 34 provinces,
in addition to Provincial Peace Committee members,
will meet on a quarterly basis and share their concerns
and ideas for improving our operations. We are
committed to increasing the number of female members
in the Committee from two to three in each province.

At the second Kabul Process conference, the
Afghan Government shared the road map for peace.
Afghan President Ashraf Ghani offered talks with the
Taliban without preconditions. He added:

"The Taliban will be recognized as a political
party in the structure of the Constitution and by the
Afghan Government if they obey the rule of law and
respect women's rights, which is one ofthe strategic
priorities for Afghanistan's international partners."

Also, one of the subjects mentioned in the proposal is
a provision for the rights and safety of all citizens of
Afghanistan, especially women, in accordance with
the Constitution.

These are achievements for Afghan women, but
some challenges remain and I shall highlight just the
principal ones. First, violence against women remains
very high throughout Afghanistan. Secondly, there is a
lack of awareness and rule of law for the implementation
of gender equality. Thirdly, access to higher education
is difficult, especially for girls who are married young
and cannot pursue their education. Fourthly, election
campaigning for women, especially in rural areas, is
still a challenge.

Ishould liketo make the following recommendations.

We must ensure that women's rights are
non-negotiable at any level of the peace dialogue.
We must make a commitment to including women's
meaningful participation in all agendas at the
negotiating table and in decision-making in peace
and reconciliation processes. We must ensure that the
female members of the Provincial Peace Committee
have the capacity to negotiate and lobby. We must also
ensure specific and sufficient allocation of budgets and
corresponding financing mechanisms for the effective
implementation of the national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000), and include women in initiatives related to
improving livelihoods and community-based projects
to strengthen development outcomes and address risks.

Afghan women expect their partners to stand by
them, bring peace and security and uproot the pervasive
phenomenon of terrorism, because if we are the primary
victims today, surely tomorrow others will be next.

