Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mali is
delighted to see the Council meeting under your
authority, Mr. Minister, to consider the situation in the
Great Lakes region. I should like to welcome the
presence today of His Excellency Mr. Paul Kagame,
President of the Rwandese Republic, and of the
Secretary-General and to thank them for their
important statements.

We listened carefully to President Kagame and to
the Secretary-General, who, like President Kabila a few
days ago, enabled us to glimpse some encouraging
prospects for the resolution of the conflict in the Great
Lakes region. The position of Mali on this issue is well
known, and I would not like to repeat it here today. I
shall therefore confine myself to making a few brief
remarks, in deference to your wishes, Mr. President.

First of all, I should like to underline the fact that
Mali welcomes the new impetus for peace and offers
its firm support for it. We believe that a lasting
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo necessarily entails respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.

Secondly, we believe that the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and the Arusha peace agreement remain the
viable bases for lasting peace in the Great Lakes
region. In that connection, we call on all parties to
show restraint and to cooperate fully in the
implementation ofthose agreements and ofthe relevant
Security Council resolutions. The time has come to put
an end to a conflict that has persisted for too long and
that has brought indescribable suffering to innocent
people.

Thirdly, I want to stress that we strongly
encourage the continuation of the talks between
President Kagame and President Joseph Kabila, which
began last week at Washington, just as we support
regional initiatives and the efforts of the Organization
of African Unity and of the international community to
put a final stop to the conflict in the Great Lakes
region.

I wish in conclusion to say that my delegation
expects to make a useful contribution to the Security
Council's meeting with the members of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement, to take place on
21 and 22 February, with a view to advancing the peace
pI'OCCSS.

