Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
the Secretary-General in thanking Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura for his leadership
and service in Afghanistan, and looks forward to
working with Mr. Jan Kubis. We also welcome the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and
thank him for his statement to the Council.

New Zealand is pleased that, after a very difficult
year, the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2011/772*) does identify further and steady
improvements in Afghanistan. We welcome the
progress made in the Kabul process and are encouraged
by the work of the Afghan Government to resolve the
Kabul Bank situation and to achieve a successful
outcome to its negotiations with the International
Monetary Fund. However, the Secretary-General's
report also identifies challenges still to be confronted,
and we remain committed to working with partners to
address them.

Since we last addressed this Council on the
situation in Afghanistan (see S/PV.6497), the New
Zealand provincial reconstruction team has overseen
the formal commencement of transition in Bamyan
province, one of the first to embark on that process. I
am pleased to report that transition is proceeding
smoothly. The team has made a conscious effort to
encourage the people of Bamyan to turn first to their
own Government for assistance. As a result, the local
authorities are taking the opportunities offered by
transition to assume increasing responsibility for their
own affairs.

Going forward, it will be important that the
Afghan Government be able to address Bamyan's
needs. Transition imposes greater responsibility on
provincial officials. Central Government must support
those officials by providing adequate resources,
delegating authority and, above all, demonstrating a
willingness - indeed, it must demonstrate a
determination - to replace the few corrupt or
incompetent actors with merit-based appointees.
Otherwise, the Bamyan population will continue to
look past the provincial Government to the donor and
non-governmental organization community to deliver
basic services.

We welcome the ongoing work of the United
Nations to promote and encourage coherence among
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
donors and the Afghan Government - work that better
links the Government to its people. As we all cooperate
to achieve the ultimate aim of transition, we urge the

United Nations to continue that vital work, as there is
still room for improvement in efforts to achieve better
coordination and communication. The United Nations-
supported Central Statistics Organization survey of
Bamyan province was an excellent initiative, but more
attention to the dissemination of its results would have
a positive effect on the ability of local Government to
meet the needs of the population.

The transition process is fragile, but we should
not underestimate the capacity of Afghan institutions,
officials and people to respond to the needs of their
communities. With ongoing support from the
provincial reconstruction team, the international
community and, most importantly, the central
Government in Kabul, there are reasons to hope for a
successful conclusion to transition in Bamyan in 2013.

New Zealand was very concerned at the October
report of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) on the widespread
mistreatment of detainees in Afghan Government
facilities . We are grateful for the United Nations'
investigation of that difficult issue and applaud
UNAMA for its careful handling of the report's
conclusions. New Zealand has expressed its concern
directly to the Afghan Government. We welcome its
initial response, but also support ISAF's immediate
suspension of detainee transfers to the facilities named.
Above all, we reiterate that the Government of
Afghanistan must continue to address that issue.

We also welcome UNAMA's report on the
implementation of the 2009 Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women . Despite some progress,
however, New Zealand's own experience of the
application of the law by Afghan judges, prosecutors
and police is consistent with many of UNAMA's
findings. Even in Bamyan - a province which, most
commendably, has had a woman governor since
2005 - the vast majority of cases involving violence
against women are not dealt with adequately in the
formal justice system. The resulting treatment of
victims is degrading. We urge the Afghan Government,
with United Nations support, to continue promoting the
proper application of the 2009 law, including the
replacement of corrupt or ineffective officials as
required.

New Zealand strongly supports the outcomes of
the recent international meetings on Afghanistan. The
Istanbul meeting sent an important regional signal of a
strong commitment to Afghanistan. We are encouraged
by the sense of commitment of all participants at the
Bonn meeting.

Like everyone else on the ground in Afghanistan,
New Zealand has worked hard to achieve good
outcomes in Bamyan, and remains committed to seeing
the transition process through to a successful
conclusion. Then it will be for the people of Bamyan
themselves and their Governments - central,
provincial and district - to secure their own long-term
future.

