Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the report (S/2007/330) he has
submitted for consideration by members of the
Council, which pertains to the fulfilment of the
responsibilities entrusted to the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). In that
connection, we would like to thank Mr. Ashraf Jehangir
Qazi for his briefing, as well as Ambassador Khalilzad,
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, for his briefing on the activities of the
Multinational Force. My delegation also listened with
great interest to the statement delivered by His
Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, whose presence here today we
welcome.

The overall situation in Iraq continues to be a
source of major concern, not just for that country but
for the entire Middle East region and the wider
international community. We see recurring acts of
violence, characterized by almost daily attacks,
kidnappings, the taking of hostages and other heinous
crimes. With regard to Iraq's rich cultural and religious
heritage, which is admired by the entire world, the cost
of the damage inflicted upon it is very difficult to
ascertain as yet. The dangerous nature of the situation
in Iraq has led to the flight of many people who have
become displaced or who have simply decided to
become exiles in neighbouring countries, in particular
Syria and Jordan, thereby creating a major
humanitarian problem in the region.

We once again condemn those violent acts, whose
continuation and overwhelmingly sectarian character
are aimed at nothing less than the destruction of a
country, its infrastructure and its political institutions.
An example of that was the 12 April 2007 attack
against the Council of Representatives. However, the
civilian population too is exposed to death and
destruction on a daily basis.
We bring up the issue of violence in order to
express our impatience as regards urgently finding
satisfactory solutions to the enormous challenges to the
unity of Iraqi society. Once again, those challenges
include national reconciliation. The sharing of political
power and equitable distribution of natural resources,
in particular oil revenues.

It is mainly the responsibility of Iraqi political
and religious leaders to find consensus responses
through an inclusive process to the questions and
difficulties of all kinds that the country is experiencing.
Although the role of Iraq's neighbouring countries and
the ongoing support of the international community
can no longer be underestimated in the current context,
it is important to keep in mind that the United Nations
should remain ready to actively support the Iraqi
Government. My delegation is aware of the essential
role played by UNAMI to that end, and we very much
welcome the work it is doing. We also welcome the
leadership role of the Secretary-General through the
recent initiatives for peace and reconstruction in Iraq.
The Secretary-General and the United Nations system
overall must stress the coordination of all efforts to
help Iraq in order to be in a better position to
implement future initiatives, and we can already
imagine how great the importance of those initiatives
will be.

As part of that effort, we wish to mention in
particular the April conference in Geneva on displaced
persons held under the auspices of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; the
meeting in Sharm el-Sheik, Egypt, on 3 May 2007,
where we saw the launching of the International
Compact with Iraq; and the enhanced meeting of the
neighbouring States of Iraq of 4 May, also in Sharm el-
Sheik, which brought Iraq and its neighbouring
countries together with the five permanent members of
the Security Council and the Group of Eight.

Particular attention should therefore be given to
the follow-up of the conclusions of those various
meetings, as well as to the work being done in the
various committees that are being asked to find
domestic legislative solutions to basic issues such as
hydrocarbons, provincial elections, political pluralism
and amnesty.

My delegation hopes that each and every one of
those various initiatives - provided that they are
carried out in the interest of the Iraqi population and
with a principally political perspective that remains
based on consensus, as the current Iraqi authorities
have worked together to do - will contribute to re-
establishing trust, which is an essential condition for
peace and reconstruction in the country.
