The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

We too are very grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Miyet for his very helpful update on the Secretary-General's
latest report.

Progress continues to be made, and we welcome in
particular the continuing strong contribution of Nigeria and
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) as a whole, and
the arrival of Kenyan and Indian peacekeepers under the
new Force Commander, Major-General Jetley. It is critical
that the force deploys to full strength and soon as possible,
and we must ensure that the Force Commander has the
clearest possible guidance and backing from his
headquarters in New York.

The United Kingdom is committed to do all that we
can to help in this effort and to make the Lorne Peace
Agreement work more widely. The Agreement gives the
best chance to the people of Sierra Leone for an end to the
Violence and suffering they have endured for the past eight
years. While there are, as Mr. Miyet has pointed out, some
reasons for cautious optimism - particularly in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme - we agree with the Secretary-General that
serious problems remain.

We are concerned at the continuing cease-fire
violations, human rights abuses and lack of humanitarian
access. And we are appalled by the recent attack on
personnel of non-governmental organizations and by the
detention of medical workers in the east of the country.
We hope that their release is imminent.

Tensions between the different rebel groups and
leaders - Sankoh, Koroma and Bockarie - lie behind
much of this continuing unrest and violence. It is essential
to maintain dialogue with each of them to bring them and
their followers into the Lome framework.

Even in the area of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, organizational and security problems
continue to hamper the DDR programme. These need to
be addressed, and a better information and sensitization
strategy is vital to encourage those groups that have not
yet disarmed to do so.

The United Kingdom welcomes the recent pledges
of contributions to the World Bank Trust Fund from
Germany, Canada, Italy and Norway and the
announcement this morning of contributions from the
Netherlands and France.

We look forward to hearing the Secretary-General's
next report in January, when UNAMSIL is fully
deployed. The United Kingdom welcomes the
appointment of Special Representative Adeniji and pays
tribute to the work of Francis Okelo.

Finally, we urge the parties and all those with
influence over them to continue to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the Lome Agreement
to allow this desperately needed peacekeeping operation
to fulfil its mandate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Miyet to respond to the
comments and questions that have arisen.

