Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation congratulates South Africa on having
assumed the rotating presidency ofthe Security Council
for this month. China affirms our full support to you,
Mr. President. We also wish to congratulate Russia on
the successful completion of its Council presidency
in September.

China thanks South Africa for the initiative to
hold today's open meeting. We listened carefully to the
briefings by Special Adviser Gawanas, Special Envoy
Chebbi and the civil-society representatives.

As the hope of a nation and the future of the
world, young people represent a valuable factor in
promoting social and economic development and an
important force in safeguarding world peace. Chairman
Mao Zedong, founder of the new China, once said to
young people:

"You young people, full of vigour and vitality
are like the sun at 8 or 9 in the morning. Our hope
is placed on you".

The late South African President Nelson Mandela
also said that youth was the greatest asset of a nation.

Africa is the continent with the youngest population.
Young people are actively involved in nation-building
and playing an important role in the revitalization
of Africa. They work hard for peace, making their
contribution to delivering on the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative and implementing the African Union's
Agenda 2063 through concrete action.

Young people affected by armed conflicts and
lack of development also face the predicament of being
marginalized. They are confronted with challenges
such as poverty and unemployment. To promote peace,
security and development in Africa, we need to support
and nurture young people as they grow up.

On addressing differences through consultation,
Africa has a good tradition of using negotiations and
consultations. Regional and subregional organizations
on the continent also have successful experience in
the area of good offices. China has always supported
African countries in finding African solutions to
African problems.

To advance the political settlement of hotspot
issues, it is necessary to give adequate consideration
to factors relevant to young people, ensure their
constructive participation in the process, listen to
the views expressed by a wide spectrum of young
population, fully leverage the youth advantage and
force a strongest synergy for peace.

It is important to promote peace through culture.
Peace embodies a common aspiration across the
different cultures. It is important to mobilize peoples
around the world, youth in particular, to impress upon
them the idea of peace being of supreme value and
the notion of harmony in diversity. On the basis of
mutual respect among different cultures, we advocate
strengthening mutual exchanges, fostering mutual trust,
expanding cooperation and seeking a win-win outcome
so as to gradually blaze a new trail to promoting peace
through culture.

Concerning pursuing peace through development,
development is the foundation for building peace and
maintaining sustainable peace. It is imperative to put
economic and social development at the forefront and
support countries in choosing independently their
development path.

China stands ready to closely coordinate the joint
implementation of the Belt and Road Initiative with
the African Union's Agenda 2063 and the development
strategies of African countries to help African countries
increase interconnectivity, build their development
capacities and eliminate the root causes of conflict.

It is vital to be action-driven. Empty rhetoric is
no solution to any problem. We must provide tangible
assistance to young people in Africa. At the 2018 Beijing
Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
China decided to work with Africa to set up 10 Luban
workshops on the continent to provide vocational
training for young Africans, the first of which has
already been established and opened in Djibouti.

We are in the process of setting up the China-
Africa Innovation Cooperation Centre to promote
youth innovation and entrepreneurship. A tailor-made
programme is being implemented to train 1,000 high-
calibre African professionals. We will provide Africa
with 50,000 Government-sponsored scholarships
and 50,000 training opportunities for seminars and
workshops, and we will invite 2,000 young Africans to
visit China in exchanges. We will train young researchers
in agriscience and entrepreneurs in agribusiness. Such
projects will support youth development in Africa and
contribute towards silencing the guns.

China and Africa are good brothers, good friends
and good partners. The principle of sincerity will
result in amity, good faith efforts and the pursuit of the
greater good and shared interests outlined by President
Xi Jinping as the fundamental guide to China's Africa
policy. China supports the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative. In the context of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, China and Africa stand together to build
a community with a shared future that features joint
responsibility, win-win cooperation and happiness for
all. We will continue to work together with our African
brothers to promote comprehensive youth development
and to make a significant contribution to the promotion
of peace and development in Africa.

