Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): A week
after the chemical massacre in Douma and a day after
last night's strikes, I want to say again straight away to
those who pretend to wonder that France has no doubt
whatsoever about the responsibility of the Al-Assad
regime in this attack. This morning we made public
a notice comprising information collected by our
intelligence services. We dismiss those who try once
again to challenge what is obvious and to disguise the
facts before the world.

For years now, Bashar Al-Assad, with the active
support of his allies, has been devising a strategy of
destruction designed to crush any opposition with
contempt for the most basic principles of humanity
and at the cost of the lives of hundreds of thousands
of civilians in Syria. We saw it in Aleppo, in Homs, in
eastern Ghouta, For years, the Syrian regime has used
the most terrifying weapons of destruction - chemical
weapons - to massacre and terrorize its civilian
population. We had another demonstration of this in
Douma, as we had seen before in Khan Shaykhun,
Sarmin, Telemens and Qaminas, where its responsibility
was clearly established by the Joint Investigative
Mechanism of the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). No
one can say he or she did not know.

For years, the Syrian regime has systematically
and repeatedly violated all its international obligations.
The list of such violations is long; it is overwhelming.
We all know them: Violations of all international
chemical-weapons obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention, to which Syria has been a party
since 2013, and the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which

prohibits the use of such weapons against civilians;
violations of the very foundations of international
humanitarian law, namely, the principles of distinction,
precaution and proportionality; violations of successive
Security Council resolutions 2118 (2013), 2209
(2015) and 2235 (2015) and, by the same token, of its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations;
finally, the use of chemical weapons against civilian
populations constitutes a war crime within the meaning
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court. In
August 2013, the Secretary-General even described the
use of chemical weapons as a crime against humanity.

In view ofthe repeated and proven violations by the
Damascus regime of all the rules on which our security
is based, France has consistently called for strong action
by the international community. We have made every
effort to ensure that these horrors do not remain without
consequences at the United Nations and the OPCW
and that they are stopped. The Security Council had
undertaken by successive resolutions 2118 (2013), 2209
(2015) and 2235 (2015) to impose coercive measures
within the meaning of Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations in the event of new violations. It
has been prevented from acting in conformity with
its commitments because of the vetoes systematically
used by Russia. By making such systematic use of its
veto in the Security Council, Russia has betrayed the
commitment it made to the Council in 2013 to ensure
the destruction of the Syrian chemical arsenal. The
Security Council's blockade of the mass atrocities
committed in Syria is a deadly and dangerous trap from
which we must escape.

When it ordered the 7 April chemical attack, the
Syrian regime knew exactly to What it was exposing
itself. It wanted to once again test the international
community's threshold of tolerance and it found it. In
the face ofthis attack on the principles, values and rights
that are the basis of United Nations action, silence is no
longer a solution. We cannot tolerate the downplaying
of the use of chemical weapons, which is an immediate
danger to the Syrian people and to our collective
security. We cannot let the deadly genie of proliferation
out of its bottle. We had clearly warned Al-Assad's
regime and its supporters that such a transgression
would not remain without reaction. We have acted in
accordance with our role and responsibility. We have
done so in a controlled, transparent framework, taking
care to avoid any escalation with the actors present
on the ground. The President of the Republic and the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of France have spoken on
this subject.

Some who for years have flouted the most
elementary rules of international law now assert that
our action is contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations. I would remind them that the Charter was
not designed to protect criminals. Our action is fully
in line with the objectives and values proclaimed from
the outset by the Charter of the United Nations. The
Organization's mission is "to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law can
be maintained". This action was indeed necessary in
order to address the repeated violations by the Syrian
regime of its obligations - obligations stemming from
the law, treaties and its own commitments.

Finally, our response was conceived within an
proportionate framework, with precise objectives.
The main research centre of the chemical weapons
programme and two major production sites were hit.
Through those objectives, Syria's capacity to develop,
perfect and produce chemical weapons has been put out
of commission. That was the only objective, and it has
been achieved.

My country, which knew at first hand the devastating
effects of chemical weapons during the First World
War, will never again allow impunity for their use.
We will never stop identifying those responsible, who
must be brought to justice. That is the purpose of the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons, which we launched last January.

Allow me to stress this point: last night's strikes
are a necessary response to the chemical massacres in
Syria. They are a response in the service of law and our
political strategy to put an end to the Syrian tragedy.
To be more specific, we have four imperatives on
the Syrian issue that are in the immediate interest of
Syrians, but also in the interest of the entire international
community, as the Secretary-General reminded us, and
I want to thank him for his briefing. Let me recall those
four imperatives.

First, the Syrian chemical-weapons programme
must be dismantled in a verifiable and irreversible way.
We must spare no effort to establish an international
mechanism for establishing responsibility, to prevent
impunity and to prevent any repeat attempts to the
Syrian regime to use chemical.

Secondly, terrorism must be eradicated by
permanently defeating Da'esh. That is a long-standing
commitment that still requires genuine effort to ensure
a definitive victory.

Thirdly, there must be a ceasefire throughout
the Syrian territory and humanitarian access to the
civilian populations, as required by Security Council
resolutions. We need full and unhindered humanitarian
access in order to help people in need, in accordance
with resolution 2401 (2018). In particular, it is essential
and urgent that humanitarian convoys safely reach
eastern Ghouta on a daily basis.

Fourthly, we need a crisis-exit strategy, with a
lasting political solution. We can sustainably resolve the
Syrian crisis only through an inclusive political solution
on the basis of the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). We have been calling for that for seven
years. It has never been so urgent to implement it and
to relaunch genuine negotiations under the auspices of
the United Nations with a view to achieving a political
transition in Syria.
Only that road map will allow us to finally emerge
from the Syrian impasse. France is ready to tackle it,
as of today, with all those who are ready to put all their
efforts to that end. In that spirit, at the initiative of
France and in line with President Emmanuel Macron's
statement tonight, we will submit as soon as possible
a draft resolution on those different aspects with our
British and American partners.

Today I ask Russia, first and foremost, to call on the
Damascus regime to enter into a plan for a negotiated
solution so that the long-lasting suffering of Syrian
civilians can finally be brought to an end.

