Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure for me to speak today on behalf of the Group
of Arab States, which is headed by the Sudan this
month, and to convey to you, Sir, our congratulations
on your succession to the presidency of the Security
Council. I would like once again to convey my
congratulations to the Chinese delegation for the
masterful way in which it conducted the Council's
deliberations last month.

Barely a few months have elapsed since the
Security Council last met to review the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Since that time the
situation has worsened in a most disturbing manner.
We had hoped that the international community
represented in the Security Council would have been
able to halt the organized murder of Palestinians by
Israel by providing urgent, international protection
from the war crimes being committed against civilians
as part of an official Israeli policy. However, the
Security Council has stood idly by while television
screens around the world showed us the spectacle of an
occupying Power persisting in using military force and
perpetrating systematic acts of killing against innocent,
defenceless civilians.

The Israelis have increased the isolation of
Palestinian towns and villages by besieging them with
tanks and heavy war machinery. The occupying Power
has used combat aircraft against defenceless
Palestinian people. In an unequal battle it has destroyed
their institutions and infrastructure, as well as the
premises of the Palestinian Authority. The latest
expression of Israeli aggression and brutal force was
the occupation of Orient House, in contravention of all
previously signed agreements and commitments.

The Security Council has not succeeded in the
past in adopting a draft resolution that might provide
protection to the Palestinian people against the daily
aggression to which it is subjected, just as it has not
succeeded in halting the deterioration of the situation
in the region, as called for by its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
Council is invested with a special responsibility to
deter Israel, which has exceeded all possible limits in
its aggression. Israel has assumed the right to defy the
resolutions of the international community and the
Security Council and the rules of international law, in
particular humanitarian law, and the Fourth Geneva
Conventions relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War.

Accordingly, the United Nations is now faced
with a major responsibility and challenge, particularly
this Council, which must prove itself equal to the
responsibilities incumbent on it. It must adopt
immediate and urgent measures to bring an end to this
violence that targets innocent, defenceless Palestinian
civilians and provide them with the necessary
protection.

Should the Council fail in its duty - the duty to
provide protection to innocent civilians in Palestine
from daily Israeli arbitrary measures - it will have
failed in the duty assigned to it by the Charter. It is
high time that Israel understand that violence cannot
bring it the security that it desires. That security and
peace cannot be achieved as long as its expansionist
policy continues, a policy based on repression,
aggression and the Judaization of Jerusalem.

The only way to peace in the Middle East
necessarily means an end to Israeli occupation and a
firm commitment by Israel to implement the
resolutions of the international community and the
Security Council, in particular resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), so as to enable the Palestinian people
to establish its independent State, with Jerusalem as its
capital.

Israel's persistence in conducting its bloody
campaign against the Palestinian people will lead to an
explosion of the situation in the entire region; an
explosion with unforeseeable consequences that could
very well threaten international peace and security, as
well as the interests of all parties in the region. That is
why the Arab Group calls upon the Security Council to
act quickly and urgently to protect the Palestinian
people. It is no longer possible to wait and allow the
situation to deteriorate further. The Arab States wish to
express their unfailing support to the Palestinian
people, Who are faced with day-to-day arbitrary acts on
the part of the occupation forces. We hail the legitimate
fight of the Palestinian people, who are struggling to
achieve self-determination - a legitimate right
recognized by international law, the United Nations
Charter and the Declaration of Human Rights. The
Palestinian people are not alone in their fight against
Israeli policy. The Arab nation as a whole stands by
their side.

In conclusion, the Arab States call upon the
Security Council and the States sponsoring the peace
process in the Middle East, as well as the European
Union, to act as quickly as possible in order to halt the
horrible deterioration of the situation in the region due
to Israel's policy of aggression. Israel must be brought
to respect international law, the international
community and the resolutions of this Council and to
halt its daily aggression against the Palestinian people.

