I thank you, Madam President, for convening this briefing on the worsening crisis in Yemen. Forgive me for speaking bluntly, but I want to make sure that no one is left with any doubt about the scale of the humanitarian disaster now confronting this nation. We are on a countdown to catastrophe in Yemen. The people have already been ravaged by years of conflict-fuelled hunger and malnutrition. A toxic combination of surging violence, a deepening economic and currency collapse and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is now ratcheting up their misery to acompletely new level. The world must open its eyes to this unfolding humanitarian disaster before it is too late. If we choose to look away, Yemen will be plunged into a devastating famine within a few short months. The truth is that we have been here before. I briefed the Security Council on Yemen in 2018 (see S/PV.8213 and S/PV.8404) and 2019 (see S/PV.8551 and S/PV.8578). I know Mark Lowcock has done the same. We have sounded the alarm about Yemen time and time again. In November 2018 (see S/PV.8404), I warned of the horrors that innocent civilians were forced to endure. Today their suffering is more pitiful than ever. I highlighted the deepening economic crisis caused by the collapse in the value of the Yemeni rial. Then it was 720 rials to the dollar. It was 215 before the war started - already one of the poorest nations on the face of the planet. Today it is worth even less - 844 rials to the dollar. And there are predictions that it could soon crash to more than 1,000 rials to the dollar. I warned that 12 million people were one step away from famine. I ended my briefing to the Security Council by begging for the resources to avoid imminent famine. Donors responded to our call and stepped up with new funding. Thankfully, we were able to pull Yemen back from the brink. But, in the two years since, so much of our good work has been wiped out. And, once again, famine is knocking at the door. Let me tell members in part why. We are back in this situation because we have been forced to waste so much time. Since 2018, our people have spent countless days, weeks and months negotiating with the Ansar Allah authorities for access to the areas that they control and for permission to set up the monitoring systems that donors rightly expect in return for their taxpayer dollars. Instead of being able to focus on getting life-saving food assistance to the people who desperately need it, we have spent the past two years trying to overcome those unnecessary obstructions. Even worse, the endless delays caused major donors to lose confidence that their funds would get to the right people, and contributions were reduced. We had clearly explained to the Ansar Allah authorities that, with all the increased demands around the world due to COVID-19, this was no time to play games. As a result, in April, we were forced to cut the rations to 9 million people living in areas controlled by the Ansar Allah authorities. Each family now receives a full ration every two months instead of every month. It breaks my heart. However, let me give a glimmer of good news. I am grateful that, on Sunday, we finally had a breakthrough when we were able to start the biometric registration of beneficiaries in Sana'a city. It is an important milestone but one that we should have reached two years ago. However, let me emphasize that this is merely a pilot of 150,000 people. I hope that this marks the start of a new chapter of cooperation among all parties in Yemen, one that allows us to scale up and roll out biometric registration in Ansar Allah-controlled areas as quickly as possible so as to give donors the confidence to provide fresh funds. This is also a critical first step in fixing the severe economic liquidity crisis, which threatens to finally break the back of the Yemeni people. We need to stabilize the Yemeni rial at around 550 rials to the dollar in order to restore food prices to some level of affordability. If we can scale up the biometric registration and restore donors' confidence, we can start getting money back into the hands of the Yemeni people. We believe that we could distribute up to $0.5 billion in cash/liquidity and vouchers into the marketplace through beneficiaries in 2021. That would stabilize the currency and get the economy moving again. However, Ansar Allah needs to show that it is willing to help us, and they can do that by meeting the seven preconditions set by donors in February. Of those seven, five have still not been met, although we are slowly making progress on all of them. Quite frankly, these are things that should be resolved in hours or days, not weeks, months and years. And we are asking for nothing exceptional or new, but just to implement, as we do all over the world. Why would anyone stand in the way? I truly hope that the Ansar Allah authorities will now continue to work with us to meet these criteria and to play their part so that we can raise the funds that will, quite literally, mean the difference between life and death for millions. We are running out of time. The war now rages across more than 40 front lines. Yemen's foreign-currency reserves, which were boosted with $2 billion in 2018 to allow the country to import food and fuel, are almost down to zero again. As a result, the cost of basic foods has skyrocketed. The impact on food security has been devastating. Before COVID-19, analysis found the number of people facing severe food insecurity was expected to exceed 17 million people in 2020. Further analysis in southern districts in July predicted that acute food insecurity would rise sharply - from 25 per cent of the population to 40 per cent by the end of the year. That is 3.2 million people of the 7.9 million surveyed. The latest internal analysis of the World Food Programme now tells us that famine is a real and dangerous possibility. The warning lights are flashing, and they are not flashing yellow. They are flashing red. We cannot wait for a formal declaration of famine to act. We have to stop waiting for the crisis to reach boiling point and then doing just enough to pull it back from the brink. It is time to stop with the band-aid solutions. We need the authorities to continue working with us and to cooperate with efforts to restore donors' confidence. We also need a comprehensive, funded plan to avert the famines glaring us in the face, stabilize the shattered economy, support longer-term development and, above all, bring pressure to bear on the warring parties to silence the guns and make peace. Today I am therefore calling on all our major donors to step up with additional funds to avoid the looming famine in Yemen. To restore rations to all beneficiaries and resume other activities, such as specialized nutrition support to children and nursing mothers, we require $2.6 billion for the whole of 2021. At a bare minimum, to avert famine in 2021, we need $1.9 billion. We cannot nickel and dime this to death. We have to move now, or people are going to die. Amid the darkness that threatens to overwhelm Yemen, I ask the Security Council to give the people of this nation a glimmer of hope. I urge Council members not to turn their backs on them. Listen to the alarm that Mark Lowcock and I are sounding before it is too late. Seize the brief opportunity we have to avoid the famine that is already gaining a foothold in parts of Yemen. But do it today, because time is fast running out.
