Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized this
debate, which provides the Council with the
opportunity to examine how the United Nations system
can better help States to secure their borders against
illicit trafficking and flows. I associate myself with the
statement to be made shortly by the head of the
European Union delegation.

Illicit cross-border trafficking and flows
encompass various phenomena. Some of them certainly
constitute direct threats to international peace and
security, for example, the trafficking of weapons of
mass destruction-related goods and technologies
related to. Others can indirectly harm regional and
international stability and security. I am thinking, for
example, of a phenomenon that we see in a number of
crises that the Council has been called on to address.
Money stemming from the trafficking of natural
resources fuels the illicit trade in weapons, which, in
turn, increases regional instability.

When the consequences of such cross-border
flows and trafficking threaten international peace and
security, the Council has the responsibility to address
those issues. The Council has already fully taken into
account that growing threat in a number of specific
areas, such as the fight against terrorism with
resolution 1373 (2001) and the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
prevention of terrorism by means of weapons of mass
destruction with resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent
resolutions. That is also a key element in the
effectiveness of sanctions decided by the Council.

Moreover, in February 2010, the Council, in
adopting presidential statement S/PRST/2012/4,
acknowledged the increasing danger posed by cross-
border threats. At last, it is increasingly taking note of
the regional dimension, as it did on West Africa and the
Sahel in February by noting the threat to international
peace and security posed by transnational organized
crime (see S/PV.6717).

The approach that we are taking today is to
consider the issue of illicit trafficking and flows from
the perspective of borders, which are crossing points
for such trafficking. Here, it is not a matter of having a
theoretical debate on the various phenomena
encompassed by the notion of illicit trafficking and
flows, but rather of trying to provide concrete
responses on the ground.

States have the key responsibility for border
control. However, we know that criminal networks
often adapt more rapidly than State structures to the
opportunities provided by globalization. States
sometimes do not have the necessary capacities to
effectively monitor their borders and to combat illicit
trafficking; hence, the importance of responding
through international cooperation and the need for
States to have the necessary capacities in order to be
able to implement their international obligations with
regard to border control. In that regard, efforts to better
help those States requesting assistance in that area can
be made.

In order to address such illicit flows, many
strategies and mechanisms to assist States that need
such assistance are already in place. We commend
ongoing projects that make it possible to tackle such
flows at the regional level. As an example, I would like
to cite the Economic Community of West African
States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons.
Strengthening cooperation among States is important;
hence, France's initiative in 2011 - in the context of
its presidency of the Group of Eight - to address the
fight against cross-border cocaine trafficking.
Moreover, I would like to recall that, within the
European Union, mechanisms exist to combat threats
related to smuggling and the trafficking of goods and
persons.

As the Secretary-General mentioned, there are
many United Nations structures, be they institutions,
programmes or bodies of the Security Council,
currently cooperating with States to help them to
counter such phenomena. The United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, in particular, plays a key role in
such issues, especially within the context of its
regional programme for West Africa.
The tasks undertaken by the various United
Nations structures often have much in common, such
as assessing the position of States and providing
technical assistance, and may overlap. Even when they
focus on specific areas, they can provide effective
external assistance. For example, when a State benefits
from a technical assistance programme to counter
proliferation and to combat terrorism relating to
weapons of mass destruction under the 1540
Committee, or when it strengthens export control
mechanisms or its customs system for that purpose, a
State more generally further secures its borders, which
helps it to further counter other kinds of trafficking.
Thus, there are many areas for possible synergies.

International peace and security can only benefit
from more efforts to prevent illicit trafficking and
flows. There are many international and regional
initiatives. It therefore seems particularly timely that
the Council is today requesting the United Nations to
assess its work on State support in that regard. In our
view, such an assessment should be in the form of
specific recommendations aimed at increasing
consistency and effectiveness, while drawing the
greatest benefit from the initiatives of other
international and regional organizations that play a role
in that area.

