Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and Ms. Anny Tenga Modi for
their briefings, which, along with the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/218) on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
give us a better overview of the current situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

I would like to focus my statement on three
key messages.

First, with regard to the political situation, we
welcome the statements of the new President in favour
of change, which was sought by the population, and we
encourage all political stakeholders in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to adopt tangible measures to
produce that profound change in the political space,
following in the steps of the initial gestures, which we
welcome, such as the release of some political prisoners.
In the European and bilateral context, we also welcome
the recent developments, which demonstrate a genuine
willingness to strengthen our relations.

However, we must not forget that the electoral
process has not yet ended. Elections have yet to be held
in Beni, Butembo and in Yumbi. In the meantime, the
formation of a new Government is still pending. There
are numerous reports of widespread corruption in
the context of the recent senatorial elections, despite
the fact that the most senior judicial authorities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo had issued
explicit warnings.

Against that backdrop, President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi has decided to address the situation. As
the guarantor of institutions, we exhort him not only
to restore institutional order and the rule of law, but
also to credibly begin combating the corruption that
threatens the country's governance. The consolidation
of solid, competent and impartial national institutions
must make it possible to strengthen the legitimacy
of the State, prevent future institutional crises and
promote a lasting entrenchment of the culture of
democratic change.

My second message concerns the pacification of
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the restoration of State authority. In that regard,
we hope that particular attention will be paid to the
persistence of violence and attacks against civilians,
which continue to plunge the Congolese population into
one of the worst humanitarian disasters in the world.
We recall the unprecedented violence of the recent
organized intercommunal attacks in Yumbi, which
killed several hundred people and displaced thousands
in a few days in December 2018. That violence, which
according to the United Nations could constitute crimes
against humanity, would not have been possible if the
authority of the State had been present in the area.
The persistence of fighting between armed groups in
Masisi, deadly attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces
in Beni territory and recent fighting in Minembwe are
all dramatic situations that require strong and urgent
measures. The restoration of State authority is essential
to ensure the pacification of the territory, but also
the resolution of the root causes of conflicts and the
security of populations, as well as development and the
rule of law for the benefit of the Congolese people.

My third message concerns MONUSCO and
its future. In our opinion, the future of MONUSCO
must be based on a genuine exit strategy based
on reference points - "benchmarks" in proper
French - clearly identified by an independent strategic
review. Such a strategy must be based on the capacity
and real willingness of the new Congolese authorities
to themselves take on the tasks currently being carried
out by MONUSCO. In the meantime, the protection
of civilians in the military, health and human rights
contexts must continue to be the cornerstone on which
MONUSCO is based. Belgium is of the opinion that an
interim mandate that would be limited in time would
allow us to deepen our reflection on these points of
reference while avoiding the risk of being immobilized
in a changing context.

Finally, we must remain attentive to the regional
context and its evolution. Our attention today to the
future of MONUSCO should not divert our attention
from the fact that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region are closely linked.
The problems are often shared problems; the solutions
must therefore also be shared solutions. In that regard,
we welcome the opportunity that will be given to the
Security Council in the coming weeks to discuss the
latest developments in the region.

