Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries of Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and
Croatia, and the European Free Trade Association
countries of Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union would like to welcome the
appointment of Mr. Jessen-Petersen as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Chief of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We look forward to cooperating
closely with him and wish him the best of luck in
carrying out his demanding job. The European Union
would like to thank the former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his
commitment to working in challenging circumstances.
Finally, I would like to welcome the presence of Mr.
Zoran Loncar, the Minister of Public Administration
and Local Self-Governance of Serbia, who represents
Serbia and Montenegro.

The violent events of mid-March constituted a
serious setback for the future of Kosovo and its people.
The report before us covers the period subsequent to
the events, from 1 April to 15 July 2004. As we take
stock of the progress made towards reconciliation and
mutual tolerance, the picture that emerges is mixed, but
moderately more positive than the violence of March.

Kosovo Albanian leaders have indeed reached out
to Kosovo minorities. During the last few months,
already half of the people that were displaced have
returned to their homes and villages. Around a third of
the properties damaged have been reconstructed, and
the authorities have pledged to rebuild the remainder of
the destroyed buildings. The intention to establish a
ministry for community matters, human rights and
returns is a promising sign, as is the recent agreement
on an anti-discrimination law.

While the European Union commends the
Kosovo Albanians for these efforts, it also calls upon
them to truly undo all consequences of the March riots.
Any person living in any part of the world wants to live
in a safe environment where he or she does not need to
fear the neighbours because they belong to a different
group. It is crucial that the people who are still
displaced should be able to return to their homes as
soon as possible. Efforts to punish those responsible
for the violence have been undertaken, but not at all
levels and not as vigorously as expected.

Likewise, we call upon the Kosovo Serbs to be
receptive and responsive to overtures made by Kosovo
Albanian leaders. In that respect, the lack of
involvement of the Kosovo Serbs in the political
process is still a cause for concern. Participation in the
Provisional Institutions at the political level and in the
upcoming elections in October is in the interest of the
Kosovo Serbs themselves. They should be strongly
encouraged to do so. The European Union believes that
resumption of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina is essential. Now is the time to rise to the
challenge.

Violence of the kind that occurred in March has
to be, and indeed was, condemned. Those responsible
for the destruction must be brought to justice. We also
have to ask whether enough is being done to prevent a
repetition of the events. The Secretary-General took his
responsibility by requesting Ambassador Kai Eide to
make a comprehensive review of the policies and
practices of all actors in Kosovo. By now, the
assessment and analysis of Ambassador Eide have been
submitted to the Secretary-General.

The European Union believes that the mission of
Ambassador Eide was timely, and the sharing of his
conclusions will be welcomed. It seems that a broad
discussion on the fundamental questions regarding
Kosovo and the policies of the international
community should be held at the right time. As to the
structure of the presence of the international
community, the European Union looks forward to
working closely with the United Nations and the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Jessen-Petersen, in order to find ways to improve the
action of the international community in Kosovo.
Meanwhile, there ought to be progress on the
standards, not just in reports but also visibly on the
ground. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, Mr. Bernard Bot, stated on behalf of the
European Union during his visit to the region two
weeks ago, the Union is committed to the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the policy of "standards before status". The
standards are aimed at promoting values such as
respect for minorities, tolerance, democracy and the
rule of law. Their implementation will be key for
Kosovo's future. The implementation of standards will
be a long-lasting process and will continue after the
mid-2005 review. It is part of the process drafted
during the Thessaloniki Summit of June 2003 on the
perspectives of inclusion of the western Balkans
countries in the European Union.

The European Union considers the joint
declaration of 14 July to be a step in the right direction
and a positive signal of commitment by Kosovo leaders
of all origins. As stated earlier, the declaration
announced the establishment of a ministry for
community matters, human rights and returns. All
parties expressed a shared commitment to do their
utmost to ensure that sustainable return of internally
displaced people can take place.

The declaration also supported the current
promising efforts on reform of local government. In
that regard, the European Union welcomes the progress
achieved and commends the working group on local
government, co-chaired by UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions, for its proposals. Reform of
local government and decentralization are important
steps towards ensuring sustainable government, the
protection of minority communities and better living
conditions for all inhabitants in Kosovo. The European
Union calls upon all communities and interested parties
in Kosovo to fully engage in this important process and
to undertake concrete steps to start implementation of
the reforms as soon as possible.

The European Union is a strong contributor to the
economic development and reform efforts in Kosovo.
As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, the
third wave of privatization has been launched. The
European Union looks forward to a renewed
momentum for this process and calls on all parties
involved to take a rational, non-political approach to
the issue of privatization.

Let me finalize by stating that the commitment of
the European Union to Kosovo is not limited to Pillar
IV. We strongly believe that the future of Kosovo is
within the European structures. Consequently, the
European Union continues to be the largest donor of
financial support to Kosovo. It will do its utmost to
enable Kosovo to become part of not only the political
and economic union that the European Union
constitutes, but also of the community of values it
stands for.

