Mr. Passy: The pleasure is all ours. At the outset,
let me say how pleased I am to see Prime Minister
Nastase and Foreign Minister Geoana presiding over
the deliberations of the Security Council and express to
them the deep appreciation of the Romanian presidency
for convening this important meeting.

I also thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
remarks.

Allow me to pay tribute to the delegation of
Mexico, which, in 2003, organized the Security
Council meeting on the role of the Council and the
regional organizations with respect to the new
challenges to international peace and security.

I am glad to be representing the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) before the
Security Council for a second time in less than three
months. With its 55 States members, extensive
commitments on the spot, field activities, unique
institutions and specialized units, the OSCE is a pan-
European organization that is geared towards building
peace and security on three continents. As a member of
the Security Council in 2003 and 2002, Bulgaria
consistently supported the enhancement of cooperation
between the United Nations and the regional
organizations, upon which we have built as Chairman
of the OSCE.

For the past decade, we have witnessed
geopolitical changes at an unprecedented pace. That is
especially true for the OSCE area. The European Union
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
have enlarged and welcomed new members. Both
organizations are developing ever closer relations with
Russia. The zone of stability has expanded
considerably, but challenges remain. The OSCE area is
still a theatre of local tensions and conflicts, some
unresolved for over 10 years. To respond to the new
realities, the organization is in the process of
transformation and adaptation.
The OSCE can give substantive support to the
United Nations, take the lead role in conflict
prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation in its region,
assist in crisis management and stabilization processes,
and promote the implementation of United Nations
principles, conventions and other instruments.
Furthermore, agreements reached at the regional level
may sometimes contain additional and complementary
commitments to those undertaken at the global level.
Countering the threat of terrorism is our top priority.
The OSCE is working closely with the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime in the fight against terrorism.

The OSCE participating States are focused on
elaborating measures to counter the threat of shoulder-
fired anti-aircraft missiles to civilian aircraft; on travel
documents, security, container security, the illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons, the destruction
of excess stockpiles, and the prevention of access for
terrorists to chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear materials; and to establish a counter-terrorism
network. As we become an actual border of the
European Union, precisely as Romania will be, we very
well recognize the significance of the enhancement of
border management and security.

In our bitter experience, we have seen in recent
years how taking hostages has become the weapon of
preference of terrorists. Using such human drama, they
blackmail Governments, pressure societies, manipulate
public opinion and devastate innocent families. Such
deplorable gambling with human life demands a
coherent and unified response. I am convinced that the
international community can go further than the
condemnation and criminalization of hostage-taking. A
discussion by the international community on a code of
conduct, setting the standards that Governments should
follow when they become victims of terrorist threats
and attacks, is overdue. Concerted actions, with an
active role for the United Nations, will send a clear
warning and decisively discourage terrorists from using
human lives as weapons of horror and devastation.

The OSCE has a long record of working in close
cooperation with the United Nations. The OSCE field
mission in Kosovo is an integral part of the structure of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. The OSCE-trained Kosovo Police Service has
close interaction with the United Nations and its
agencies. The established modus operandi between the
United Nations, NATO, the European Union, the OSCE
and other regional organizations can serve as a model
for interaction between the United Nations and the
relevant organizations in other regions.

It is my view that cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE in the South Caucasus could and
should be further enhanced. Both the United Nations
and the OSCE have broad field experience. They are
taking similar approaches to the resolution of the South
Ossetian and Abkhazian conflicts. The OSCE actively
supports the United Nations-led peace process in
Abkhazia. In that regard, it might be useful to explore
options for OSCE participation in the Group of Friends
of the Secretary-General on Georgia.

The Helsinki process, based on the principles of
cooperative and comprehensive security, was
instrumental in bridging differences in a period of
confrontation. It worked in Europe, and I am confident
that its lessons and practices can be applied elsewhere.

More can be done on joint crisis management. In
order better to analyse and cope with threats, the OSCE
has proposed the creation of an ad hoc mechanism to
consult with other international organizations and
institutions. We will continue to organize information-
sharing and coordination meetings of country-specific,
regional and thematic issues. We might consider how
regional arrangements could issue early warnings to the
United Nations if efforts peacefully to settle local
disputes start to break down.

The proven track record of the OSCE in
organizing and overseeing democratic elections and
training efficient and democratically accountable police
forces could be put to good use in Afghanistan, an
OSCE partner for cooperation. I hope that the OSCE
will be in a position to respond positively, if it is so
decided by the 55 OSCE member Governments, to the
request of Mr. Abdul Abdullah, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, to observe the upcoming
elections.

In conclusion, I cannot fail to mention the
usefulness of the established practice of high-level
meetings between the Secretary-General and the heads
of regional organizations. Such meetings are an
essential mechanism in terms of synchronizing agendas
and rationalizing the use of resources. I would argue
that the operational relationship encouraged by the
United Nations could successfully include interaction
with and among regional organizations.

I should like once again to wish all the best to the
Romanian chairmanship of the Security Council, and I
should like to say how much we benefited from the
Romanian chairmanship of the OSCE a few years ago.
The OSCE really gained a lot from our Romanian
neighbours, and I would like to thank them very much.

