President Mesic' (spoke in Croatian; English text provided by the delegation): It is a great honour for me
to present, on behalf of the Republic of Croatia, our
views on the issue that has been put on the agenda of
today's meeting.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the United
States and to you personally, President Obama, for the
initiative to discuss in the Security Council the very
delicate issue of nuclear non-proliferation.

If this meeting brings us just one step forward on
the path towards a world free of nuclear weapons - a
world that you, President Obama, have in a visionary
manner set as the objective to which we should
aspire- then we will have succeeded. I emphasize
that even if we get only one single step closer to this
objective we will indeed have succeeded, because the
journey towards a world free of nuclear weapons is not,
cannot be and will not be easy, simple or short. This,
however, does not mean that we should give up or
allow despondency to rule our thoughts and deeds -
quite the contrary.

The world was faced with nuclear weapons
54 years ago. The horrendous effects of their use
imposed the need to start almost immediately to reflect
on how to limit their proliferation, which was also the
objective of a set of international treaties. However, in
spite of all those efforts, today we live in a world
where there are 10 or so nuclear Powers, recognized or
unrecognized. I deliberately use the term "Powers",
because possession of a single nuclear bomb makes the
country that possesses it a Power, if one considers the
consequences of its potential use - to say nothing of
the fact that the present-day world is burdened with the
evil of international terrorism, or what it would mean if
a terrorist group were to get hold of nuclear weapons.

What we should do here today, as my country
sees it, is to reinforce the role of the United Nations,
without the least intention of replacing any institution
or forum dealing with non-proliferation, and,
unanimously and jointly, and taking into consideration
earlier documents of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, to state the following: On the one
hand, great efforts are needed to attain, first,
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons followed by
nuclear disarmament. On the other hand, at the same
time, every country must be guaranteed its right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy - if necessary with
even more stringent measures of universally accepted
international control.

Let me be more precise: we have to work
together to affirm or establish principles that will help
us to head towards a world free of nuclear weapons
without necessarily entering into debate over this or
that concrete issue.
There are other things that we have to do. First,
we must unreservedly support a multilateral
contractual system related to nuclear arms control and
disarmament which includes strict implementation and
strengthened verification of contractual obligations.
Secondly, we must call upon all members of the world
Organization to contribute to activities aimed at
preventing the abuse of existing treaties and at
strengthening anti-proliferation efforts and resources.

Efforts focused first on limitation of nuclear
weapons, then on reduction and finally on disarmament
have a long history. They have, however, gained a new
and strong impetus since the announcement by the
United States President that his ultimate objective is a
world free of nuclear weapons. Because of that
declaration our task today is to send a message to the
world, which has authorized us to act here, that there is
political will for the pursuit of a policy providing all
countries with security without nuclear weapons.

We would thereby also respond to the long-
standing efforts of participants in the campaign for a
nuclear-free world. Among them I include the
Secretary-General, non-governmental organizations,
civil society, current and former political leaders,
parliamentarians, scholars, trade unions and students.

Our objective is peace in security. This objective
cannot be reached if the threat of nuclear weapons
exists. The decades of the cold war - when
admittedly, thanks to the balance of fear, we had global
peace, but not security - are the best proof that this is
so.

The Republic of Croatia is prepared to make its
maximum contribution to efforts aimed at achieving
this objective. As a member of the generation that
experienced the Second World War, and remembering
all later local wars and crises that threatened world
peace, I can just add that this is something that we owe
to those who come after us. When we leave, let us
bequeath to them a better world - a world free of
nuclear weapons.

