Mr. Roet (Israel): For too long, the world has
witnessed the unfolding of bloody conflicts, which
have led to some of the worst humanitarian crises in
history. From Yemen to Libya, from Somalia to South
Sudan, infrastructure is destroyed and civilians are
trapped - pawns to illegitimate regimes and targets of
terrorists eager to kill. Most recently, innocent civilians
in Manchester have fallen victim to such inhumane
attacks. Israel stands in solidarity with the people
of Great Britain. In the face of human rights abuses,
the United Nations cannot remain silent. Protecting
civilians and health-care access in conflict zones must
be our top priority.

Nowhere have attacks on civilians and critical
infrastructure caused more damage than in
Syria - devastation that has shaken the whole world
to its core. Over the past six years, the Syrian regime
has led a brutal campaign against its own population.
Al-Assad has deployed chemical weapons, including
the recent sarin attack in Khan Shaykhun. He has
authorized siege warfare and hanged thousands of
prisoners, with shocking reports of his plans to dispose
of their bodies in a large crematorium, seeking to hide
the atrocities committed.

The Syrian regime has even resorted to destroying
hospitals and removing essential medical aid from
humanitarian convoys, leaving almost 13 million
people with no access to treatment. As we heard from
the Secretary-General this morning, over 400 hospitals
and medical facilities were hit last year, which forced
half of Syria's hospitals to close treatment wings or shut
down completely. Eight hundred medical staff were
tragically killed in 2016, and most of those remaining
have been forced to flee. In Madaya, following months
of siege, al-Assad and his allies not only starved the
town's 42,000 residents, but also proceeded to demolish
all but one hospital.

Al-Assad's main ally and beneficiary, Iran, is an
accomplice to those crimes. Terror militias backed and
financed by Iran, most notably Hezbollah, operate in
Syria, bolster its brutal regime and commit unspeakable
atrocities, trapping innocents in the crossfire.

The Syrian people have called desperately for the
world's help. Despite lacking diplomatic ties with Syria,
Israel has responded to that call. Our medical team and
first responders have treated countless Syrians - no
questions asked. We do so because we firmly believe
that it is the right thing to do. Earlier this year, a sniper
hit 23-year-old Raji in the face. With his upper jaw,
cheekbones and right eye gone, this Syrian person
knew that he had to seek treatment in Israel. Using 3-D
printing technology, the Israeli doctors reconstructed
Raji's face, completing one of the first-ever treatments
of this kind. Under Israel's care, Raji is now close to
full recovery.

Israel's Western Galilee Hospital in Nahariya has
treated 1,600 Syrians over four years. Doctors and
nurses are committed to improving physical and mental
health, ensuring that patients feel at home and restoring
their sense ofhumanity. When it comes to saving lives,
Israel knows no borders.

Israel's northern hospitals must often perform
life-saving procedures under threat from Hizbullah.
In 2006, that terrorist organization fired almost 900
rockets into the city of Nahariya alone. Hizbullah is an
internationally designated terrorist group, notorious for
destroying critical infrastructure and conceiving of new
ways to harm civilians. It has amassed over 100,000
missiles and point them straight towards Israel, in clear
violation of resolutions 1710 (2006) and 1559 (2004).
As we have cautioned time and again in this Chamber,
Hizbullah has transformed southern Lebanon's Shiite
villages into terror outposts, intending to harm Israel.
Rocket launchers sit by schools and hospitals, and
living rooms store missiles. Today, Hizbullah has
recruited a third of the civilians within these villages,
strengthening its terror framework. By launching
attacks on Israel out of Lebanese population centres,
Hizbullah is committing a double war crime.

Lebanon continues to ignore the Council's demand
to take responsibility, restore order and "exercise full
sovereignty and authority over its territory". Lebanese
President Aoun recently described Hizbullah as
essential to Lebanese defence. Just this week, Lebanon's
Foreign Secretary distanced himself from the Riyadh
Declaration at the Arab-Islamic-American Summit
criticizing the terror group.

Hamas is another internationally recognized
terrorist organization guilty of a double war crime.
At the expense of the people of Gaza, Hamas exploits
international humanitarian aid to build rockets and
terror tunnels, and even base its headquarters among
civilians. During the 2014 conflict, Hamas stored its
lethal arsenal, launched deadly attacks and created a
makeshift military command centre in Gaza's Wafa
Hospital. These terrorists even built an entrance inside
Wafa to Hamas's vast terror tunnel network.

The senseless attacks on civilians, the use of
human shields and destruction of health-care facilities
must end. The Security Council must stand against
these abuses. While Israel supports and co-sponsored
resolution 2286 (2016), the issue of human shields
should not have been omitted from that text.

Millions in Syria, throughout the Middle East and
around the globe look to the United Nations to end the
carnage. Our goal, our duty, is to end all war. But until
then, the international community must answer the call
and guarantee the protection of civilians around the
world.

