Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We were also shocked by
the terrorist act in Stockholm and express our solidarity
with and condolences to Sweden.

First of all, I would like to stress that we came
here not to discuss yesterday's strike by the United
States but the consequences of the terrible and deadly
chemical-weapons attack of last Tuesday.

I would also like to draw the attention of my
colleagues to the statement issued by the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine that indicates, inter alia, that
any use of chemical weapons is an outrageous violation
of international law and constitutes a war crime; the
perpetrators of such acts have to be held accountable;
and impunity for a violator of international law in the
use of chemical weapons leads to further crimes.

The chronic blocking of the work of the Security
Council by Russia is unacceptable. The Syrian regime's
sponsors and advocates also bear responsibility for the
use of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) in Syria
and the subsequent deaths and suffering among Syria's
civilian population.

The United States actions must be supported to
prevent the regime from committing any further war
crimes, including against the civilian population.
Ukraine considers the United States missile strike
against a military target, namely, the airbase from which
an air strike to deploy chemical weapons was launched
against Khan Shaykhun on 4 April, to be an appropriate
and proportionate response. It is a clear signal that the
use of WMDs will no longer be tolerated.

Yesterday's events were long overdue. For years, the
Council was paralysed with regard to many important
international security issues, including the Syrian
issue. For all intents and purposes, it was practically
held hostage by one delegation that abused its status
as a permanent member and practiced the approach of
"my way or no way".

The Council's efforts to address the Syrian crisis
have been blocked by Russia's use of the veto on seven
occasions - that is, seven immobilizing vetoes and
the pairs of thousands of Syrian children's eyes who
will never see the light of day again. All means were
employed to obstruct any meaningful action by the
Council: obfuscation, distractions, diversions, outright
lies and even bullying. As a result, despite the best
efforts of its members on numerous occasions, the
Security Council was not able to deliver because of the
intransigence of the Russian delegation.
Ukraine does not consider the draft resolution
proposed by the Russian delegation to be either
adequate to the circumstances or a proper reaction
by the international community to the horrible mass
murder of people in Idlib province. Given the brutal
facts on the ground, it is actually adding insult to
injury. We cannot accept a reference to this crime
as "the alleged incident with chemical weapons" or
"reportedly causing large-scale loss oflife". Really? An
"incident"? A "reported loss oflife"? Does the Russian
delegation not watch television? Or maybe it means
to assert that what is in that horrible footage from the
country was staged.

Furthermore, the draft resolution suggests that the
key focus of the international response to the use of
weapons of mass destruction against civilians, instead
of promoting the prompt identification and bringing to
justice of the perpetrators and the taking of steps to
prevent future attacks, should be limited to considering
the composition of the personnel investigating team
based on the principle of a broad-based and balanced
geographical distribution. Is this a terribly important
issue? No: it is not serious. Such an approach is aimed
at postponing practical investigations. We therefore see
it as a shameless attempt to undermine the credibility of
the Security Council.

When the United Nations is unable to take action,
the resulting void is filled. As my delegation stated in
this Chamberjust two days ago (see S/PV.7915), endless
talks cannot be the substitute for concrete action. We
also reject the assertion by the Russian Federation that
the United States action constitutes an act of aggression.
The Russian side has lost the moral high ground in such
claims after its invasion of Georgia, its occupation and
attempted annexation of Crimea and after launching
armed aggression against my country in the Donbass
region, which continues until this day. The deafening
sound of salvos of Russian Grad missiles and artillery
shells pounding Ukraine's territory and bringing death
and destruction render hollow all Kremlin statements
on the subject of respect for international law. At the
very least, the Russians are utterly hypocritical. I call
on the Russian delegation to stop mocking the Security
Council and stop calling others paranoiacs. Rather,
they should look at themselves.
Ukraine continues to believe that the final
settlement of the Syrian conflict can be achieved only
through a political solution. In the light of the recent
escalation, the only way forward is a reinvigorated
political process, a reanimation of the ceasefire and
a true commitment to a genuine political transition
based on Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015). We therefore urge the
Syrian regime and its backers to think carefully before
embarking upon an escalated level once again, and
instead read the situation correctly in a way that would
give peace a chance.

The events of this week sent a clear signal to all
of us. The international community can ill-afford
a dysfunctional Security Council. A failure by this
body to discharge its duties in an objective manner,
to stand up for what is right, to ensure accountability
for violators of international law, undermines its moral
standing. Moreover, when the time and energy of its
members are expended in attempts to achieve unity and
consensus by basically shielding the perpetrators of the
most vicious of crimes from responsibility, it destroys
its credibility.

I call on all members of the Security Council to
remember that its main task is not to achieve consensus
on any given issue at any cost, but to work diligently
and responsibly to maintain international peace and
security. When the United Nations is found wanting,
opportunistic and unscrupulous types will always rush
in to explore opened weaknesses in order to achieve
their own political or other goals, thus creating more
demand for a just and adequate response. If the United
Nations persists in inaction, sooner or later the response
will come from outside the United Nations system.
Therefore, obstructionists whose identities are well
known have only themselves to blame for events not
playing out according to their desired scenarios.

