Mr. Herasymenko (Ukraine): I would like to
welcome Judge Pillay, Judge Jorda and Chief
Prosecutor Del Ponte and to thank them for their
comprehensive and interesting briefings. I also wish to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the judges of
the Tribunals for their dedicated work and tireless
efforts in discharging their mandate.

We note with satisfaction the continuous
implementation of the reform process of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the efforts of the Tribunal to speed its judicial
work to allow it to complete its mission by 2008. We
would like to emphasize that the ICTY can play an
important role in the process of reconciliation and
restoring peace in the region through the strengthening
of national judicial systems in the Balkans. We fully
agree with the conclusion of the Tribunal that while it
cannot try all those who perpetrated serious violations
of international humanitarian law, its work must be
picked up by the domestic courts.

My delegation has consistently emphasized the
importance for the Tribunal to fully use the existing
mechanisms under the statute and its rules of procedure
and evidence to defer its competence in respect of
particular cases to national courts in the former
Yugoslavia that have concurrent jurisdiction to
prosecute persons for violations of international
humanitarian law. The monitoring of the proceedings
before national courts by the Prosecutor, coupled with
the possibility for the Tribunal to request a deferral of a
case to the competence of the ICTY, would ensure the
impartiality, fairness and integrity of such trials for
national courts. This in turn would substantially relieve
the workload of the ICTY and allow it to concentrate
on the most prominent cases and the prosecution of
those most responsible for the commission of crimes
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. You have
addressed this issue in your statement.

In this connection, I would like to ask how the
ICTY is going to otherwise encourage the domestic
courts to pick up its work. I would like to underline the
importance of these considerations in terms of the
future consideration of the exit strategy for the ICTY.

