Mr. Maruyama (Japan): It was with great pleasure
that I listened to the statement by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of Mozambique,
His Excellency Mr. Leonardo Simao, in which he
described the optimism of the people of Mozambique as
they embark upon the task of national reconstruction and
development. I am delighted to have this opportunity to
congratulate him and the other members of the Cabinet of
the duly elected President of the Republic of
Mozambique, His Excellency Mr. J oaquim Alberto
Chissano, on the assumption of their respective posts.

I should also like to express my deep appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Aldo Ajello, and to all the men and women involved
in the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ), which promoted the peaceful settlement of
the situation there. Japan heartily welcomes the success of
the United Nations effort, which culminated in the
establishment of a democratic Government in
Mozambique. I am pleased to note that members of the
Japanese Self-Defence Forces and Japanese electoral
observers participated in that effort.

ONUMOZ will surely be counted among the most
successful United Nations peace-keeping operations. I
believe it succeeded for the following reasons.
First, the conflicting parties were clearly supportive
of the peace process sponsored by the international
community, and strictly observed the cease-fire. It should
also be noted that the United Nations remained committed
to the effort and insisted that both the Government of
Mozambique and RENAMO cooperate in advancing the
peace process.

Secondly, building upon the experience gained in
Angola, the United Nations Operation focused on
demobilization and, in an effort to address the needs of
demobilized soldiers, established civilian technical units.

Thirdly, ONUMOZ operated flexibly, making the
most effective use of a limited number of personnel.
Indeed, the importance of this point should not be
underestimated, and it should serve as a lesson for the
conduct of future operations.

Finally, the peace process in Mozambique enjoyed
the strong support of the United Nations, centring on

 

ONUMOZ, and of the entire international community. The
mobilization of donor countries to finance the
reconstruction and redevelopment of Mozambique was an
especially significant element in the Operation's success.

Peace has finally been achieved in Mozambique, but
the long and laborious task of national reconstruction still
lies ahead. If peace is to take firm hold, it is essential that
the principles and the spirit of democracy be disseminated
throughout the country and national reconciliation efforts
accelerated. There are many obstacles to be overcome,
however. The elimination of anti-personnel land-mines is
just one of the urgent problems that must be addressed.
Reconstruction of the war-ravaged infrastructure and the
reintegration into civilian society of demobilized soldiers
are also problems of pressing concern.

Clearly, the people of Mozambique will require the
continued support of the international community for the
foreseeable future. My Government, for its part, will
continue to contribute to the reconstruction of Mozambique
and to the stability of southern Africa.

