President Museveni: I greet the Security Council
on behalf of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). Before I talk about IGAD
issues, I would like to point out that, in my opinion,
wherever there is chaos in the world, one will most
likely find a confluence of four factors. And what are
those four factors? Factor one is parasitic, vested
interests. Factor two is superficiality and obscurantism
in identifying and dealing with those parasitic interests
and their effects on a particular country or group of
countries. Factor three is weak or disoriented local
leadership. Factor four is the pre-industrial character of
many of the affected areas, especially in Africa, where
societies are backward and pre-industrial.

In my opinion, as someone who has been
observing the scene for the last 40 years, those factors
are always present when there is chaos in any part of
the world. If I had time, I would elaborate on each of
those four factors. But I do not have the time now. It is
enough, however, that I have stated them today.
Without correcting them, especially the first three
factors, we cannot reach a solution, in my opinion.

Some of the chronic problems, such as that of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, are due to a
combination of some of those factors. Some nationalist
legitimate local leadership emerged in 1960, and the
first and only elections in the history of the Congo
were held. I am referring to the leadership of Patrice
Lumumba and his party, the Mouvement National
Congolais. Since there was no strong Congolese
independent State, trouble broke out soon after
independence. The United Nations troops came in.
Instead of assisting the only legitimate leadership to
emerge in the Congo up to then, and indeed since then,
the United Nations took the side of illegal elements,
including the famous General Mobutu. It has now been
almost 45 years since the Congolese tragedy of 1961.
The United Nations is back in the Congo. How can it
be that a country cannot develop a capable State in 45
years? What is the problem? Who is responsible for
that problem?

We are now witnessing the tragedy of Cote
d'Ivoire. How can it be that a country, 47 years after
independence, does not have the minimum pillars of
State, such as an army capable of defending the
territorial integrity of the country, political problems
notwithstanding? Is the international involvement in
such situations part of the solution or part of the
problem? Is the analysis of those situations correct or
defective? What about the incredible suffering visited
on the people in those situations? I would like the
Council to seriously evaluate all those factors.

As the Council knows, Uganda has had a lot of
problems. Nevertheless, Uganda has never sought, nor
would we ever accept, international involvement in our
internal affairs, other than our collaboration with our
Tanzanian brothers in getting rid of Idi Amin in 1978
and 1979. That is because we do not like to add to our
own copious confusion the international supplies of the
same commodity of confusion. It is not wise to add
international confusion, to what is already an
oversupply of local confusion.

Therefore, in my view, and following our long
experience in this part of the world, our actions should
be guided by the following steps. First and foremost,
any political problem should be solved by the citizens
of the country in question, following democratic
principles and guided by belief in the equality of all
persons before the law. That should be step number
one.
Secondly, if the citizens of that country, for some
reason, cannot solve the problem, then the region
should come in. In the case of our area, the regional
organizations concerned are the following: the East
African Community (EAC); the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which is here; the
Southern African Development Community (SADC);
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); and others.

Thirdly, ultimately the African Union should
bless the process.

Fourthly, it is only then that the international
bodies, such as the United Nations, should come into
the process, to provide solidarity and back-up support.
The advantages are the following.

First, there is the question of knowledge of the
problem. Because part of the problem is the fact that
the players do not know the problem. I have been
Chairperson of the Burundi peace process for a very
long time. In 1994-1995, when we were first coming
into the process once the citizens of Burundi had failed
to provide their own solution, there were many
suggestions. Some people suggested that the respected
former President of the United States, Jimmy Carter,
should head that process. I said no. I was Chairperson
of the process, and President Jimmy Carter is my very
good friend, but I said no. By the time President Carter
learned to pronounce Barundi names - and Barundi
names are so long: Ntibantunganya, for instance - it
would be 10 years later. And he would be unable to
help. So I insisted that the retired President of
Tanzania, the late Mwalimu Nyerere, should head that
process. Then, unfortunately Mwalimu Nyerere died,
then we brought in Mr. Mandela. Although South
Africa is rather far away, he was supported by all of us
and he has done a very good job. That is how the
Burundi process is moving steadily and surely. Thus,
again, the first advantage I see in this arrangement is
the question of knowledge: the ability to know the
problem so that one is able to provide a correct
solution. One should not complicate an already
difficult problem with a lack of knowledge and with
superficiality.

Secondly, there is the question of stakeholders.
Normally, when there is a problem in a country, the
first victims are the people in that country. But the next
victims are the neighbours, who are affected next by
refugees and all the other problems. The neighbours
are therefore stakeholders, next to the citizens of the
country. Although sometimes there may be some
rivalries which may complicate the issue, those can be
specifically isolated and dealt with.

Thirdly, there is the question of international
solidarity, especially concerning the question of
resources. So once you have the knowledge and you
have all the stakeholders brought in, then the next level
is international solidarity, especially with respect to
resources and maybe some technical contributions.

The four issues of this area are the Sudan,
Somalia, Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I am reversing the order, because I would have
started with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
I put it last, because the region is now out of the
Congo. The region is the one which shepherded the
Congo process, through the Lusaka process, stopped
the war and brought about a ceasefire and the
disengagement plan. But then, when the United
Nations came in, it said the region is out. So the region
is now out of the Congo. That is why I am putting it
last: because I do not know what is happening. I cannot
speak about what I do not know about.

Regarding those four issues, I would like to give
the following summarized comments. The leaders of
the Sudan, who are sitting next to me here, for a long
time refused to listen to the advice of the region in
handling the diverse character of that great African
country - that country where different African
peoples meet.

Many in the world may not know who the
Africans are. Africans fall into four major linguistic
groups. Africans in all of Central Africa, Southern
Africa, much of East Africa and quite a bit of West
Africa are part of the Niger-Congo group of languages.
It includes the Bantu languages, and also the Kwa
languages, the languages spoken in some parts of West
Africa.

The second group are the Nilo-Saharan people,
like John Garang, and all the people in southern
Ethiopia, Chad and so on. Their languages are the
Nilo-Saharan group of languages.

The third group are the Afro-Asiatic group of
languages, of which those are three in Africa: Arabic,
Amharic in one part of Ethiopia, and Tigray in Eritrea
and in part of Ethiopia.

The fourth group of languages is the Khoisan, a
very small group in South Africa. Those people have
somewhat Asiatic facial features, but they live in South
Africa, and a few in Botswana and Namibia.

Those are the four linguistic groups of Africa. We
have now added the new European languages - I do
not know whether we can also call them African:
English, French, Portuguese - and even Spanish in
some places. Those are the additional new languages of
Africa.

Now the Sudan is aware that some of those
language groups meet; the Arabic-speaking people
meet Garang's people. Those are very different people;
they all are African, but they are very different. As you
can see, Mr. Garang's people are not only black; they
are actually blue, when you look at them very
carefully.

Now when you have Arabs and blue men living
together under one sovereignty, that is a very serious
project, and it should be taken seriously. But that was
not taken into account. We are talking to our brothers;
fortunately, I have been dealing with them for a long
time, and they know my views. At one time, I went to
Khartoum - I was invited to the university, and I gave
my views there.

As a consequence of not dealing with the issue
over the past 50 years, this is where we are today on
the question of the Sudan. The six protocols, in my
opinion - given what has gone on, given the loss of
time in solving this problem - are a reasonable
package that should give this region a chance to see
peace in the Sudan and then make a fresh start.

When you want to jump, you do not stand in one
position and jump. No; you go back first. English is a
poor language; it does not have enough vocabulary,
like my language. In my language, we have a verb for
going backwards in order to jump better: we call it
okusinga. Okiisinga is when you go back in order to
gather enough momentum to jump far. I think there is a
word in English, but I do not remember it, even though
I did English at an advanced level.

In the Sudan, because of lost time and lost
opportunities, because of mistakes in defining the
problem, we need to go backwards. We need to
okasinga, to borrow my language. I think that is what
the Sudan needs. That sense of okusinga is captured in
these six protocols.

I hope we can implement these protocols, so that
we can see what happens next. Therefore I appeal to
the parties to the Sudan problem to resolve the
remaining issues without delay. When I spoke with
Mr. Garang on the telephone the other day, he
mentioned the issue of paying the army, and a few
other issues. I hope that these can be resolved quickly,
so that we can get moving.

I saw a television interview last night when I was
in Arusha - we were in Arusha for the meeting on
AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis - in which a Sudanese
person was saying that the Khartoum Government was
busy with the problem in Darfur and that therefore it
was not attending to this problem. But, in my opinion,
dealing with southern Sudan is part of dealing with the
question of Darfur. If you deal with southern Sudan
correctly, then you will be able to deal with Darfur
more easily.

Turning to Somalia, that country now has an
agreed Transitional Government. The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union,
the Arab League and the United Nations should
materially and technically back that Government so
that it can establish its authority in Somalia within the
shortest possible time. We should not lose any time,
because this package in Somalia is very, very
important. I must thank President Kibaki and his
Government for helping IGAD to negotiate this
agreement here in Nairobi, and I would appeal to
everyone to support this process.

What they need is troops to assist the Transitional
Government to establish its authority inside Somalia. I
would propose here the use of African troops. There
are troops from very far away - from Uruguay, from
the North Pole, from the South Pole; there are quite a
variety of them - but I think that African troops could
do this work much better. First of all, they are cheaper;
we pay our soldiers much less than those people are
paid. And they can stand and fight; there is no problem
at all.

Where African troops have been involved, we
have found solutions quickly. We solved the problem
of Amin almost alone, we the Africans - Tanzania,
ourselves and a few other countries. We solved the
problem of Mobutu. We are the ones who dealt with
the problem of genocide in Rwanda. Genocide would
never have stopped if we had not taken a stand. Getting
rid of the regime and enabling people to survive was
done by Africans. We are the ones who fought
apartheid; the Africans are the ones who fought
apartheid.

I do not know why, therefore, we do not have a
system whereby we have international resources and
use African troops to solve these problems. If there is
money, we can raise soldiers to deal with this problem
of Somalia, or any problem, for that matter. The youth
in Africa are doing nothing, they are not employed,
they are looking for jobs. It would be very easy for me
to raise any number of brigades - two, three, four,
five.

Now once, when we were working with the
former President Bush on the question of Somalia in
1991, I wanted to make a contribution, but I was told
that I could send only one company. I said, "No, I am
not going to send one company. I am not here for
decoration. If you want me to make a contribution, I
must send a brigade, so that you can see what Ugandan
soldiers can do in order to make a contribution. But
just one company from me - that would be like a
jamboree, or something like that."

Let us use Somalia as an example. I am the
Chairperson of IGAD, and I have consulted the new
President, President Abdullah Yusuf. We can have
several brigades of African soldiers go into Somalia
and assist the Transitional Government to establish its
authority on the ground, if we have the money. Money
is the only problem. After all, these soldiers are being
paid; even when they are at home they are being paid.
The money we may be looking for could be money for
transportation, food and so on. We are already paying
those soldiers, but if we need to raise new battalions,
we may need more money, including for salaries. That
is what Somalia needs now. It needs a number of
brigades to escort that Government into Somalia so
that they can start preparing for elections, so that they
can have a legitimate Government.

The situation in Burundi is progressing quite
well, mainly because the region, the internal parties of
Burundi and the international community are
coordinating well. Things are moving along quite well
in Burundi, because all of us are there all the time. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Carolyn McAskie, is working with all the
stakeholders. We encounter all sorts of complications,
but nobody can deceive us, because we know the
situation. By putting our heads together, we always
reach a good solution.

The only problem in Burundi is money. What is it
the French word for money? "Argent." I keep saying
that argent is what is needed now, first of all for the
elections, for printing the ballots. I think some money
has been raised for the ballot boxes and so forth, but
we also need money to assemble the combatants, put
them in one place, disarm them and disband them. If
we do not do this, free elections cannot be held,
because the parties that have armed groups will use
them to intimidate rival parties. It is therefore very
important that we get the argent for the purpose of
demobilizing the combatants.

As regards the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I have expressed my worries to both President
Kabila and the Secretary-General. I hope that those
worries are taken into account. One of the problems I
had with the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is
that it has delayed the integration of the combatants.
For one and a half years, rebels in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo have been appealing to the
Government to integrate them. The Government has
been saying, "No, we cannot integrate you". When I
inquired further, I was told that Western ambassadors
in Kinshasa are the ones advising the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo not to integrate
the rebels. Why? Because the rebels committed
atrocities, so they must be investigated first. This must
be a new theory of conflict resolution. The little I know
about conflict resolution is that you first establish
peace. If all the troublemakers come peacefully, you
accept them with open arms. We should not say, "No, I
do not want to allow you in, because I think you may
have committed crimes and I want to investigate you
first". If people want to come, we should welcome
them with open arms.

That is why in the case of Burundi we used the
method of "immunite provisoire", provisional
immunity. We assume that these people are not all
criminals. They bring their guns, they all come, and we
put them in the army temporarily. We then use
technical standards to reduce their number to the
number we want. We take out those who are over age
and those who are sick. We may have a standard
regarding education as well. Thus, in the end, we have
a smaller number than the original number. Then we
give a package to those who are not absorbed. That is
where the World Bank comes in: we give them a
package, and they go home with a good heart.

Now when we do that, we are solving two or
three problems at once. First, people with guns come
and hand in their guns. Secondly, we are helping the
faction leaders. A faction leader has real problems. He
has his followers, and he cannot join the transitional
Government and leave his followers out. His followers
would kill him and say, "You have betrayed us; you
only care about yourself and you forgot about us". That
is why some of the faction leaders are very reluctant to
come: because they cannot join the process without
first having a solution for their followers. When you
integrate combatants, you also help the faction leaders.
The faction leader is then able to tell his followers,
"Look here, my friends, the transitional process has
catered for you, so do not harass me".

I truly hope that this issue is dealt with. Only the
other day, I sent a special envoy to see President
Kabila to tell him about my worries, because I have
heard stories of these thousands of people who are out
there in that part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with guns, unaccounted for, and whom the
Government wants to investigate first. If we had
followed that logic of justice before peace and
legitimacy, we would have had no peace process in
Burundi, because I cannot vouch for most of the people
in Burundi's army. Many among the rebels may have
committed crimes. But, by using the technique of
"immunite provisoire", however, we gathered all of
them and we can proceed to establishing a transitional
Government. From a transitional Government, we will
proceed to elections, and thus to legitimacy. Then we
can come back to the question of justice. That is how
that issue was handled in South Africa, if the Council
remembers: first negotiations, then the transitional
process, elections and then the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission to establish questions of
justice.

I am taking a lot of your time, members of the
Council, but I imagine you came a long way to listen to
us, so do not complain. You voluntarily came to listen
to us.

In my opinion and according to my experience,
the magic formula when internal forces have failed to
apply in dealing with the issue is the following: the
internal parties, the regional players, and the
international players. That is how the problem of Amin
was solved, how the problem of apartheid was solved
and how the problem of Mobutu was solved, to some
extent, although not wholly. In my opinion, if there is
an intractable problem, that package of players should
shepherd the solution through all the stages:
negotiations, agreement, implementation, and
guaranteeing the agreement in the post-implementation
period. Because, if it is not guaranteed, the internal
forces will guarantee it through war - through
fighting - asserting their rights themselves in the
absence of anybody else to guarantee their interests.

