Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the accession
of the Kingdom of Sweden to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January, and I thank
you for organizing this open debate and for choosing
its theme. Issues pertaining to conflict prevention
and sustaining peace are currently enjoying a very
positive momentum, and we should, all together, take
advantage of that in order to give concrete follow-up to
your call for political and financial re-engagement on
those priorities.

I also congratulate the Secretary-General on his
briefing, which confirms his firm commitment to
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I would like
to say to the Secretary-General and to the members
of the Security Council that Morocco continues to be
committed to the universal values of peaceful conflict
resolution and sustaining peace.

The multiplication of conflicts, their complexity
and their disastrous consequences make it necessary to
review the way in which the Organization deals with
them. This debate also provides us today an opportunity
to present new approaches and answers to the questions
that remain for the implementation of the vision initiated
two years ago by the processes to review the peace and
security architecture, which resulted in the emergence
of the new paradigm, namely, sustaining peace.

The resolution on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture (resolution 2282 (2016)) led to a redefinition
of sustainable peace through a more integrated, strategic
and coherent approach, in which security, development
and human rights are closely interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. A comprehensive approach recognizes that
sustaining peace is based, first, on conflict prevention
and the elimination of its root causes by promoting
sustained economic growth, lasting social development,
strengthened social cohesion, the culture of democracy
and human rights. Conflict prevention then becomes
one of the strongest links in this new mechanism,
namely, sustaining peace.

Often, the instruments available to the Secretary-
General and to the Security Council set out in Chapter
VI in the Charter of the United Nations, such as
negotiation, mediation or arbitration, are not enough
to avoid conflicts. As a result, traditional policies for
preventing armed conflicts that seek only to reduce the
intensity, duration and geographical extent of violence
and, ultimately, to end it, have become inadequate.

The fact is that the underlying causes of conflicts
often go neglected in the face of the urgency of ensuring
a security and humanitarian response. But when strong
institutions, the rule of law, and sufficient State capacity
for minimum public services are lacking, conflicts, or
relapses into conflict, are more likely to emerge. That
is where we need a holistic vision and where the new
concept of sustaining peace takes on its full meaning.
According to this innovative approach, the strategy that
enables a coherent, effective and legitimate culture of
prevention to establish itself is one that tackles every
aspect of the root causes of conflicts.

There are many stakeholders with an important
role in addressing the root causes of conflict, including
bilateral and multilateral partners and non- governmental
organizations, as well as representatives of civil
society, young people and women. Within the United
Nations system, the various funds and programmes
play a leading part in strengthening States' institutional
capacities, as do regional and financial organizations.

Beyond that, several elements are required to
implement the concept of sustaining peace, among
them a change in the culture within the United
Nations. We commend the Secretary-General on
the steps he has already taken to reorganize various
departments, and we believe firmly that they will
help to revitalize prevention activities and improve
the flow of information. This situation makes the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) crucial
in functioning as a bridge between all the various
actors. In accordance with the latest resolutions of
the Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) and the
General Assembly (resolution 70/262)) on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture, the time has come to
strengthen the PBC so that it can play its role to the full.

In conclusion, I would like to share two
recommendations. First, some Member States see
prevention activities as an attack on their countries'
sovereignty or as interference in their States' internal
affairs. To remedy that, we should clarify the principles
of early warning and preventive action. A few years ago,
the same misunderstanding afflicted the concept of the
protection of civilians, and yet today it has become a
sacred principle. Secondly, in order to ensure the success
of sustaining peace, we should pay special attention to
an operation's transition from peacekeeping to country
team. Based on current experiences in Liberia, as well
as in Mali and the Central African Republic, we could
consider including support for country teams in the
compulsory contribution funds while the missions are
still deployed, in order to prepare for the transition as
soon as that deployment begins.

Lastly, I would like to congratulate the new members
of the Council - your country, Mr. President, as well
as Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan and Italy - on their
election, and to assure them of our full cooperation.
Similarly, I offer my congratulations on the end of
the Council term of the last remaining dictatorship in
Latin America, Venezuela. That country has perverted
the Council's mandate with a political and ideological
agenda and an utter lack of interest in just causes,
particularly in Africa and the Middle East. It is a self-
proclaimed teacher of lessons about human rights
when its own people live under oppression, torture,
forced disappearances and imprisonment. Venezuela's
representative talks of referendums when his own
Government has refused its own people a referendum

and prevents them from expressing their views
democratically. The presence of such a representative,
of such a country, in the Security Council tarnishes its
image and weakens the Organization. Happily, it is gone.
I am sorry for having digressed from my statement, but
I had to respond to attacks on my country.

