Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation wishes
to congratulate you, Madam President, on Poland's
assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We have full confidence in your wisdom
and able leadership. I assure you of our full support
and cooperation.

My Government welcomed the visit of the members
of the Security Council to Myanmar in the hope that the
visit would help them to better understand the situation
on the ground so that we can further strengthen our
cooperation with the United Nations in our efforts for
the safe, dignified and voluntary return of the displaced
persons. We believe that we will be able to overcome
the serious challenges that we face today by working
in partnership with the United Nations. We trust in
its constructive engagement and cooperation based
on the principles of objectivity, mutual respect and
understanding. We also hope that the visit will give
strong impetus to our bilateral efforts with Bangladesh
for the implementation of the repatriation process.

We facilitated the Security Council's visit to the
fullest extent possible within the available time frame
of the Council. The State Counsellor saw the visit
as an important turning point. She reaffirmed the
commitment of the Myanmar Government to bringing
about peace, stability and development in Rakhine state.

In resolving the current issues relating to Rakhine
state, we all agree that the most urgent task right now
is to start the repatriation of the displaced persons in
accordance with the bilateral agreements. We have
repeatedly stated that we want to start the repatriation
process as soon as possible, as we are ready to receive
the returnees. Recently, on 8 May, the Ambassador
of Bangladesh to Myanmar, Mr. Manjurul Karim
Khan Chowdhury, was summoned to Nay Pyi Taw
and reminded of Myanmar's readiness to commence
the repatriation of verified displaced persons before
the monsoon, as agreed by the two Governments.
The Ministry for Foreign Affairs once again urged
Bangladesh to implement the bilateral agreement
and to repatriate those who are already verified so
that they can return to their villages in Rakhine. The
Ambassador was also reminded to send the lists of
displaced persons, using the right forms, as agreed in
the physical arrangement for repatriation.

The forms used by Bangladesh were not those
prescribed in the physical arrangement. They did
not contain the signatures, fingerprints and proper
photographs necessary for the proper verification and
assurance of consent. We had already requested the
Bangladesh side, on three separate occasions through
diplomatic channels, to forward the duly completed
prescribed forms that would enable displaced persons
to be repatriated under the principle of voluntary, safe
and dignified return.

Prior to the Security Council visit to Myanmar, the
Minister for Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement
of Myanmar visited Cox's Bazar refugee camps and
met with the displaced persons. He explained the
resettlement programme for returnees to them and
provided information on the repatriation process. To our
surprise, they were not at all aware of the repatriation
process. Apparently, they had not been notified by
the Bangladesh authorities about the current bilateral
arrangements or provided any of the forms required for
the repatriation process. During the visit, the Minister
could not meet the persons whom we have verified for
repatriation, despite our request that such a meeting
be arranged.

While we are trying to solve the issue in good faith
through bilateral cooperation, it is most regrettable
that, instead of fulfilling its commitment for the
repatriation ofthe displaced persons as per the bilateral
agreements, the Bangladesh side has deliberately
made one excuse after another to stall the repatriation
process. Bangladesh has been distorting the facts and
telling the whole world that Myanmar is not willing to
accept the return of the displaced persons. Bangladesh
is altering the truth and vilifying the Government
and the people of Myanmar to solicit international
condemnation and exert maximum political pressure
on Myanmar. We need the full and sincere cooperation
of the Government of Bangladesh if the repatriation
process is to be successful.

In that connection, I would like to refer to the
remark made by the Permanent Representative of
Kuwait concerning the illegal occupation on both
sides of the international border. Human habitation
and the building of any structure within 150 feet of
the international border is prohibited by our bilateral
border agreement. We have therefore filed our objection
with the Bangladeshi side regarding the construction of
bunkers and houses in the restricted areas on their side
of the border. We have also learned that the Bangladesh
side is helping illegal occupants on our side ofthe border
in building shelters, which is a violation of Myanmar's
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We notified them
that such actions should cease immediately.

Allow me to turn to the matter of accountability.
The Government of Myanmar has stated time and again
that no violation of human rights will be condoned.
Allegations supported by evidence will be investigated
and action taken in accordance with the law. You may
recall, Madam President, that, during your meeting
with State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, she
condemned all violence and reassured you of our
readiness to take actions on the alleged human rights
violations in Rakhine if the necessary information is
provided. She reiterated that security assurances would
be given to anyone who wishes to bring to court in
Myanmar cases regarding violations of rights.

Moreover, the Commander-in-Chief also told the
members of the Council that the Tatmadaw would
welcome any alleged survivor of sexual violence who
could bring hard evidence of the crime committed so
that the perpetrators can be held accountable. He also
mentioned that the Tatmadaw has adopted a zero-
tolerance policy against any sexual violence committed
by members of the armed forces.

When it comes to human rights abuses and
violations, we should not forget the fact that the
current humanitarian problem was the result of Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA) terrorist attacks
on 30 border guard posts in northern Rakhine. The
root cause of the latest crisis and the brutal killings
and atrocities committed by the terrorists on innocent
ethnic Hindu, Rakhine Buddhists and other minority
tribes had been ignored by the Western media. The
truth has been suppressed by incessant sensational
arguments and Muslim victimhood narratives. Only a
balanced and constructive approach can lead us to the
right solution of the extremely complex and politically
sensitive problem of Rakhine state.

During the Security Council visit to Maungdaw on
1 May, approximately20 Rakhine, Mro, Maramar and
Hindus waited for the Council members at the township
administrative office for an opportunity to testify as to
their experience of ARSA terrorist atrocities. Due to the
limited time, only one Rakhine woman and one Hindu
woman were able to talk about human rights abuses and
atrocities perpetrated by ARSA terrorists. Sadly, many
tragic stories of the ethnic people in Rakhine have
fallen on the deaf ears of some who wanted to listen to
only one side of the story of their choosing.

Those people witnessed the atrocities committed
by ARSA terrorists, including the killing of seven
Mro ethnic people in Khon-Taing village of Maungtaw
township on 28 August 2017 and the subsequent
torching of 2,625 houses in the area. They also testified
as to the horrific discovery of a mass grave found near
Yebawkya village on 28 September 2017, where 45
bodies of Hindus were discovered among the hundred
kidnapped by ARSA. Those ethnic people in Maungtaw
area are traumatized by these brutal terrorist acts. They
all feel insecure as minority groups in their own land as
a result of the fear instilled by ARSA. ARSA must also
be held accountable for atrocities committed against
the civilian population in Rakhine. The investigation
of violations must include cases of terrorist atrocities
as well.

We are seriously concerned that Bangladesh is
unwittingly allowing extremism to rear its ugly head
in that part of the region. ARSA already has a foothold
in the camps, which soon will become a stronghold of
terrorism and extremism. Recently, on 9 May, a group
of four to six terrorists entered one of the refugee camps
in Balukali and dragged 46-year-old Mohamed Faisal
Ulhaq out of the camp and stabbed him to death. He
had reportedly been advocating returning to Rakhine
among his fellow displaced persons.

We have made every effort to put in place an
environment conducive to the return of displaced
people. Convinced that the engagement of United
Nations agencies in Rakhine will strengthen our ability
to ensure safe, dignified and voluntary repatriation, we
are in the process of active discussions on a memorandum
of understanding with the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Those agencies will be
working alongside Myanmar ministries concerned and
the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development for the good of all
communities in Rakhine.

At the same time, we shall also be dealing with the
root causes ofthe recent violence. The recommendations
of the Annan Commission set out practical measures
necessary to achieve development for all communities
in Rakhine. Of the 88 recommendations by the Annan
Commission and the 48 by the national investigation
commission, many overlap. Fifty-seven will be
fulfilled very soon, while 31 are still being processed.
The first report of the Implementation Committee was
issued in February 2018, and the second will appear in
May. Since the submission of Mr. Annan's final report,
three camps for internally displaced persons have been
relocated, and another four will be closed very soon.

With regard to the issuance of national verification
cards, false information has been spread to discourage
people from complying with requirements in that
regard. In reality, cards constitute the first step for
citizenship verification. Card holders who meet
requirements in accordance with the existing law will
become Myanmar citizens within a few months. All
persons residing in Myanmar have to go through the
same process of verification, myself included.

We will continue to implement the recommendations
of the Annan report at the fullest extent, in keeping with
the situation on the ground, to bring long-term peace,
harmony and development to the people of Rakhine.

The international community, including the
United Nations, should work together to create an
environment conducive to restoring peace, harmony
and development for all people in Rakhine state. Hate
narratives that promote deep-rooted mistrust must stop.
The prevailing hostile attitude towards the Myanmar
Government will not contribute to building peace and
harmony in the country. We have just heard a few very
hostile and hateful remarks with respect to my country.
That is very unfortunate. Discriminatory treatment and
one-sided support will lead only to further polarization
and escalation of tensions among different communities
in the region.

Bangladesh must cooperate fully and sincerely
with Myanmar in the implementation of the bilateral
agreement for the repatriation of displaced persons.
We are confident that we will be able to resolve the
present humanitarian problem and the issues of long-
term peace and development of Rakhine state if
Myanmar and Bangladesh work hand in hand in a spirit
of mutual respect, genuine desire to help the displaced
persons and a spirit of good-neighbourliness. In that
connection, I am pleased to inform the Council that the
joint working group for the repatriation of the displaced
persons will meet in Dhaka on 17 May to expedite the
implementation of the agreed repatriation process.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
delegation's sincere appreciation to the members of
the Council that have been extending their support
to Myanmar at this challenging time of transition to
democracy. We also thank our four neighbours for
accepting our invitation to travel to Myanmar with the
Council members. We believe that mutual understanding
and constructive cooperation will ultimately bring
about the positive result to which we all aspire.

I would like to reassure the Council that,
notwithstanding all the daunting challenges we are
facing, the Government of Myanmar will spare no
effort to bring peace, harmony and development to all
people in Rakhine state.

