Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2552 (2020). We thank the penholders for their efforts to find a compromise among the divergent positions. We have heard the call from the Central African Republic for the extension of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in order to protect civilians, including during the 2020-2021 election, and of the Mission's good offices and support to the peace process, including the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. That is why Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution. I am taking the floor to highlight the following points. First, MINUSCA is first and foremost a peacekeeping mission. We salute our peacekeepers for risking their lives and leaving their families behind in pursuit of peace in the Central African Republic. Their safety and security will always be a top priority for Indonesia. Our position has always been crystal clear. To that end, we welcome the new language on peacekeeper safety and security in the resolution. Secondly, we support the call to increase women's participation in MINUSCA at all levels and positions, including senior leadership positions, in line with resolution 2538 (2020). Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations must be fully prepared, especially in the light of the changing, complex and increasingly dangerous environment. That is why it is critical to ensure that the Mission be given clear mandates, the necessary equipment and sufficient resources. As an elected member of the Security Council, Indonesia has over the past two years followed closely the progress in the Central African Republic, including the peace agreement reached in February 2019. We continue to support MINUSCA within and outside of the Council, as the largest personnel contributor among Council members. Allow me to reiterate Indonesia's commitment as a true partner for peace for the Central African Republic, even beyond our term on the Council. The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.
