Mr. Lamani (spoke in Arabic): At the outset I
would like to express our deep appreciation to the
President of the Council for convening this open debate
on the question of Iraq. I would like also to express our
appreciation to the delegation of South Africa for its
courageous and constructive initiative on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement in requesting the convening of
this important meeting.
In his statement before the annual coordination
meeting of Foreign Ministers of members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), held in
New York on 17 September 2002, Mr. Abdelouahed
Belkeziz, Secretary General of the OIC, stressed that
the gravity of the situation in Iraq continues to
preoccupy our organization despite the breakthrough in
Arab-Iraqi relations earlier this year.

The continuation of the sanctions imposed on
Iraq, with their severe social and humanitarian
consequences, has inflicted much harm on a whole new
generation in Iraq. The Secretary General expressed
concern that this will have extremely negative
repercussions for this Islamic country for many years
to come. He expressed the hope that Iraq would be able
to settle all its problems with its sisterly neighbours.
Foremost among these problems is the issue of the
missing Kuwaitis. It is also hoped that Iraq could settle
its problems with the United Nations, particularly with
regard to the return of the United Nations inspectors to
resume and complete their mandated tasks.

Following that meeting, the OIC Foreign
Ministers issued a statement welcoming the decision of
Iraq concerning the return of the United Nations
inspectors to Iraq, in response to the appeals made by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, by the
Secretary General of the League of Arab States, and by
Arab, Islamic and other States as a first step towards a
comprehensive solution to relations between Iraq and
the Security Council. Normalized relations would lead
to implementation of all Security Council resolutions,
to the lifting of sanctions imposed on Iraq, to
respecting its security and sovereignty and to
establishing the Middle East as a zone free from
weapons of mass destruction.

The Ministers called upon all States to abide by
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, to refrain from the threat or use of force
against Iraq, and to respect its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

It has been repeatedly stated before this body that
there should be no double standards when it debates the
issue of non-compliance with its resolutions by any
Member State. The history of the United Nations and
its records testify to the fact that some of its Member
States have defied its resolutions. Israel is a clear
example. However, the United Nations, including the
Security Council, has not resorted to the use of force
against such countries. I would like to refer to an
article published in the Inter Press Service on 11
October 2002, quoting Professor Stephen Zunes,
Associate Professor of Politics at the University of San
Francisco and Middle East Editor for Foreign Policy in
Focus. He wrote that there were an additional 91
Security Council resolutions about countries other than
Iraq that were currently being violated, 31 of which
dealt with Israel.

We strongly support the call for seeking a
peaceful solution to the issue of Iraq in a way that
preserves the authority and the credibility of the United
Nations, as well as the unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law.

Undoubtedly, the recent decision by Iraq to allow
the United Nations inspectors to return unconditionally
and to facilitate their task, as well as the positive
outcome of the meetings held in Vienna between Iraq
and the United Nations, are steps in the right direction.
They enable the Security Council to play its mandated
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security and spare the region the catastrophes of war
and destruction and alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi
people, which has lasted far too long and must be
ended.

