Mr. Cazeau (Haiti) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
the holding of this informational meeting concerning
my country one year and eight days following the
12 January 2010 disaster, which is seared into the
minds of the Haitian people and its brothers, sisters and
friends throughout the world. I would like, through you
Sir, to commend and thank Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy and his colleagues in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for their efforts, which have
greatly benefited my country thanks to the work of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Valerie Amos and all the staff of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for their apt response to the situation in Haiti,
which in less than one year suffered three disasters
requiring emergency response. I would like to tell
Ms. Amos that my delegation is aware that OCHA's
experience in Haiti over the past year was in many
respects not easy. Fortunately, however, under her
asserted leadership, major challenges have been
addressed to the extent possible.

At 4.53 pm. on 12 January 2010 Haiti
experienced the saddest moment in its history. To recall
the remarks of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in
marking the first anniversary of that fateful day:

(spoke in English)

"Forty-seven seconds. It is not a long time. But
the earthquake in Haiti was an eternity of sorrow.
One year is not long either."

(spoke in French)

Indeed, a large swathe of our country was lost,
resulting in more than a quarter of a million deaths
among Haitians and foreigners alike; thousands left
11-21162
injured, orphaned or homeless; emotional and physical
devastation, desolation and despair. The Government
had just put in place its national development plan
when this scourge struck the country and everything
suddenly changed: priorities had to be reevaluated, and
in most cases refocused and/or modified.

My delegation will always remember how the
international community rallied to the aid of the
Haitian people in less than 24 hours after the
earthquake. Help arrived from all continents and air,
sea and land was opened for the provision of
humanitarian aid to Haiti. We will never forget these
acts, which reinforce the bonds of friendship and
understanding among peoples. We appreciate the
gestures from all parts of the world and the generosity
of the international community which, at the meeting
on 31 March 2010, opened its wallet to pledge
contributions that went beyond our expectations. Many
donors have already made good on those promises, but
not all funds have yet arrived. We nonetheless continue
to believe that they will not fail to do so in due time.

We must recognize that Haiti needs to be rebuilt,
not just patched up. This is an immense undertaking
that will take time and call for human, financial and
material resources. Well before 12 January 2010, Haiti
was already struggling with major problems, which
have only become worse. We must bear in mind that
many of our colleagues in both the public and private
sectors perished under the rubble, while others were
handicapped or traumatized or have simply left the
country. Services are therefore functioning with greatly
reduced capacity and staff. The country faces a great
variety of challenges every day, all of them urgent.

These challenges are without a doubt difficult to
overcome, but they are not insurmountable, with the
help of the international community. Those who have
taken the floor before me have spoken quite frankly to
paint an accurate picture of the situation. There is so
much to do that at time we get the impression that
nothing has been done.

Since its establishment in June 2010, the Interim
Haiti Reconstruction Commission, led jointly by
Haitian Prime Minister J ean-Max Bellerive and former
President of the United States Bill Clinton, has
approved 74 projects in various sectors such as
education, health, development, agriculture and
technical and professional assistance for the public and
private sectors. Construction will soon begin on an
5
industrial park in the north of the country, which, when
fully operational, will provide jobs to more than 20,000
citizens. A 350-bed teaching hospital is currently under
construction in the centre of the country, thanks to
cooperation between the Ministry of Health and
Partners in Health. A central market has just been
restored in Port-au-Prince for the traders of the capital.
Commercial activities have resumed and most schools
have begun to function again. Public and private
services are up and running. The Haitian National
Police has started training new officers and the courts
are working. We can report that there has been a return
to normality, to a certain degree.

However, as has already been said, a great deal
remains to be done. More than 1 million people are still
living in tents that are no longer strong enough to
withstand the onslaught of tropical winds and rains.
The hurricane season is already upon us and we can no
longer afford to hesitate or make mistakes.

In addition, there are the devastating effects of
the cholera epidemic, which in less than five months
has officially claimed more than 3,500 lives and led to
almost 90,000 hospitalizations. Fortunately, the
response has been appropriate and we can hope that in
the near future the health agencies will, with the help
of the population, have this scourge under control. We
hope that the panel of five experts established by the
Secretary-General to investigate the origin of this
problem will make its conclusions known soon in order
to end speculation.

Finally, my delegation would like to recall that,
while the day of 12 January 2010 was devastating for
Haiti, it also provided a unique opportunity for a new
vision of what a modern country should look like: a
State focused on development, democracy and respect
for human rights that is able to provide basic services
to the population, which it must serve and protect. To
achieve that goal, we are counting firmly on the
continued full, frank and respectful cooperation of the
international community. Patience, mutual
understanding and continued dialogue are the
principles by which we must all be guided.

