Mr. Annabi: As you have just indicated, Mr.
President, Council members have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
dated 15 December, which provides a comprehensive
account of developments in Kosovo, Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, over the past few months.

The most important development during these
past three months has been the holding of municipal
elections, in which almost 80 per cent of the eligible
electorate participated. As Council members are aware,
Kosovo Serbs did not, however, participate in the
elections, and the voter turnout for Romas and Turks
was low to negligible. Other minority participation was
more encouraging, especially among the Kosovo
Bosniac and Gorani communities.

The election results have been certified by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Bernard Kouchner, in 27 out of Kosovo's 30
municipalities. Of those 27 municipalities, the
Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) won in 21
municipalities, and the Democratic Party of Kosovo
(PDK) won in six other municipalities. The exceptions,
where certification has not been possible, are the three
Kosovo Serb majority municipalities of Leposavic,
Zubin Potok and Zvecan. In these areas, the Special
Representative has appointed municipal assemblies.
Kosovo Serb representatives have been drawn from
various political parties, but they also include a number
of independent personalities. Major progress has now
been made in establishing functioning municipal
assemblies.

The report of the Secretary-General notes that
changes in the Government in Belgrade have
influenced Kosovo's political life. While Kosovo
Albanian leaders have welcomed the changes as a
positive contribution, they have perceived President
Kostunica's victory as a threat to their well-known
aspirations for the province. That perception could,
unfortunately, further radicalize some Kosovo Albanian
nationalist elements and may place Kosovo's
minorities under increased threat, which UNMIK, in
cooperation with the Kosovo Force (KFOR), has taken
steps to address.

S/PVAZA')

 

UNMIK places emphasis on combating
politically motivated violence, and a joint UNMIK-
KFOR Political Violence Task Force has been
established. The pre-election period saw a significant
drop in the level of politically motivated violence.
However, in the post-election period, the number of
attacks has, regrettably, returned to a level comparable
to that of midsummer of this year.

One incident of particular concern to UNMIK
was the bombing of the house of the senior
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
Kosovo, Ambassador Vukicevic, of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia Committee for Cooperation
with UNMIK, which resulted in the death of a Serb
guard and the injury of three other persons. The
following day, a senior politician of the LDK was also
murdered.

The overriding human rights concern in Kosovo
continues to be the provision of adequate security for
Kosovo's minorities. While for some communities,
such as the Kosovo Roma, the number of significant
incidents has dropped, for others the situation remains
precarious or has in fact deteriorated. For example,
four Ashkalija returnees were murdered in the
Mitrovica region in early November. UNMIK has
continued to develop measures to improve security in
minority communities, with joint patrols of UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force and the establishment of a
telephone hotline.

The Secretary-General has emphasized that
extremists must not be allowed to undermine the
achievements obtained so far in providing the basis for
substantial autonomy and self-government in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Continued
implementation of substantial autonomy depends upon
the existence of security and respect for human rights
and democratic development. None of these conditions
can be met unless Kosovo's leaders and the general
population commit themselves to ensuring that they are
upheld.

I would like to turn now to the situation in the
Presevo Valley. In mid-November, there was an
escalation of armed confrontation between Serbian
security forces and the self-styled Liberation Army of
Presevo, Medveda and Bujanovac in the ground safety
zone adjacent to Kosovo. The clashes triggered an
influx of almost 5,000 displaced persons from the area
into Kosovo. While the number of displaced can be
considered as relatively small, the potential
implications for peace and security in the region are
quite serious.

In response, KFOR and UNMIK continue to
enhance operations within Kosovo to further deter and
disrupt radical ethnic Albanian groups from conducting
armed activities in the Presevo Valley. These
operations combine both political and military efforts
to reduce tensions within the ground safety zone.
Elements of the operation include, among other
measures, sustained political pressure on Kosovo
Albanian politicians who might exert some moderating
influence on hard-line Albanian armed groups;
intensified reconnaissance operations along the eastern
boundary of Kosovo; and extensive operations within
Kosovo to deter any attempt to move arms or military
equipment to the Presevo Valley.

UNMIK continues to make impressive gains in
normalizing life in Kosovo. Health care institutions
continue to be refurbished. Almost 70,000 children
have been immunized against polio. More than 1,000
schools have been rehabilitated since last September.
Work also continues to restore both the electricity and
the water-supply systems in Kosovo. In the case of the
water systems, 80 per cent of Kosovo's urban
population now have chlorinated water. In comparison,
only 30 per cent had access to chlorinated water in
mid-1999, when UNMIK was established.

On the humanitarian front, it is estimated that
some 20,000 families could be at risk of suffering
severe exposure this winter if coal and firewood are not
provided. Work is under way to provide winter stoves,
blankets and other non-food items, such as coal and
firewood. Places are also being made available in
community shelters.

The UNMIK Mine Action Coordination Centre
has estimated that the task of clearing Kosovo of mines
and other ordinance should be completed by December
2001 and it has therefore prepared an exit strategy to
transfer responsibilities to the appropriate departments
of the Joint Interim Administrative Structure.

Before concluding, I would like to mention the
incident which occurred last weekend in Leposavic in
northern Kosovo. This was on the evening of 16
December, when two Kosovo Serbs died, two more
were seriously injured and the Leposavic municipal
police station was burned to the ground. The violence
stemmed from an incident in which a Kosovo Serb was

S/PVAZA')

 

arrested for drunken driving and the attempted murder
of a Kosovo Serb officer of the Kosovo Police Service
(KPS). A crowd subsequently formed at the Leposavic
police station to demand the release of the arrested
man. In the ensuing events, seven Belgian KFOR
soldiers were taken hostage and later released. The
crowd attempted to break into the police compound.
Petrol bombs were thrown at the police station and
three KFOR vehicles and one KPS police car were
destroyed. Belgian KFOR members fired tear gas and
warning shots in response.

As I just mentioned, two Kosovo Serbs died
during this incident, one from a gunshot wound and the
other, reportedly, from a heart attack. UNMIK police
has launched an investigation into this incident and
into the deaths. Since then, the situation in the region
has remained calm, and this is confirmed by the latest
situation reports we have received.

To conclude, I would like to emphasize that,
while many of the foundations for the future
development of Kosovo have been laid, much remains
to be done. The upsurge in politically motivated
violence, as well as the incidents in the Presevo Valley
and in Leposavic, underscore, if there is any need to do
so, the fragility of the situation and the need for
continued international support for UNMIK and its
work. This support will be critical as the Mission
continues to implement the results of the municipal
elections held last October and as it increases the
involvement of the local population in the local interim
administrative bodies.

