Mr. Ramirez Carreiio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her presentation of the twenty-
second report on the investigation of the situation in
the Sudan. We also commend the work of the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Court in combating impunity
and promoting justice for victims of the crimes cited in
article 5 of the Rome Statute, to which Venezuela has
been an active party since its entry into force in 2002.

We believe that international cooperation is an
essential ingredient for the full achievement of the
Court's objectives, a view endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 1593 (2005), which calls for the
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan and the
international community, with the goal of strengthening
the rule of law, protecting human rights and combating
impunity in the Darfur region. To that end, we believe
that cooperation between the Security Council, the
International Criminal Court and regional bodies
such as the African Union has a critical role to play in
ensuring that political agreements founded on mutual
respect and unwavering observance of international
law, aimed at achieving peace, stability, development
and justice, can be arrived at in the Sudan.

Venezuela considers the issue of accountability to
be particularly important, since we believe it makes a
major contribution to fostering a climate of trust in the
State institutions of the Sudan, as well as to breaking
the cycle of impunity, particularly in Darfur. In that
regard, we also believe that making accountability
a concrete reality is an important part of achieving a
lasting peace in the post-conflict phase.

In supporting the Prosecutor's efforts to ensure
that justice and accountability are realized, we would
also like to urge the Court to be objective and impartial
in evaluating the situation. Its role in an impartial
investigation of the actions of all parties to the conflict
is crucial to strengthening its credibility. The ICC must
work in a balanced way to promote justice and the
achievement of a lasting, sustainable, comprehensive
and holistic peace. In that regard, we are concerned
some elements' attempts to politicize the work of the
International Criminal Court, and thus undermine
the principles that govern it. They weaken the Court's
institutional status, to the detriment of the spirit and
purpose of the Rome Statute.

Venezuela firmly and unreservedly condemns
armed attacks that target the civilian population,
which are a flagrant violation of international human
rights and humanitarian law, whoever perpetrates them
and for whatever reason. We are therefore extremely
concerned about the fact that the report continues to
describe a continuing complex situation of violence
and abuse in Darfur. We urge all parties to put an
end to such practices, which are unacceptable under
international law.

We would like to reiterate our support for the
position of regional bodies and joint political entities
such as the African Union, the Organization for
Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States and the
Non-Aligned Movement, among others, regarding the
defence of the principle that should govern the Sudan's
entities and constitutional proceedings in order to ensure

their compliance with the International Criminal Court
regarding the necessity of complementarity for all the
bodies involved. For that reason, we call for improved
cooperation between the ICC and the Government
of the Sudan, as well as between the countries of the
region, in order to ensure accountability for violations
of international humanitarian and human rights
law. Such cooperation would also help in reaching a
solution to the conflict in Darfur aimed at achieving
peace and justice for the Sudanese people, in line with
international law.

