Mr. Egeland: There are signs of progress in our
work to better protect civilians caught in conflict. First,
while there are more than 20 million displaced persons
of concern to the Office of the United Nations High
2

Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) worldwide, the
High Commissioner documents that the overall number
of refugees fell to 8.4 million in 2005 - the lowest
figure since the 19605 and half the number of a decade
ago. Secondly, in a number of countries, including in
southern Sudan and Burundi, the prospects for return
for the displaced are improving - a positive
development. Thirdly, with the reduction in the number
of armed conflicts, according to the Human Security
Report, most of us are living in a safer world. Conflicts
have been resolved and displacement brought to an end
in, for example, Angola, Sierra Leone and Liberia.

Our collective efforts are having an impact: more
systematic engagement by the Security Council in
more crisis areas, more comprehensive peacekeeping;
an enhanced humanitarian response and more
mediation and effective judicial recourse offered in
more places have contributed to stronger protection
and the reduction of conflict related civilian deaths.
Where there is concerted, coherent and systematic
international action and strong positive political
engagement from the parties to conflicts, we can -
and we will - make significant progress.

The recent adoption of Security Council
resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, is fundamental to this progress. It
represents a strengthening of the earlier resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000). Together, they provide a
principled framework to ensure better protection for all
civilians in situations of conflict. The new resolution
details how peacekeeping missions can better provide
physical protection for civilians. However, it still fails
to ensure a predictable response to the massive
suffering of vulnerable civilians.

We, as the United Nations, and the Security
Council specifically, now have the responsibility to
protect, as reaffirmed in resolution 1674 (2006). There
are too many times when we still do not come to the
defence of civilian populations in need. When our
response is weak, we appear to wash our hands of our
humanitarian responsibilities to protect lives. The
world is, indeed, a safer place for most of us, but it is
still a death trap for too many defenceless civilians -
men, women and children.

In Iraq, the Sudan, Uganda, Somalia, Afghanistan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, civilians
continue to bear the full brunt of armed conflict and
terror. Despite all our efforts, women are still raped
06-40877
and violated as a matter of course, children are still
forcibly recruited and defenceless civilians continue to
be killed - in violation of the most basic principles
enshrined in centuries of international law-making.

In the time that we take today to debate how best
to protect civilians, dozens will have died from the
direct, blunt and brutal Violence of conflict in just the
six crisis situations that I mentioned earlier.

At the end of June, President Karzai stated that
up to 600 civilians had been killed in Afghanistan in
recent weeks. Indicators suggest that with central
authorities being unable to provide security in 80 per
cent of Afghan territory, the security situation may
worsen further. In Somalia, the prognosis is equally
bleak. In the past four months, 500 people have been
killed, 2,000 have been injured and an estimated
18,000 have been displaced as a result of the fighting
in Mogadishu alone. Urgent political action is required
to stop that country, already ravaged by war, from
spiralling further back into chaos. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, figures are worse still, with
daily reports of massacres, rapes and scores of children
dying from disease and neglect associated with the
conflict.

In Darfur, the African Union reports that 69
people were killed in the month immediately following
the signing of the Darfur peace accord. We know that
the real figures are much higher and that general
mortality is once again on the rise among the hundreds
and thousands of people in Darfur to whom there is
limited or no humanitarian access.

However, it appears that it is in Iraq that the
greatest numbers of civilians are being killed by
indiscriminate acts of terror and sectarian and conflict-
related violence. The figures vary and are
controversial, but those quoted by Iraqi Government
sources are staggering. Official Iraqi Health Ministry
figures from the main mortuary in Baghdad reveal that
the mortuary has received over 6,000 bodies of Iraqis
killed since the beginning of the year. Those figures
represent a worsening trend since President Bush
delivered his address to the World Affairs Council in
December 2005 and estimated that over 30,000
civilians had been killed between March 2003 and the
end of 2005.

Whatever caveats are applied to those figures, the
undeniable truth is shocking: scores of defenceless
civilians are continuing to be intentionally and brutally
06-40877

killed on a daily basis, mostly in indiscriminate
sectarian violence and terror, but also as Victims of
combat operations. With the targeting of mosques,
school buses and markets, no one is immune. Neither
the national authorities nor the massive international
involvement have been so far able to effectively
protect the civilian population.

Currently, there is no humanitarian crisis in Iraq,
as many had predicted. There would be. For the most
part, provincial health structures, water and sanitation,
food supply and social services are functioning.
However, in the past six months alone, 110,000 people
have been displaced by violence, with the numbers
continuing to rise. The failure to address that
displacement will result in growing humanitarian
needs.

In certain African countries the situation is far
more precarious, from a humanitarian perspective.
Conflict has decimated whatever fragile infrastructure
was in place, and people have become infinitely more
vulnerable. As a result, civilians die in exponentially
larger numbers from the associated disease and
malnutrition than from the violence itself. Mortality
studies undertaken by the United Nations and the
International Rescue Committee in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Uganda exemplify
that toll. It is estimated that up to 1,200 people are
dying in silence every day in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The mortality rate of 1.54 per 10,000
people per day in northern Uganda not only exceeds
emergency thresholds but is greater even than that for
Darfur last year.

In Darfur and in eastern Chad, attacks against
civilians continue to be undertaken by the Janjaweed,
other militia groups, elements of the Sudan Liberation
Army and Government forces. In late May, militia
attacks around Mukjar, in West Darfur, killed over 25
civilians, displacing scores more. In North Darfur,
intra-rebel fighting prior to, and after, the signing of
the Darfur Peace Agreement has displaced thousands
and has included horrific acts of violence. Janjaweed
incursions moving further into Chad have brought with
them fear and have significantly threatened the civilian
nature of refugee camps. Between 12 and 14 April, 118
people were shot or brutally hacked to death in a
massacre in Djawara and three other Villages 70
kilometres east of the Sudanese border. Recent analysis
from human rights colleagues of the United Nations
mission indicates that this may be the beginning of a
3
new phase of violence in which armed groups, militias,
rebel groups and the army are intensifying their
targeting of civilian populations.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, serious
attempts are being made to stem the violence and
address impunity, with the surrender and imprisonment
of prominent Mai-Mai and armed group leaders and the
International Criminal Court's indictment of a former
commander of the Union des patriotes congolais for
human rights violations. But in a context where
hundreds of thousands of civilians continue to suffer
from ongoing Violence in areas such as Katanga, Ituri
and the Kivus, the impact of those actions is limited.
Nearly all serious violations committed against the
civilian population by all parties still go unchecked.

A key question is how we can we make the
recently adopted resolution 1674 (2006), on the
protection of civilians, offer a real platform for action.
Protection has been made a central responsibility of
peacekeeping mandates. That commitment
acknowledges that it is by how well the United Nations
protects that our missions will be judged.

The Security Council has created a range of
protection tools to place at its disposal. These must be
used more effectively. The Council's presidential
statement of June 2005 (S/PRST/2005/25) rightly
expressed grave concern over the limited progress to
ensure the effective protection of civilians in many
situations of armed conflict. It stressed the urgent need
to provide better physical protection and underscored
that the establishment of a secure environment for all
vulnerable populations should be a key objective of
peacekeeping operations.

States have the primary responsibility for the
protection of their own people. But in the case of
armed conflict within their own territories, they all too
often lack the capacity and the will to do so. The
humanitarian community helps create an environment
where will and capacity can be re-established or
recreated. The Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue has
shown that a humanitarian presence can have some
beneficial effect, deterring violence. However, let us be
honest: a humanitarian presence has limitations. In
many situations, such as in today's eastern Chad,
security is so precarious that civilians, and often
humanitarian staff, need physical protection, which
today is virtually non-existent. That is where the role
of the Security Council in defining and facilitating the
role and capacity of peacekeepers is so crucial.

First, peacekeeping missions must be equipped
with better and more comprehensive mandates and the
means to fulfil them. In two round table consultations
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) has held with Council members, other
Member States, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and agency colleagues, we
examined the implementation of protection mandates
of the peacekeeping missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Cote d'Ivoire. From
those consultations it is clear that our people on the
ground are too often ill-equipped to fulfil their duty to
protect. Realistic and well-designed mandates for
missions and practical support for their implementation
are fundamental to the effectiveness of their efforts. In
2002, the Council adopted the aide memoire
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex) to assist in the process of
formulating peacekeeping mandates to properly
address protection needs. It is now time for that vital
tool to be reviewed and updated and put to better use.
My Office stands ready to support that process.

Secondly, new creative approaches to
peacekeeping are required, and the composition of
missions must be amended. Instead of being adapted to
allow for a flexible response to emerging threats, new
tasks are often simply added on to old ones. In Cote
d'Ivoire, new threats for civilians have emerged, with
groups like the Jeunes patriotes using street Violence
and criminality to advance their agenda. Soldiers are
not trained to meet those challenges. Recent
reinforcements authorized by the Council for the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
that include additional formed police units are most
important. The round table consultations also
highlighted the difficulties of interpreting imminent
threats of violence on the ground. Peacekeepers must
be given tools, guidance and support if they are to
respond to those threats and provide better protection.

Humanitarian access is the first stepping stone to
the protection of civilians. The Security Council must
make every effort to ensure that access is granted and
respected. By not responding more forcefully in cases
where that access has been unreasonably denied, we
risk placing humanitarian personnel in jeopardy,
further exposing them to possible attack. Humanitarian
workers remain at considerable risk to violence. In
Afghanistan alone, 24 humanitarian colleagues have
been killed since the beginning of the year, including
four working with Action Aid who were summarily
shot in the head by the roadside in Jawzjan less than a
month ago. On the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip,
restrictions on access for humanitarian goods and
supplies, coupled with limitations on the movement of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel, continue
to pose severe problems for humanitarian agencies
operating in the occupied Palestinian territories.

One of the most important tools at our disposal is
conflict mediation and the timely and effective use of
good offices. A number of Violent crises highlight the
grave cost in human lives of inadequate timely
mediation. That situation also underscores the fact that
conflict can only ever be resolved at the political level.
International protection, whether by peacekeepers or
humanitarians, can only ever be an interim response -
a band-aid. Without political solutions, tragically,
civilians continue to suffer and the humanitarians are
left to deal with intractable conflict and open-ended
displacement.

We must activate, strengthen and resource the
Secretary-General's good offices more often and
earlier, seize every opportunity for mediation and
speak out when political solutions are needed. The
appropriate space and channels for that to work need to
be created and better individual training provided. I
welcome the opportunity to take these discussions
forward with the Department of Political Affairs to
strengthen mediation capacity in the field.

Targeted sanctions and embargoes are also yet to
be used optimally, despite our efforts to develop
guidance for their effective use. Targeted sanctions
should be employed at the earliest opportunity where
violations against civilians prevail to signal our
concern and serve as a first step to protect. I would
have hoped that the sanctions Committee had been
more consistent, for example, in the case of Cote
d'Ivoire and elsewhere, where we have seen deliberate
attacks on civilians, as well as on United Nations
personnel and assets. In cote d'Ivoire, individual
sanctions levied against three members of the Jeunes
Patriotes and the Forces nouvelles did have an
immediate ameliorative effect. But why did we stop
there? Why, for example, has no action been taken by
the Security Council or by the national authorities
against those publicly and loudly responsible for Radio
Guiglo, which inspired and directed mob violence
against civilians and humanitarian organizations in

January? And why are we not using sanctions
strategically in other crises? And where embargoes are
in place, but are violated, why is stronger action not
being taken? For example, the report of the Monitoring
Group on Somalia has documented daily arms
shipments to militias and warlords that fuelled the
fighting which then engulfed the only two hospitals in
Mogadishu.

Protection is a collective responsibility. To
strengthen protection response, we in the Secretariat
have our own responsibilities to fulfil. We need to
work with the Security Council to ensure better
provision of information, strengthened analysis and
comprehensive planning of our protection response.
The mechanism that has been established through
Council resolution 1612 (2005) to monitor and report
on the impact of armed conflict on children is already
showing some results. Work is in progress to ensure
that a reporting mechanism on broader protection
concerns is dovetailed with that initiative. Agency
colleagues are working together to build on the
methodologies and practice already developed, and
pilot protection monitoring mechanisms have been
established in Darfur, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Better methods of analysis are
also needed to ensure that local populations are
included as a crucial element in our decision-making
processes. The perceptions of the local population are
critical to understanding where risks lie.

Joint planning is also essential. In the mission
planning for Darfur, DPKO, OCHA and other key
United Nations actors have worked in close
collaboration to ensure better provision for the
protection of civilians. That should set the standard. In
general, integration is most effective where it is
formulated around a common objective, such as
protection. The United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo serves as a
positive example of that. In Cote d'Ivoire, similar
initiatives are now being taken where an expanded
inter-agency committee has been created that brings
humanitarians together with key actors from the
peacekeeping mission to work collaboratively to
provide protection. In Uganda, where there is no
peacekeeping presence, OCHA and DPKO are starting
to work with the Ugandan security forces to facilitate
civil-military relations and strengthen the capacity of
national security forces to provide protection.
5
Those actions will have limited impact if we fail
to address the need to uphold and respect the universal
values enshrined in the tenets and rules of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. The new
Human Rights Council is a welcome addition to the
international architecture to safeguard the rule of law,
but if we are unable to fulfil our responsibilities or
enforce the legal frameworks that we have created, and
impunity prevails unchallenged, we will consistently
fail to protect civilians caught in conflict.

Such protection must be provided consistently
and without prejudice. We grapple, in particular, with
how to meet the specific protection and assistance
needs of indigenous groups and ethnic minorities,
which are amongst those at greatest risk. The situation
faced by ethnic minorities in Colombia is one case
among many that illustrates that challenge. Indigenous
people and Afro-Colombians are increasingly under
pressure from illegal armed groups. Minority leaders
are victims of forced abduction, torture and
assassination. Several hundred persons from
indigenous communities have been assassinated,
mostly by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
guerrillas and paramilitary groups. Children are
forcibly recruited by the armed groups, and women and
young girls raped. Many are forced from their ancestral
lands and reduced to begging in urban slums, which is
slowly eroding their traditions and culture. A dozen
indigenous communities are on the verge of extinction.
We cannot stand by as passive witnesses to the loss of
life and the loss of cultures.

In conclusion, I sincerely believe that progress to
ensure better protection for civilians has been made -
just not enough. The numbers of innocent civilians who
continue to be killed and live with the constant threat
of Violence are unacceptable. We must work together,
at all levels and using every tool at our disposal, to
provide adequate protection for those living in the
midst of conflict around the world.

There is much at stake. In these dangerous and
polarized times, it could not be more important to
reaffirm the rule of law, which lies at the heart of the
protection agenda. Where we fail, countries emerging
from crisis are at serious risk of spiralling back into
conflict, as the current situations in Timor-Leste and
Sri Lanka make clear. Together with my humanitarian
colleagues, I stand ready to continue to work with you
and Member States towards the creation of a real
culture of protection and a safer world for all.

