Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
join you, Mr. President, and others in welcoming the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and in thanking him for his further briefing on his
investigation into the very grave humanitarian situation
in Darfur.

My Government continues to strongly support the
independent judicial role of the ICC in Darfur. We also
support the Prosecutor's efforts to combat impunity
through the investigation of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed there. The perpetrators of
those most serious crimes should be brought to justice.
Justice for victims is an essential component of
achieving peace in any part of the world, and that also
means in Darfur. We reiterate our thanks to the
Prosecutor and his staff for all their work to help
achieve that. We also welcome the Prosecutor's
engagement - as detailed in his report - with United
Nations and regional bodies, notably the African Union
and the League of Arab States. It is important that that
dialogue continue.

My Government is deeply concerned by reports
that crimes against humanity and war crimes are
continuing in Darfur and that ongoing attacks against
civilians include murder, systematic rape, the
destruction of homes and villages and forced
displacement. There are horrific reports of the rape of
thousands of women and girls - some as young as
five - by both rebels and Sudanese armed forces.

We commend the Prosecutor's ongoing efforts to
monitor and investigate these crimes against the
civilian population of Darfur, and we also condemn
attacks on humanitarian workers and peacekeepers.

Once again, I would like to use the occasion of
this debate in the Security Council Chamber to call
upon all parties to the conflict to refrain from further
acts of violence against civilians and protected persons
and against humanitarian workers and peacekeepers.

It is also a matter of strong concern that there
have been reports of comments from senior members
of the Sudanese Government expressing doubts about
the continued safety and security of United Nations
personnel and peacekeepers, particularly linked to the
Prosecutor's ongoing investigations. The Government
of the Sudan should be in no doubt about its
responsibilities to ensure the safety of United Nations
and humanitarian personnel. These allegations and
these reports do the Sudanese no credit. I hope that
they will stop and, on the contrary, that there will be an
affirmation from the Government of the Sudan that it
will live up to its responsibilities in this respect.

Following the Prosecutor's last briefing in June,
this Council adopted a statement calling on the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict to cooperate fully with the ICC, in accordance
with their obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
That statement still stands, and we reiterate it today.
We deeply recall that, more than 18 months since the
issue of arrest warrants for Ahmed Haroun and Ali
Kushayb, there has been no progress. We call upon the
Government of Sudan immediately to execute these
warrants.

I have listened carefully to the debate today and
have noted that some Council members have suggested
that the Security Council should act to defer the ICC's
investigation. This is not my Government's View. We
see no justification at present for the suspension of the
ICC's work in Darfur, and my Government does not
back any such plan. The onus is on the Government of
the Sudan to take much more ambitious, bold and
concrete action to cooperate with the ICC and to
achieve peace in Darfur.

