The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Guinea.

I should like to express my delegation's gratitude
to the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Danilo Tiirk, for his presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB).

The most recent developments in the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement
deserves our full attention. My delegation particularly
welcomes the significant progress achieved in the
implementation of stage II of the Action Plan for the
Completion of Weapons Collection. That progress,
which is of crucial importance for the island's future,
should be consolidated with a view to fostering the
entry into force of the following stage. In order to do
that, it is essential for the Bougainville parties still
outside the peace process to come back to the
negotiation table. It is also important to recall that the
reintegration of ex-combatants is another priority with
a View to a final settlement of the dispute. Moreover,
we hope that the commendable efforts of the parties to
the Bougainville Peace Agreement will be made
tangible by the holding of elections before the end of
2003.

Furthermore, the development of a
comprehensive dialogue between the Government of
Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville parties is a
further source of satisfaction. The most eloquent
illustration of that cooperation is the signing, on 19
February, of a memorandum of understanding that
envisages a mutual consultation mechanism on all
aspects of the implementation of provisions related to
autonomy. The National Government's decision to
withdraw its defence force from the island on 26 March
will also undoubtedly promote the establishment of
relations of confidence and cooperation.

In that very encouraging context, my delegation
is of the view that these political achievements should
also be accompanied by enough economic growth to
consolidate peace in an effective and lasting way and to
ensure the island's stability. That is why we appeal to
the donor community to further mobilize for the
island's economic development.

In conclusion, I should like to express my
delegation's profound gratitude to the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville and to the Peace
Monitoring Group for the remarkable work that they
have accomplished and for the indispensable role that
they have continued to play in the implementation of
the Bougainville Agreement. We are also grateful to
the Government of Papua New Guinea for its
commitment to the restoration of peace. We encourage
all the parties to demonstrate the needed determination
with a view to concluding the current stage on schedule
and thereby arriving at the following stage, which is
the prelude to the establishment of an autonomous
Government in Bougainville.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Papua
New Guinea.

