Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I start,
Mr. President, by welcoming your choice of topic for
today's debate. I think that, from the conversation we
have had around the table and the contributions made,
this is one that has provoked considerable interest. It
is a really good choice. In the same spirit, I would also
like to thank our briefers for coming to us today and
setting out their views.

The United Kingdom greatly values triangular
cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat, represented by Jean-Pierre Lacroix -
who is also of course also a key player there -and the
troop- and police-contributing countries, which are so
vital for all of us in in terms of achieving any mandate.

As the Ambassador of Kuwait kindly reminded us,
we set out these issues in a joint non-paper with our
friends and colleagues from Pakistan last year, which
we think is still highly relevant to these conversations.
At that time, there was broad agreement that the
purpose of triangular cooperation was to enable those
troop- and police-contributing countries to provide
reliable and relevant information on the realities of
implementing and delivering peacekeeping mission
mandates to decision makers here in New York.

Like many of its counterparts on the Security
Council, the United Kingdom is of course a troop-
contributing country (TCC) itself. We therefore very
much recognize the importance in value of views from
the ground, which we happily pass on from our own
troops. And, as a Security Council member without
personnel presence in every mission, we know that
we need to seek the perspectives of other troop- and
police-contributing countries as we consider issues on
the Council's agenda, and we do so.

As an example, in advance of the renewal of
the mandate of African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) this year, we met each of the Permanent
Representatives of the troop-contributing countries
throughout the process and at every level in the
Mission. We hosted a meeting with other Security
Council members, and that helped directly inform our
approach towards resolution 2472 (2019) and, I believe,
the Council's decision-making, particularly on how to
deliver the commitment that we have made repeatedly
concerning the transition from AMISOM. to Somalia-
led security. That is just one example, in which it was
not necessary for us to create any new process. We were
able to do that within the existing parameters, and I
believe that we should consider that, as well.

We must also recognize, as troop-contributing
countries, that we may draw a particular view or
perspective from our own contingents' activities, but
no single contributor has a monopoly on the truth of
what is happening on the ground. As a Council, we
need to make sure that we consider the views of the
Special Representatives and Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General, Force Commanders and all other
relevant analyses to make sure that we have a complete
and integrated picture.
As I said earlier, I think that there has been a really
interesting conversation about the best way of holding
these discussions. We have carried out these relatively
informal consultations one on one and subsequently
with other members of the Council. During the United
Kingdom presidency in August 2018, I also chaired a
TCC meeting (S/PV.8326). I would say that it was not the
most dynamic discussion that I have ever participated
in. I therefore believe that it is really important that
we consider how we can make those meetings more
informative and interactive.

We are very ready for that conversation, and I take
note of proposals made by Alexandra Novosseloff. But
we do not want itjust to add to our already busy agenda.
If we are going to come out with a new idea for how
to do something, we need to take something else away
or amend the existing method. Otherwise, we will be
simply creating more and more meetings. I also agree
with all of those who have talked about the value of
missions and visits.

The Secretary-General has urged Member States
to make a greater commitment to peacekeeping
through the Action for Peace initiative (A4P), and
151 Member States have endorsed that declaration,
which specifically calls on us to implement existing
intergovernmental commitments on triangular
cooperation, namely, to strengthen consultations
among peacekeeping stakeholders on mandate
implementation, strengthen United Nations and
African Union cooperation, and expand the triangular
partnership project, which builds long-term capacity
for TCCs and supports capacity-building.

When Alexandra Novosseloff talked to us earlier
about triangular cooperation, she also talked about it
in terms of avoiding tension. In that spirit, let me note
that the other shared commitments under A4P include
improvements to performance and conduct through
the use of performance data to inform deployment
decisions and agreement to hold personnel in leadership
to account for proper conduct, including in particular
on sexual exploitation and abuse.

For the United Kingdom, it is therefore
disappointing that some troop-contributing countries
have decided to obstruct improvements that would have
helped deliver better performance. The adoption of the
Fifth Committee's draft resolution on cross-cutting
peacekeeping policy would have asked the Secretary-
General to take further steps to improve peacekeeping
performance and tackle sexual exploitation and
abuse. It was also deeply concerning that the same
Member States frustrated the usual consensus on the
independent Board of Auditors report (A/73/5 (Vol. II)),
which addresses actions within the Secretary-General's
own remit, by forcing a vote and resoundingly rejecting
recommendations on improving performance. Such
recommendations would have not only helped to
protect civilians in conflict; they would have gone
hand in hand in improving the safety and security of
our peacekeepers.

Let me conclude by saying that, in seeking to
improve United Nations peacekeeping, the Secretary-
General has sought commitment and consensus. It is
now down to us to demonstrate our commitment to
implementing the reforms that we so often talk about
and on which we found consensus just last year.

