The President (interpretation from Arabic): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Bahrain.

Bahrain is concerned at the continuing situation in
Afghanistan, a situation of instability due to the continued
fighting in parts of the country. It appeals to all Afghan
factions to give priority to a political solution over a
military solution and to conclude a ceasefire followed by
political negotiations to reach a peaceful solution to the
Afghan conflict.

In this context, Bahrain pays tribute to the efforts by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, to reach a peaceful solution of the Afghan
problem and thereby reduce tension in the region.

Moreover, Bahrain believes that the efforts by the "six
plus two" group will lead to positive results if pursued in
a balanced manner in tandem with those made by the
United Nations. We hope that efforts aimed at holding a
ministerial meeting of the group in Tashkent with the
participation of all principal Afghan factions will be
crowned with success.

Bahrain affirms the importance of continued
contributions by the United Nations and specialized
agencies in providing humanitarian relief to the Afghan
people, which has suffered from war and natural disasters.

Bahrain will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/ 1998/ 1140.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President (interpretation from Arabic): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1214 (1998).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.35 pm.

