The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.

At the outset, let me express my sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General Guterres, all my colleagues from
Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan,
and other high-level participants in this extremely
important meeting.

Representing Central Asia in the Security Council
for the first time in the history of the United Nations,
Kazakhstan is honoured to sponsor this debate on
building a regional partnership in Afghanistan and
Central Asia as a model for linking security and
development objectives. That was the vision that His
Excellency Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, President of
Kazakhstan, proposed in his policy address, which
I presented to the Security Council last year (see S/PV.7857): to create a model zone of peace, security
and cooperation in Central Asia; to transform the
landlocked region into a landlinked one by connecting
it to neighbouring regions through trade, transit,
transportation and energy exchanges; and to ensure that
stability in Afghanistan also contributes to prosperity
in the wider region, thereby becoming secure and
growing prosperous together. We have a Kazakh
proverb that expresses the sentiment succinctly: "The
core of happiness is found in unity".

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
and, this month, as President of the Security Council,
Kazakhstan is keen on underlining the importance of an
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
and reconciliation. Our Permanent Representative,
Mr. Kairat Umarov, led a visit by the Security Council
this past week to Kabul, during which Council members
met with President Ghani and a number of officials.
They were updated on plans concerning the peace
process and underscored the importance of the holding
of credible and inclusive parliamentary elections in
2018 and presidential ones in 2019.

Kazakhstan is also keen on garnering international
support for peace and stability in Afghanistan. We
recognize ongoing international efforts in that regard,
such as the new American strategy for Afghanistan
and South Asia, consultations on Afghanistan in the
Moscow format and China's Belt and Road Initiative,
which will undoubtedly contribute to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals in the wider
region. As a country geographically located in the wider
region surrounding Afghanistan, we also have a direct
and legitimate interest in solving common threats,
addressing challenges and reaping common benefits.

We recognize that stabilization and reconstruction
in Afghanistan will also present an opportunity for
Central Asian countries to coordinate their efforts
and reinvigorate regional cooperation. Kazakhstan,
which has always stood behind integration processes
in Central Asia, is very much encouraged by increasing
efforts fostering mutual understanding and trust in the
region. Central Asian Foreign Ministers held a number
of five-party meetings in 2016 and 2017 - with the
most recent one having taken place last night - which
resulted in the adoption ofthe first-everjoint ministerial
statement and joint programme of cooperation for
the period from 2018 to 2019 on November 2017 in
Samarkand. In the future, we may see Afghanistan join
that platform for dialogue.

We hope that increased dialogue and connectivity
will help solve common problems and address
challenges. One such threat is the intensification of the
activities of terrorist groups, particularly the the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (Da'esh) in the northern
parts of Afghanistan and the potential return of foreign
terrorist fighters to their countries of origin, including
Central Asia. We are also concerned about the threat
posed by narcotics production in Afghanistan and
recognize the importance of close coordination between
Afghanistan and Central Asian States in combating the
cultivation, production, trade and trafficking of illicit
drugs in Afghanistan. We plan on cooperating more
closely with Afghanistan through existing institutions
dedicated to that problem, including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Central Asian
Regional Information and Coordination Centre.

But it would be a mistake to consider Afghanistan
solely as a source of insecurity and instability. With
its immense potential, its favourable geography and
considerable human capital, Afghanistan could,
and should, also be seen as a strong partner for joint
economic projects. We therefore join our Central Asian
neighbours in our legitimate interest in intensifying
joint efforts in supporting peace, security and
development in Afghanistan, while calling on global
Powers to contribute to making our region an arena of
regional cooperation.

The Council's visit to Afghanistan last week
identified a number of security issues and the prospect
of finding a possible solution to the situation based on
large-scale bilateral and multilateral investments into
Afghanistan, with a View not only to support growth
and integration into global economic processes, but
also as an investment in peace. Additional information
about the outcome of the visit was presented two days
ago at the special briefing to the Security Council
by Kazakhstan's Permanent Representative, who led
the trip.

Common geography, economic complementarity
and cultural ties between the people of Central Asia
and Afghanistan facilitate cooperation. But we also
believe that long-term stability and prosperity in the
region, as in any other region, should also be guided
by the principle of an integrated approach based on the
following three pillars.

The first is the recognition and strengthening
of the security-development nexus. That means that
investment in trade, transit routes, transport and
infrastructure development should also be seen as
stabilization assets. In that regard, we are confident that
the projects pursued by Central Asian countries with
Afghanistan - such as the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India gas pipeline project, the Central Asia
South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project
and other planned railways and roads i will not support
not only connectivity for Central Asian countries but
also contribute to stability in Afghanistan, the creation
of jobs and to the development of infrastructure the
region. Those projects will strengthen links among
nations and diffuse potential tensions.
The second pillar is a regional approach. Regional
cooperation is imperative given that threats do not
recognize borders and are of common and transnational
character for our countries, and therefore require a
common approach and solution. A good example is
our joint efforts on countering terrorism. Central Asia
was the first region to develop a joint plan of action
to implement the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in 2011. Kazakhstan has now
contributed $300,000 to implement the plan. We hope
to increase cooperation with Afghanistan through the
joint plan of action, including in border security, data
sharing, cooperation on fighting against financing of
terrorism and so on.

We have also been striving to implement an
integrated solution for the management of common
water and energy resources in Central Asia. We
recognize the need to intensify cooperation on
water sharing with Afghanistan in that regard. We
call for the streamlining of efforts by the myriad
regional organizations operating in Central Asia and
Afghanistan and the different regional frameworks,
such as the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan, the United Nations Special Programme
for Economics of Central Asia and the Central Asia
Regional Economic Cooperation Programme, to
name a few. Such institutions can help promote the
Sustainable Development Goals at the regional level.
We also commend the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia in collaborating closely to facilitate the
bilateral and multilateral engagement of Central Asian
States with Afghanistan.

The third pillar of a successful strategy is a
coordinated transparent approach led by the United
Nations agencies. Streamlined operations under the
One United Nations approach are vital in the light of
rapidly diminishing development aid. We reiterate the
importance of maximizing the efficiency and efficacy
of the work of the United Nations in Afghanistan and
Central Asia, including through enhanced coordination
across the United Nations system.

We also call on the donor community to increase
its contribution to peace and development in and
around Afghanistan and to improve the performance
and accountability of official development assistance.
Kazakhstan is working to create a United Nations-
led regional hub in Almaty designed to help deliver
coordinated support for the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals to the countries of
the region. We believe that the three-pillar approach
of economic development, regional cooperation and
international coordination could be better used to forge
a model of regional peace and development.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
confidence that the Central Asian countries and
Afghanistan have the potential to build a stable and
prosperous region, while playing an important role in
attaining global peace and security.

I wish the Council a very fruitful discussion today.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I now call on the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.

