Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam, on your delegation's
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and conducting the Council in an
outstanding manner. My delegation also appreciates the
fact that you have convened this interesting debate and
have provided an excellent background paper on the
role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building.

Post-conflict peace-building helps countries
emerging from conflict to get back on their feet and to
prevent their relapse into violence. In Nepal's view,
peace-building is as much a conflict prevention
measure as it is a building block for durable peace, for
which overall economic and social development is
absolutely critical.

The Security Council, responsible for
international peace and security, is right to explore all
avenues to fulfil its obligations. My delegation has
viewed this debate in that light, not as an endeavour of
the Council to expand its role into every nook and
cranny just because it could. We trust that this debate
will inspire the Council to work coherently with the
pertinent organs and agencies of the United Nations -
such as the Economic and Social Council - that have
mandates and competence in the domain of
development, and not to usurp their roles.

For quite some time, civil society organizations -
such as non-governmental, religious, private sector and
community organizations - have been important
partners in efforts to promote peace and development
in the world. They have rallied against wars and
weapons; they have provided early warnings of
gathering storms by exposing gross human rights
violations and injustices; and they have helped us to
understand conflict situations from their perspective.
Many times, those organizations have been able to
coax the conflicting parties to the negotiating table,
have worked as objective arbiters and have actively
delivered humanitarian assistance to the victims of war.

Civil society actors clearly stand out in their
contributions to post-conflict peace-building. They
reach out to the most difficult areas and to the most
deprived people, and they make a palpable impact with
limited resources through social mobilization. These
outfits encourage the process of healing and foster
social harmony. They help build capacity and empower
people by helping them to rebuild their shattered lives
and to strengthen their institutions. Civil society does
its job with the utmost efficiency, agility and
effectiveness.

Undoubtedly, the United Nations must tap into
these positive potentials of civil society with respect to
consolidating peace. It could involve civil society more
effectively in planning, implementing and monitoring
peace-building activities in war-ravaged societies. Civil
society organizations could be asked to monitor the
implementation of peace agreements in order to build
confidence and promote reconciliation between the
conflicting parties and to make them accountable for
their actions. That could be part of an exit strategy for
the United Nations.

That said, the role that civil society can play in
peace-building should be understood in its context.
Civil society has been very powerful in advocacy, and
its role in reconstruction efforts has been remarkable
but limited. The limited role of civil society in peace-
building is understandable. Unfortunately, not all post-
conflict situations are accorded the significance they
deserve by the world community. More often than not,
when peace is restored in a war-torn country, the
international community moves on to the next trouble
spot. As a result resources for peace-building dry up,
leaving both civil society and the country in question
high and dry. Civil society is forced to follow the tide
and to go where it finds a piece of action and the
resources to make a difference.

The main point here is this: what can the United
Nations do to change this situation, and how can the
Security Council help to sustain peace-building efforts?
There ought to be a seamless transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building to development. The
Security Council should ensure that peacekeeping
operations are followed by a reduced and reconfigured
United Nations presence with adequate resources until
the country emerging from conflict is fully able, with
the help of development agencies and donors, to absorb
all activities undertaken by the closing peacekeeping
operation and until that country begins to move
forward on the road to reconciliation and economic

recovery.

In the peace-building phase, the Council should
promote cooperation in a spirit of partnership with the
organs and agencies of the United Nations that have
competence in the development realm. Working
together with civil society and Governments, the
various relevant organs of the United Nations will be
able to foster synergy and fulfil their respective
obligations and mandates. I hope that the Security
Council will want to look into that possibility.

Finally, one firefight after another has not
brought durable peace so far, and it will not in the
future either. Lasting peace requires increased
investment in economic and social transformation and
the energy and the efforts of all key stakeholders,
including civil society, to remove the root causes of
conflict such as poverty, hunger, deprivation and, of
course, injustice.

