Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): The draft resolution before us
has two objectives. The first is to help heal the wounds of
the recent past by establishing the facts relating to the
assassination of the late President of Burundi on 21 October
1993, as well as the massacres that followed; and the
second is to put an end to the culture of impunity which
seems to persist in Burundi by bringing to justice those
found guilty of those acts. These objectives can make
important contributions towards national reconciliation and
the future stability of the country.

In this context, my delegation has carefully read the
letter of the Secretary-General to the President of the
Security Council dated 28 July 1995, as well as the
accompanying report of Mr. Nikken on the modalities
which the international community could employ in
assisting the Government and people of Burundi to achieve
the two objectives that I have just mentioned.

My delegation has no objection, in principle, to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
establishment of an international commission of inquiry
with a subject-specific mandate that seeks to achieve the
two objectives I have already identified. None the less, my
delegation believes that political arrangements in a country
fall within the purview of the duties of the State in the
exercise of its sovereignty. Furthermore, it is our view that
the support and commitment of the Government of Burundi
must be obtained so as to ensure the attainment of the
objectives of this draft resolution. We are encouraged that
the parties in Burundi have, through the Convention of
Government, agreed in principle to the setting up of such
an inquiry. The cooperation of the Government of Burundi
would become even more important for the implementation
of the various recommendations and decisions of the
international commission. We therefore see a lot of
wisdom in the commission's consulting closely and at
every stage with the Government of Burundi and look
forward to the reports of the Secretary-General on the
work and progress of the commission of inquiry.

Finally, the Security Council has demonstrated its
concern over the tragic situation in Burundi by, inter alia,
dispatching to that country within one year two special
missions of the Council. Nigeria was honoured to chair
both missions. The reports of the two missions may have
contributed positively to the promotion of peace in
Burundi.

The present draft resolution, which we support,
further demonstrates the Council's continuing interest in
the search for peace in Burundi. My delegation is
therefore hopeful that the commission, while mindful of
the need to punish past deeds and address the culture of
impunity, will endeavour to be forward looking in its
recommendations in order to promote national
reconciliation and future stability in Burundi.

