Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for organizing
this timely and relevant briefing. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross Peter
Maurer, and Director and co-founder of The Liaison
Office Masood Karokhail for their respective briefings.

I have expressed my concern to the Council on
several occasions, whether on thematic issues or
country-specific situations, that despite recent strides
in strengthening the ability of the United Nations
to protect civilians, conflicts around the world are
still characterized by a prevailing disrespect for the
core principles of international human rights and
humanitarian law, including the responsibility to
protect people from genocide and other mass atrocities,
as reaffirmed by resolution 2150 (2014). Combatants in
various theatres of conflict are behaving with disregard
for the rule oflaw, including the principles of distinction
and proportionality. The continued targeted attacks on
civilian areas and infrastructure, coupled with the use
of heavy weaponry, put civilian lives in danger.

It is unfortunate that, 11 years after the fateful
date of 19 August 2003, when a terrorist attack
against the Canal Hotel in Baghdad killed 22 people,
including Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Sergio Vieira de Mello, whom we remember
today, humanitarian workers continue to be attacked
or killed while working in conflict zones. Moreover,
discrimination and the restrictions imposed by
belligerents around the world continue to hamper the
delivery of humanitarian aid, endangering the lives of
people in need. The perpetrators of such acts must be
prosecuted and held accountable. We reiterate our call
on all parties to conflict to observe strict compliance
with international law, to avoid targeting humanitarian
workers and their assets, to stop militarizing United
Nations and humanitarian facilities and to allow
unhindered access to humanitarian aid for affected
people.

We believe that effectively protecting humanitarian
workers requires concerted efforts by all stakeholders,
including the United Nations, in building a security
strategy that ensures broad-based acceptance of
the impartiality, neutrality and independence of
humanitarian organizations based on the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols. That
requires continuous engagement with all the parties to
a conflict and building trust with the relevant political
forces at the local and national levels.
As the maintenance of international peace and
security remains an essential task ofthe United Nations,
humanitarian organizations rely on the sustained
efforts being made in this domain by the Organization,
especially by the Security Council. Peacekeeping
operations play an important role in that mission, as
they are often the only reliable force on the ground
to create conditions for humanitarian organizations
to operate. The Security Council should ensure that
the effective protection of humanitarian workers in
armed conflict is clearly outlined when authorizing
peacekeeping-mandated missions, as well as the means
for carrying out such mandates, including an emphasis
on the physicial protection of humanitarian workers.

However, as recalled by the Deputy Secretary-
General, military personnel should not be directly
involved in humanitarian action, as that would associate
humanitarian organizations - in the minds of local
authoritites and populations - with political or military
objectives, hence putting their mission in jeopardy.
Peacekeeping missions, however, should help the host
States in strengthening the rule oflaw and boosting their
protective, investigative and prosecutorial capacities in
order to ensure accountability and responsibility.

We believe that the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations can take advantage of the evolving
role of regional and subregional organizations in
building trust with parties to conflicts. Owing to
their regional, cultural, linguistic and even religious
proximity, such organizations are better equipped to
conduct knowledge-based and culturally sensitive
campaigns, including raising awareness on compliance
with obligations under international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, cultural proximity gives regional
organizations access to specific conflict zones that
would otherwise be risky or hard to reach by other
organizations, including the United Nations.

Most important, as conflicts remain the major cause
of human suffering, including the increasing number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, we reiterate
our firm belief that conflict prevention is the better
way to provide protection, including for humanitarian
workers. We should strive to address the root causes
of conflict in the first place and put in place effective
early-warning mechanisms and mediation tools. In
that regard, we look forward to the open debate on the
prevention of conflicts to be convened by the United
Kingdom presidency on Thursday.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute, on
this International Humanitarian Day, to humanitarian
workers and their organizations for their trememdous
work on the ground. Not only do they have to deal with
the humanitarian consequences of increasing natural
disasters, due mainly to man-made climate change,
but they now also confront a concerning upsurge in
man-made disasters - armed conflicts - that deserve
from the Security Council and its influential members
solution-driven consideration, instead of the current
interests-driven approach.

