Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I also join other speakers in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews. Estonia warmly welcomes' the continued improvement of relations between the Sudan and South Sudan. We commend the important role that South Sudan played in facilitating the Sudan peace talks, which led to the signing of the Sudan peace agreement on 3 October. We recognize that the political transitions in both countries require much of the attention of the respective Governments. However, we also urge the parties to use the momentum created by the historic peace agreement to facilitate progress towards resolving the question of Abyei. The Secretary-General said in his report (S/2020/1019) that the status quo cannot continue, and we agree. The people of Abyei deserve better than the status quo, as they continue to suffer from numerous episodes of violence, a lack of access to basic State services and dire socioeconomic conditions. For anything to change on the ground, there is no substitute for a meaningful political process between the parties. Therefore, we welcome all the steps taken in that direction, and we call on the Sudan and South Sudan to continue to build a viable political process that leads to the implementation of security and administrative arrangements to which both can agree. The political process could be significantly aided by the appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of Mission, and we call on all parties to help to make that a reality. We also encourage regional actors to actively engage the parties on the Abyei question. We are concerned about the increased violence and criminality, including the recent trend of attacks on United Nations troops and contractors. Six months ago when speaking in the Council on the Abyei question (see S/2020/351, annex VI), the representative of Estonia articulated three specific asks: to expedite the deployment of the police component; to conduct joint investigations into the deadly incidents of violence with the purpose of bringing the perpetrators to justice; and to deploy human rights expertise to United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). These asks remain as valid today as they were six months ago. Estonia supports the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for the next six months. Moving forward, we need to start the discussions of how the United Nations can be most helpful, given the current realities. In conclusion, at the heart of our deliberations must be the fact that any delays in resolving the Abyei question will only continue to prolong the plight of the people Abyei. Therefore, we call on the parties to capitalize on their improved relationship to push for progress on the question of Abyei. We also call for the removal of any impediments to the implementation of the mandate of UNISFA. Finally, I would like to express our gratitude to UNISFA and Ethiopia for their invaluable contributions.
