Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I too would like to thank the representatives of the
Secretariat for their briefings.

Both in its role of the presidency of the European
Union (EU) and in its national capacity, France has
strongly condemned the decision taken by the Russian
Federation to recognize the independence of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia. The President of France informed
President Medvedev and President Saakashvili of its
views last night.
As the Security Council is aware, France is
deeply involved in attempting to find a resolution to
this conflict. Since the beginning of hostilities, we
have committed ourselves to achieving a consensus

statement to be adopted by the Council. We also
worked with determination to carry out a difficult
mediation, which led to a six-point plan signed by the
parties - first and foremost by Russia and Georgia,
but also by the two separatist entities. Since that
agreement was reached, France, in its role of the
presidency of the European Union, has worked
tirelessly to ensure that the Council can lay the
foundations for a lasting solution based on the six-
point plan and the clarifications agreed among the
parties.

Those discussions have not been easy. We have
acted resolutely and in good faith in carrying them out.
We have listened to the wishes of the members of the
Council and done our utmost to arrive at a text that will
enjoy consensus. I believe we were making significant
progress towards an agreement prior to the Russian
decision to recognize the independence of the
separatist entities. Of course, that decision makes
continuing this work extremely difficult, and we
strongly deplore it.

Georgia has a history in the Security Council.
Less than six months ago - as well as a year ago, two
years ago and 10 years ago - the Council
unanimously and strongly reaffirmed its commitment
to respect the territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders. A few days ago, the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
said that recent events had "dashed" the Council's
resolutions on Georgia. Such statements are of concern
and are clearly contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations. Security Council resolutions cannot be
challenged, much less nullified, by military action.

Specifically, the territorial integrity of a Member
State, repeatedly and unanimously reaffirmed by the
Council, absolutely cannot be called into question by
armed intervention by a neighbouring State which then
proceeds on that basis, and in the absence of a political
process including serious international guarantees, to
adjust boundaries in an area abutting its own territory.

We also need to think about the meaning and true
underlying objectives of this decision by Russia. Heads
of State of the European Union (EU) will meet on
Monday to draw initial lessons from the Russian
decision as regards EU relations with Russia.
Nonetheless, one thing is certain: the six-point
ceasefire agreement of 12 August, which was signed by
President Medvedev, President Saakashvili and Abkhaz
and South Ossetian leaders, should be implemented in

full. The military forces that have not yet withdrawn to
the pre-hostilities lines must be moved immediately -
I am thinking in particular of all forces beyond the line
of restricted armament in contravention of the 1994
Moscow agreement. The international mechanism
which is to replace the Russian patrols around South
Ossetia must be deployed rapidly. The international
discussions on security and stability arrangements for
the two Georgian provinces of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia, foreseen in point 6 of the agreement, must
begin as soon as possible. Finally - perhaps the most
pressing concern - there must be complete freedom of
humanitarian access. That means free for all, and
without delay: free access to all victims by all
organizations capable of providing assistance.

The long-term resolution of this conflict requires
dialogue and the opening of international discussions.
Until then, increased international monitoring of the
situation on the ground will be necessary. It is
particularly vital that the return of refugees be
permitted, without hindrance and under international
observation. It is also vital, in these troubled times, that
vulnerable communities be protected. I am thinking in
particular of areas of Georgian population in the
separatist entities, which need to be monitored very
carefully. Reports by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees about continued
Violence and destruction in those areas are particularly
alarming.

My country therefore considers that an impartial
United Nations mission to investigate the humanitarian
and human rights situation in Georgia, including in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, should be dispatched
without delay. In that spirit, we fully support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to explore the role that the
United Nations could play, including through the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia. We also
reaffirm the readiness of the European Union to make
an active contribution on the ground, and we welcome
the readiness of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to do likewise.

