Sustaining peace, which is both a comprehensive process and a goal, has never been an easy task for conflict-affected countries. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has only magnified this challenge: human and health costs have soared, socioeconomic problems have proliferated, and the challenges of planning, implementing and following up on peacebuilding efforts have multiplied. Indeed, over the last couple of months, we have witnessed unprecedented needs and repeated calls for an urgent and coordinated response. Moreover, on | July, we unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), recognizing that the pandemic could reverse peacebuilding gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict countries and calling for all relevant parts of the United Nations system to accelerate response to the pandemic. Now is the time to further reflect upon our approach and draw out some best practices and lessons learned. In this regard, we would mention four points. First, multilateralism, international cooperation, collaboration and collective responsibility are and remain essential. As long as the pandemic affects one of us, it will affect all of us. Collective problems require collective answers, and such answers can and will only be found if we - the United Nations and its Member States, regional and subregional organizations, international financial institutions, the private sector and civil society - work together. Secondly, if effective multilateralism is based on respect for shared principles and values, the same should be true for our next steps in addressing the pandemic. COVID-19 should not be used as a pretext to infringe upon human rights or international humanitarian law. COVID-related restrictions are indeed sometimes disproportional, unlimited in time and taken without much - or any - scientific backing. Thirdly, the whole conflict cycle has been negatively affected by the pandemic. We therefore need to be innovative in all aspects of conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in order to preserve the hard-won gains of the past, build resilience and lay the groundwork for a better future. The Peacebuilding Fund, for instance, was able to add additional funding to an access- to-justice project in Haiti, to allow for virtual hearings and facilitate legal arbitration for the release of detainees. Being innovative requires paying adequate attention to known thematic challenges that are closely linked to the pandemic, but which are intensifying, for example, climate and security or mental health. Furthermore, innovation consists in finding new ways to secure adequate funding to tackle these challenges, such as exploring additional budgetary partnerships with international financial institutions and the private sector. Fourthly, best practices and lessons learned in addressing the pandemic should reinforce our ongoing review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Given its function as both a platform and a bridge across the whole United Nations system as well as its early engagement in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Peacebuilding Commission, together with the Peacebuilding Fund, has been ina unique position to help tackle the pandemic. It is therefore appropriate to incorporate their views and recommendations in the review. Efforts undertaken in the context of peacebuilding and sustaining peace can help to further increase national and local ownership, counter fragmentation in the United Nations system and its pillars and help to foster additional partnerships between the United Nations and other stakeholders. In short, we need to be more strategic, focused and unified in tackling the pandemic. The peacebuilding architecture can play a crucial role to this end.
