Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for facilitating
this open meeting on the issue of Bougainville.
Through you, I should like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report and to thank Mr. Tiirk for his
verbal briefing this morning.

At a time when much of the world is preoccupied
with conflict and war, Papua New Guinea is pleased to
participate in the debate on the achievements and role
of a United Nations mission which is helping to build
sustainable peace in an important part of our country,
Bougainville.

The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), Papua New Guinea, which is
known on the ground as the United Nations observer
mission in Bougainville, is among the smallest and
financially least costly United Nations missions
involved in supporting and helping to build peace
around the world. We pray it will also continue to be
among the successes of the United Nations.

At the end of last year, the Security Council
agreed to continue the mission for another 12 months,
until the end of this year. My Government welcomed
and continues to appreciate this decision. The same is
true of the other parties to the Bougainville peace
agreement, in the implementation of which UNPOB
plays a very important part.

All of the parties understand that, as the
President, on behalf of the Security Council, advised
the Secretary-General in his letter announcing the
decision to extend the mission's mandate for another
12 months, this is the final extension. All of us
understand why.

We appreciate the announcement it sends
regarding the international community's continuing
strong support for the peace process in Bougainville,
Papua New Guinea. We also appreciate that it presents
a powerful challenge to everyone who is concerned for
the peace process to take full advantage of the
remaining time that His Excellency Ambassador Noel
Sinclair and his colleagues will be on the ground.

The parties must work together vigorously to
insure that peace in Bougainville will be self-sustaining
when it arrives, hopefully at the end of the year. This
challenge is one that all of the parties involved in the
peace process are determined to meet.

The parties' shared determination to continue co-
operating in building peace in Bougainville includes a
commitment to carry on, while encouraging Francis
Ona and his closest hard-core supporters, who remain
outside the peace process, to join in. Much has been
referred to today about Mr. Ona, and I would only
comment that every effort is being made, at every
level, to ensure that Mr. Francis Ona and his
Me'ekamui Defence Force are involved in the process.

A growing number of people in areas around
Panguna have already responded positively to our
repeated invitations to join the peace process. Others,
including members of the Me'ekamui Defence Force,
are also showing increasing interest in weapons
disposal. Concerning those who continue to be
reluctant, the least that can be said is that they have
generally respected the peace process as it has moved
from initial truce to permanent and irrevocable
ceasefire, the conclusion of the Bougainville Peace
Agreement and, now, the implementation of the
Agreement.

The Bougainville peace process is a national
priority for the Government of Papua New Guinea.
Both peacemaking and, now, practical peace-building
are pursued on a bipartisan basis.

The Bougainville Peace Agreement sets the
agenda with three elements. The first element is the
establishment and progressive transfer of a very wide
range of powers, functions and resources to an
autonomous Bougainville government, operating under
its own constitution. Secondly, the guarantee of a
deferred and conditional referendum among
Bougainvilleans on Bougainville's political future, with
the outcome subject to the final decision-making
authority of the National Parliament of Papua New
Guinea; and thirdly, a plan for weapons disposal in
stages.

The arrangements for autonomy and the
guarantee of a referendum are now part of Papua New
Guinea's Constitution. They are directly linked to
weapons disposal by a constitutional provision, which
may be unique in the world. This provision ensures that
the autonomy and referendum arrangements enter into
operation when - and only when - the United
Nations observer mission in Bougainville verifies,
certifies and then notifies the National Government of
Papua New Guinea that stage II of the agreed weapons
disposal plan has been achieved. The process moves
ahead automatically once the United Nations observer
mission reports that the guns are held in secure,
double-locked containers under its supervision.

As members of the Security Council will
appreciate, the link between weapons disposal and the
other arrangements is an expression of trust in the
integrity of His Excellency Ambassador Noel Sinclair
and the United Nations. It also imposes a considerable
burden of responsibility on the United Nations observer
mission of Bougainville.

The Bougainville peace process owes much to the
initiative and the continuing active support of people in
Bougainville - leaders, communities and especially
women, who have played a major role, as well as ex-
combatants who have chosen the path of peace.

Weapons disposal is no exception. The initiative
and prospects for implementation of the agreed
weapons disposal plan depend on leaders, community
pressure and, above all, the commitment and
cooperation of ex-combatants possessing guns.

With the active cooperation of ex-combatants, the
break-ins and removal of weapons from containers that
caused so much concern late last year appear to have
ended. The National Government is cooperating with
the police in providing financial and other support for
their efforts to provide security.

Many, though regrettably, not all, of the guns
taken out late last year have since been returned or
recovered. New containments are taking place. While
the process is slow, it is nonetheless real. The United
Nations observer mission and the neutral regional
Peace Monitoring Group have been working hard to
keep it moving ahead, as have leaders of the main ex-
combatant factions, the Bougainville Revolutionary
Army and the Bougainville Resistance Forces.

With United Nations active encouragement and
support, what might be described as a bottom-up action
plan for weapons disposal has been developed, based
on careful assessment of conditions in different parts of
Bougainville. The factions are working closely together
to promote public awareness and, above all,
implementation.
Proceeding from the Bougainville Peace
Agreement, a Constitutional Commission has been
established and has held wide public consultations. It
has prepared a second draft of the proposed
Constitution, which was expected to be presented to the
National Government for consideration this week.

The Government has also appointed a high-level
bipartisan National Committee to advise on its
response to the Bougainville Constitutional
Commission's proposals. The Committee includes five
senior ministers, as well as two opposition members of
Parliament, and is expected to travel to Bougainville
next week.

The Defence Force is expected to be able to
complete its withdrawal under the agreed weapons
disposal plan at much the same time. From then on, the
Defence Force's presence and responsibilities in
Bougainville will be as specified by the Bougainville
Peace Agreement.

Another initiative, taken well before any legal
requirement, led to the establishment last week of a
joint supervisory body through which the National
Government and Bougainville leaders have already
begun to cooperate in managing the implementation of
the agreed autonomy arrangements.

The signing of the memorandum establishing the
Interim Joint Supervisory Body, and its first meeting,
coincided with an historic visit to Bougainville by a
team of 11 ministers and senior officials, whose
commitment to practical peace-building was evident in
their enthusiasm to visit and meet with Bougainville
leaders and to see the situation on the ground for
themselves.

Even before the ministerial team's historic visit to
Bougainville, the Government had announced it would
provide k5 million (about $1.5 million) both this year
and next, as an establishment grant to assist the
autonomous Bougainville government in meeting the
extraordinary expenses it will incur at the start of its
work.

Reform of the public sector in Bougainville is
proceeding in readiness for the establishment of the
autonomous government. Thus does practical peace-
building progress. It is a process in which Papua New
Guinea's friends in the international community assist
in various vital ways. These friends include such
prominent foreign aid donors as Australia, the
European Union, Japan, the United Kingdom, the
United Nations Development Programme and other
specialized agencies, as well as members of non-
governmental organizations, including churches.

Friends who continue to make a noteworthy
contribution in another very important way include the
countries which contribute to the Peace Monitoring
Group, namely Australia, Fiji, New Zealand, and
Vanuatu. Their contribution has not only helped to
build mutual confidence and security on the ground, it
has also provided invaluable support to other aspects of
the peace process, including communications and
assistance in transporting people to meetings.

The Peace Monitoring Group has played an
important role in weapons disposal. It has facilitated
many aspects of United Nations work, including
technical support for weapons disposal, the provision
and placement of trunks and containers, as well as
transport and communications.

Like the Security Council's decision on the final
extension of the mandate for the mission in
Bougainville, the Peace Monitoring Group countries'
decision to withdraw at the end of June is a challenge.
The parties involved in the Bougainville peace process
have always known that the Group will not be with us
forever.

As with the deadline set for the United Nations
mission, the particular challenge posed by the plan for
the Group to withdraw at the end of June is to make the
utmost use of its presence while it is still on the
ground. Everyone involved has to make every effort to
conclude weapons disposal before the Group leaves.

For the United Nations observer mission the
withdrawal of the Peace Monitoring Group will leave a
noticeable void, especially as far as communications,
transport and technical support for weapons disposal
are concerned.

Papua New Guinea notes and supports the
emphasis placed in the Secretary-General's report on
the need to ensure that, by the time the Peace
Monitoring Group withdraws, weapons disposal will be
so far advanced that it will no longer need that level of
support from the Monitoring Group. In doing so, Papua
New Guinea agrees that it would indeed be helpful for
the parties to review the progress in weapons disposal
before then. Indeed, the Government would like to
discuss and finalize the procedures for verification
through community-based consultation with the United
Nations observer mission and other parties at the
earliest practicable opportunity.

The Government also believes that the meeting at
stage III to decide on the final fate of weapons should
be brought forward. The meeting should not be left
until the outer limits of the time allowed in the agreed
plan are reached.

Finally, Papua New Guinea notes, and draws the
Council's attention to, the observation contained in
paragraph 14 of the Secretary-General's report
regarding the absence of any provision for the
additional resources the United Nations mission will
surely need when the Peace Monitoring Group
withdraws. The issue deserves our close attention, as
do other efforts to nurture the peace process through
carefully focused restoration and development
programmes, as the Secretary-General noted in his
report.

The reintegration of ex-combatants and
communities must continue to be a special priority. In
that and other respects, the United Nations
Development Programme's cocoa and coconut
rehabilitation and dryer restoration project makes a
very positive contribution to economic and social
recovery, which Papua New Guinea hopes will
continue.

In conclusion, let me reiterate how much my
Government, and indeed all of the parties involved in
the peace process, appreciate the Security Council's
decision to extend the mandate for the mission in
Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, until the end of this
year. Papua New Guinea would also like to commend
the Secretary-General's report for its careful
consideration of this issue. That should now be
directed towards the development and implementation
of practical strategies that will help support efforts to
secure sustainable peace on the ground.

