Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): As this is the first time
my delegation has had the opportunity to speak this month,
I should like to extend to you, Sir, my delegation's sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July and to assure you of
our continuing support.

I should also like to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Detlev Graf Zu Rantzau of Germany, for the
exemplary manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council last month, and to wish him all the best for the
future.

The Indonesian delegation would further like to
express its appreciation to the joint sponsors of the draft
resolution that is before us today, which provides for the
extension, for a period of 75 days, of the partial easing of
sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro), as originally adopted under
Security Council resolutions 943 (1994), 970 (1995) and
988 (1995). My delegation would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY) for the invaluable periodic reports
detailing the closure of the border between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We note that the reports issued since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 988 (1995) contain the
assessment by the Mission Coordinator that the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has continued to
meet its commitment to close its border with the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We further note that the period
was relatively free of controversy about alleged air
violations of the border. The latest report by the ICFY Co-
Chairmen indicates that no unexplained radar contacts have
been reported by the airfield monitors of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). The Indonesian delegation
is encouraged by the recent substantial increases in
confiscations in most categories of goods along the border,
which is indicative of the Mission's increased effectiveness.
Above all, the Indonesian delegation is heartened by the
improved financial situation facing the Mission, which has
enabled the Co-Chairmen to authorize an increase in
Mission personnel to 200. It is indeed our hope that
henceforth the Mission will be provided with means
commensurate with its important responsibilities.

Yet my delegation cannot fail to note the continuing
shortcomings in the border closure. The substantial
increases in confiscations, to which I alluded earlier, may
also be indicative of an increasing trend in the illegal
transport of materials. We are concerned that interceptions
of smuggling attempts, confiscations, fines and penalties
are perhaps increasingly becoming acceptable "costs" as
far as the smugglers are concerned. The Indonesian
delegation would like to reaffirm the importance of efforts
by the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to enhance even further the effectiveness of the border
closure.

Other concerns of our delegation are the well-
documented repeated incidents involving threats to
Mission personnel and attempts at border violations, both
of which we believe require urgent attention. Threats to
Mission personnel aimed at hindering their freedom of
movement cannot be tolerated. We also believe that the
violations of the border closure detailed in Section VII of
the latest report by the ICFY Co-Chairmen should not be
dismissed too readily. The Indonesian delegation is
particularly concerned to learn that uniformed personnel
continue to cross the border between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - a clear violation of the border closure.
We should like to see this issue addressed as a matter of
priority, since complacency regarding such incidents can
only lead to an increase in their frequency.

On balance, my delegation does not currently see the
need for any major revision in the existing arrangements
relating to the partial easing of sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Therefore, we welcome
the draft resolution, since it basically reaffirms the
elements contained in resolution 988 (1995). We would
like to underline three elements contained in the draft
resolution which we believe to be of particular importance
to its success.

First - and this is a matter that we have addressed
previously - our delegation has found the reports of
border crossings of uniformed personnel to be unsettling.
We would therefore like to underline the draft resolution' s
emphasis on there being no provision of military

 

assistance of any kind to the Bosnian Serb forces in terms
of finance, equipment, coordination of air defences or
recruitment of troops. Secondly, my delegation would like
to echo the necessity of the appropriate resources being
made available to the Mission so that it is able to carry out
its tasks effectively. Thirdly, the Indonesian delegation
underscores the call for early mutual recognition between
the States of the former Yugoslavia of their internationally
recognized borders. Such an action would constitute an
important step towards furthering an atmosphere of trust
and cooperation. By taking this most basic step, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia would send a clear and unequivocal
message of its peaceful intent to the international
community.

Clearly, the long-recognized shortcomings of the
border closure have not been completely overcome in the
past 75 days. Moreover, during those 75 days we have
witnessed ever-increasing acts of defiance by the Bosnian
Serb party, as reflected in the seizure of UNPROFOR
personnel as hostages and the shelling of Bosnian cities and
towns. In the face of such defiance, the mission must
continue vigorously to enforce the border closures in an
effort to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to end their
intransigence. The Bosnian Serb party should have no doubt
that the international community expects it to end its
aggression and accept the Contact Group peace plan.

In view of these considerations, my delegation will
support the adoption of the draft resolution.

