The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

I would like to begin by thanking High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing on the
Secretary-General's report on small arms and light
weapons (S/2017/1025).

Every year at least 500,000 lives are lost and
countless human rights violations, including sexual
violence and the forced recruitment of children, are
conducted as a result of the misuse and illicit transfer
of small arms and light weapons. Such weapons also
prolong and intensify conflicts and hinder humanitarian
aid, reconstruction and development, even in post-
conflict areas. It is imperative for the international
community to enact adequate regulations and controls
in order to reduce further armed violence involving the
misuse of such weapons.

Japan believes that disarmament that saves lives,
as called for by the Secretary-General, is an important
vision. That is the very mindset we should adopt to
tackle the issue of small arms and light weapons. From
that point of view, we welcome the recommendations
and best practices described in the report. Japan hopes
that the report will help the world take further steps to
reduce small arms-related violence.

Japan places a high priority on addressing threats
involving the misuse and illicit transfer of small arms
and light weapons. In post-conflict areas in particular,
we focus on capacity-building for competent national
institutions, such as for law enforcement and security
authority. For instance, from 2015 to 2017, Japan has
provided approximately $3 million to C6te d'Ivoire.
In cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, we have provided capacity-building
assistance for the national commission in charge of the
collection and disposal of small arms and light weapons
and also helped to set guidelines on the control of those
weapons, to be used by national authorities. We hope
that such efforts will lead to sustainable peace in post-
conflict areas.

It is evident that the excessive stockpiling of
conventional arms can destabilize domestic and
regional situations, and that proper international trade
and stockpile management are indispensable. In that
regard, Japan would like to emphasize the importance
of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) as the first legally
binding Treaty regulating international trade in
conventional arms. The ATT sets high standards for
the regulation of the arms trade, and its implementation
contributes to eradicating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. However, although three years have
passed since the entry into force of the Treaty, only 93
States havejoined it. In the Asia-Pacific region, only six
countries have joined the Treaty. Japan, as President of
the upcoming Conference of States Parties to the ATT,
is committed to the universalization of the Treaty. We
will approach those who have not yet joined the Treaty
and call for a joint effort of the international community.

As other speakers have already mentioned, in June
of next year, the third Review Conference of the United
Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons will be held in New York. The Programme of
Action provides a framework for activities to counter
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. Japan
believes that the Conference will be an important
opportunity to take stock of our progress. Japan is
strongly committed to the success of the Conference.
We will continue our efforts, together with the
international community, to eliminate the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

