The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation

We thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Pedersen, for his briefing and all the
speakers for their views and assessments.

The Security Council has repeatedly considered
the matter of a political settlement in Syria, but today's
meeting is special. For the first time, we meet at a time
when we can say with satisfaction that real conditions
have been created and are in place to move forward on
the path to a lasting and just settlement of the Syrian
crisis in the interest of all Syrians without exception.
As Special Envoy Pedersen just confirmed to us, the
work on the formation of the Constitutional Committee
has been fully completed. That is undoubtedly a major
accomplishment for the entire international community.

Let me remind members that the idea of establishing
the Constitutional Committee was adopted by the
participants in the Syrian National Dialogue Congress
in Sochi in 2018, who represented all segments of
Syrian society. We agree with Mr. Pedersen that the
establishment of the Committee is not an end, but the
beginning of a long road. And many have stated that
today. Syrians have to agree for themselves on the
parameters of the future development of their country.
I would also like to recall the key principle of their
independent work, as enshrined in resolution 2254
(2015), which is to promote a Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned political process.

We welcome the intention to hold the first meeting
of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva in late
October. Russia, together with Iran and Turkey, made
a decisive contribution to determining its composition
and agreeing on its rules of procedure. The guarantor
countries worked very closely with the Syrian parties,
namely, the Government and the opposition, and
carefully coordinated their efforts with Secretary-
General Guterres and his Special Envoy. Russia
will continue to support the successful launch and
sustainable work of the Constitutional Committee in
every way possible. The same assurances have also been
repeatedlygiven by the representatives of Turkey and
Iran. At the same time, all the activities of the Astana
guarantors will be based on the strict observance of
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. The Presidents
of the three countries stated that firmly at the fifth
tripartite summit in Ankara on 16 September. The
practice of holding high-level international meetings
on Syria in the Astana format will continue. The next
such meeting is scheduled to be held in the capital of
Kazakhstan in the near future.

We believe that all of us should take great care
in preserving the inter-Syrian dialogue to begin in
Geneva at the end of October. We have no doubt that
the Syrians themselves, who represent one of the
oldest and most unique countries in the Middle East,
with a centuries-old tradition of peaceful coexistence
among ethnic and religious groups, will be able to find
mutually acceptable solutions themselves. They also
have sufficient expertise to achieve that end. We are
convinced that attempts to interfere in the inter-Syrian
dialogue and impose prescriptions on Syrians that are
incompatible with their cultural, religious and national
traditions are unacceptable. It is also unacceptable to
set artificial time limits or to demand concessions from
only one of the parties. That is the position of the Astana
format, which stands ready to continue providing
constructive assistance to the Syrians in coordination
with the United Nations. We invite all those genuinely
interested in returning peace to Syria to join our efforts
in a constructive way.

It has been said that it is strange that the
representative of Iran should be at the table with us. It
seems strange to me that those words were heard in this
Chamber at all. As a member of the Astana troika, Iran
has done much to defeat terrorism in Syria, but I have
difficulty remembering what some Western members
of the small group have done to launch the political
process and create the conditions for it. There is a lot of
talk and lecturing, but little is actually done. I hope that
that will change.

We may be talking about Syria today, but we are
well aware that if we can move towards a sustainable
and lasting political settlement in that country - based,
I repeat, on a commitment to its sovereignty and
territorial integrity - it will certainly have a much-
needed impact on the entire region. Peace, security and
stability in the Middle East will benefit. The time has
come to encourage, not discourage, Syria's return to the
Arab family.

The Syrian people, including with the support of
Russia, have won a decisive victory over terrorism. The
main forces of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), the Jabhat Al-Nusra, or whatever it may be
called nowadays, and other terrorist groups recognized
as such by the Security Council have been eliminated.
But the eradication of terrorists, including in such
major hotspots as Idlib, must continue with the utmost
care for the lives and security of civilians.

We are disappointed that consensus could not be
reached on most issues during the recent discussion of
the situation in Idlib. But the blame in that regard is on
those who, under humanitarian pretexts, deliberately
submitted a draft resolution (S/2019/756) that was
politicised and had no chance of being adopted. Of
course, we cannot but be concerned about the situation
in north-eastern Syria, where ISIL sleeper cells are
becoming more active. We believe that achieving
stability and security in those areas is ultimately
possible only if they are returned to the control of
the legitimate Government. It is also unacceptable to
consolidate the dividing lines that, unfortunately, exist
in Syria today, in particular under the pretext of a so-
called nationwide ceasefire. Declaring a truce with
terrorists is not possible by definition, and the problems
within Syria ought to be resolved through a broad,
inclusive dialogue.

Today's turnaround in the political settlement
creates the conditions for taking concrete steps to
provide comprehensive humanitarian assistance in the
post-conflict reconstruction of Syria. That will help to
strengthen the country's economy and create conditions
conducive to the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes. That is precisely what
our Western partners have been talking about over the
past year, literally pleading for help in launching the
Constitutional Committee as a key precondition for
unfreezing funding for necessary post-war recovery.
I believe it is immoral to condition conciliatory
gestures towards Damascus with constantly changing
political demands.

Finally, I support the coordinated and coherent
efforts of the international community, provided that
they are meant to advance a genuine peace process
rather than serving narrow geostrategic aims. I am
convinced that, if we act together - all together - we
will be able to do more for Syria and Syrians than we
would if we acted on our own.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of China has asked to make a
further statement.

