Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for yesterday's
debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (see S/PV.7985). I would like to thank
today's briefers, particularly Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l7/515). France welcomes this solid, balanced
report and presentation. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Vale de Almeida of the European Union
and Ambassador Cardi of Italy, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).

Over the years, the international community,
whose voice the Security Council should echo, has built
a solid, enduring system of collective security, at the
heart of which is the current non-proliferation regime
that we have painstakingly constructed. It is based on
robust international instruments that we all value and
of which the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is the cornerstone. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), concluded on 14 July 2015
in Vienna between the E3+3 and Iran, has been in
force for almost 18 months now. It has become part
of the framework defined by these instruments and is
designed to reinforce them.

By its endorsement of the agreement through its
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), the Council was
able to respond robustly to a major proliferation crisis.
It puts in place a 10-year guarantee that Iran will not
develop a military nuclear programme. That represents
a key step both for our international non-proliferation
efforts and for international peace and security as well
as a historic achievement for the Security Council.
France has already emphasized that we have a duty
and a responsibility to ensure that it lasts. This is an
issue linked to the stability of the Middle East, which is
already in the throes of numerous crises. Mr. Le Drian,
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France,
brought it up just today during his talks with Mr. Zarif,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran.

Consolidating the Vienna agreement and
ensuring its durability requires a robust and balanced
implementation of all the commitments made by the
parties to the agreement, carried out with the necessary
transparency and effectiveness. France would like
to highlight the fact that on 2 June, the International
Atomic Energy Agency noted that Iran had not failed
to meet any of its nuclear commitments during the
verification period. We welcome the reports that the
procurement channel is functioning well, based on the
reviews of the proposals for transfers that have been
submitted. We reiterate that all the requests submitted
under the established procedure will be carefully and
rigorously reviewed. Incidentally, France's bilateral
cooperation with Iran has significantly increased in
value since January 2016 and the JCPOA's entry into
force. Our purchases of Iranian crude oil have reached
€2 billion since then, and our two countries have begun
discussions on the launch of bilateral cooperation in
various specifically civil nuclear areas strictly within
the framework outlined by the JCPOA.

However, we should make it clear that the
commitments made almost two years ago do not
end with the JCPOA, as a framework, nor with the
substance of its nuclear aspects. The establishment of an
atmosphere of lasting trust entails full and total respect
for the commitments undertaken in their entirety and
outlined in resolution 2231 (2015). The specifics in
the Secretary-General's report regarding Iran's failure
to respect several of its important provisions can only
raise serious concerns, the first being the missile launch
that took place this winter and that France condemned.
This kind of action contradicts resolution 2231 (2015),
which clearly calls on Iran not to proceed with ballistic-
missile activities capable of carrying nuclear weapons,
including launching such missiles. Furthermore, those
actions are being undertaken in a fragile regional
context and runs counter to the process of restoration
of trust established by the Vienna agreement. It is
vital to regional stability and international security to
ensure that Iran ends any activity that could result in an
escalation of the situation.

We are also concerned about the implications of
weapons that have been seized and that are suspected
of or known to be either originating in or destined for
Iran, including by my own country, and that have been
reported or confirmed by the Secretariat. Such transfers
are violations of resolution 2231 (2015) and fuel
animosity in a fragile regional context. Lastly, we are
also worried about the information concerning foreign
travel by Major General Soleimani, who is still under
a travel ban. We urge all States Members of the United
Nations to comply with their obligations, especially
where assets freezes and travel bans are concerned.

Maintaining a firm collective commitment to the
flexible but rigorous implementation of provisions that
we ourselves have agreed on is of course essential, as
the Secretary-General emphasizes in his report. But it
should also be clear that this commitment should be
maintained in the same spirit of cooperation that led to
the agreement, through a demanding and comprehensive
dialogue between all the parties concerned. To be
precise, what I mean is that ensuring the continued
success of this diplomatic effort requires strict and
consistent respect for the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) in their entirety and for the JCPOA. France will
be vigilant and will work to ensure that the Security
Council, with the firm and constant support of the
Secretariat, will also monitor the entire process.

