Mrs. Furman (Israel): The Palestinian
representative's remarks earlier have no constructive
purpose and only serve to inflame hostilities against
Israel.

It is ironic that the Palestinian representative
would lecture the world on the protection of civilians
when the Palestinians are the ones using human beings
as human shields. They stockpile their arsenals of
weapons in the basements of homes, the playgrounds
of schools and the back rooms of hospitals. In so doing,
they commit a double war crime: first, by firing rockets
at innocent Israeli civilians; and, secondly, by firing
rockets from populated Palestinian areas and putting
their own civilians at risk. A recent report by the
Secretary-General reveals, that this year alone, dozens
of Palestinians, including 23 children, were killed
because of Palestinian-made explosives stored within
civilian homes. It seems as though the Palestinian
delegation is heavy on the criticism of Israel but very
light on the facts.

The Palestinian representative conveniently forgot
to mention the persecution and discrimination against
women, religious minorities and the lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender community in Gaza and the
West Bank. In Gaza, homosexuals who are not killed
are subjected to 10 years in prison, and access to justice
for women who are victims of domestic violence does
not exist. The most recent report of the Secretary-
General reveals that 24 women were killed in the name
of so-called "honour" between January and August
2013. According to the report, that number is most
likely underreported.

Out of respect for the Council's valuable time, I
will not respond further to the baseless accusation of
the Palestinian representative, except to say that it is
unfortunate that she insists on politicizing this debate
while peace negotiations are under way.

Allow me to thank the Egyptian representative for
highlighting the issue of the protection of civilians.
As the Council knows, over the past year and a half,
his Government has made headlines for its treatment
of civilians. As he spoke so passionately on the topic
earlier today, I urge the Egyptians to go one step
further and publish a volume of Egypt's best practices
in the protection of civilians. I have no doubt that it will
become an international best seller.

