Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the crucial issue of detainees, abductees and missing
persons in Syria. I would like to welcome Dr. Hala and
Ms. Khoulani to today's briefing.

In June this year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons
in armed conflict. The resolution establishes a clear
link between solving the issue of missing persons and
resolving conflicts. In conversations with us, many
Syrians see resolution 2474 (2019) as a glimmer ofhope.

Given the continued lack of access to places of
detention and to detainees in Syria, the United Nations
has no official statistics on those detained, abducted
or missing. What we know comes from accounts recorded
and corroborated by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
mandated by the Human Rights Council and human
rights organizations, since the start of conflict in 2011.

While the United Nations is not able to verify,
reports suggest that more than 100,000 people have
so far been detained, abducted, disappeared or gone
missing, largely, but not only, at the hands of the Syrian
Government. Many families have no information on the
fate of their loved ones. Detainees, including women
and children, are held without due process or access
to legal representation or their families. Places of
detention are not accessible to the United Nations or
international monitors.

Records from hospitals or burial sites are not public.
Some families have been forced to pay enormous sums
of money in the hope of obtaining information - often
in vain. Deaths in detention centres have continued to
occur, many allegedly as a result of torture, neglect or
inhumane conditions. For the families of detainees, their
tragedy is compounded by the difficulty of obtaining
death certificates or remains. Even if they obtain the
certificates, the real causes of death remain hidden.

Women, besides being direct victims, are also
impacted when their husbands or male relatives
disappear. Syrian women risk losing legal rights,
including their housing, land and property rights. That
happens if they cannot explain their husband or male
relative's whereabouts and lack legal documentation
or a death certificate. Many women under those
circumstances carry the heavy burden of sustaining
their entire families. For refugees and the internally
displaced, those challenges are multiplied.

In paragraph 12 of its report, entitled Detention
in the Syrian Arab Republic: A Way Forward, the
Commission of Inquiry has documented since 2011
how the Syrian Government has,

"[p]erpetrated the crimes of extermination, murder,
rape or other forms of sexual violence, torture, and
imprisonment in the context of its widespread and
systematic detentions of dissidents, as well as those
perceived to be sympathetic to armed groups".

Perhaps the most prominent evidence of torture
and ill-treatment of detainees in Government detention
centres is the more than 50,000 photos smuggled out
of Syria by a military defector and made public in
2014. Those photos show nearly 7,000 dead bodies
bearing marks of torture. Following the Government's
reassertion of control in some areas previously held
by armed groups, the United Nations has continued
to receive reports of civilians arbitrarily detained or
disappeared, including in areas subject to so-called
reconciliation agreements. Human rights organizations
have reported cases of detention and enforced
disappearance of refugees who return to Syria or
internally displaced persons who return to their places
of origin. Surveys by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees indicate that fear
of detention is among the factors preventing refugees
from return.
Those abuses are not limited to the Government
forces. According to the Commission of Inquiry, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, both designated by the Council as
terrorist organizations, have committed heinous abuses.
Armed groups affiliated with the opposition have
also committed serious abuses. They have allegedly
established makeshift places of detention in different
areas under their control where captured Government
soldiers, suspected collaborators with the Government
or members of opposing armed groups were held and
sometimes executed. Reporting from human rights
organizations indicates that armed opposition factions
currently controlling Afrin have conducted arbitrary
detention, torture and the abduction of civilians. The
Syrian Democratic Forces have also conducted arbitrary
detentions, including the arrest of men attempting to
evade forced conscription.

The Government of Syria claims that the number
of those detained by armed groups is estimated at
16,000. However, without access to all detention
centres in Syria, the United Nations cannot verify the
accuracy ofthis information. Justice and accountability
for those abuses must be ensured, regardless of the
perpetrators. The United Nations is also concerned
that thousands of foreign nationals - many women
and children who are family members of alleged ISIL
members - are currently being detained in the Al-Hol
camp. We call on Member States to ensure that their
nationals are repatriated for the purposes ofprosecution,
rehabilitation or reintegration, as appropriate, and in
line with international law and standards.

Special Envoy Pedersen has prioritized the case
of detainees, abductees and the missing. Meaningful
action on this file would build confidence and move the
political process forward. The Special Envoy continues
to seek progress within the working group on this issue,
in which the United Nations is a member, together with
the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and
the Republic of Turkey. The International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) is an observer. Since it was
established in December 2017, the working group
has facilitated four exchange operations, including
one last week. The releases of detainees so far, while
welcome, are insufficient in scale and nowhere near
commensurate with the magnitude of the problem.
Only 109 have been released so far.

We stress the need for the parties to move beyond
one-for-one exchanges. All sides should engage in
unilateral releases in the true spirit of resolution 2254
(2015). Furthermore, meetings of the working group
should occur regularly and with more frequency. I
urge the working group to also adopt the procedures
on missing persons that have been submitted by the
United Nations, and I reiterate the invitation of the
United Nations to host the next meeting of the working
group in Geneva.

In its resolutions 2139 (2014), 2254 (2015) and
2165 (2014), the Council called for the release of those
arbitrarily detained, particularly women and children.
These calls must be heeded especially by those with
influence on the Syrian parties. The United Nations
stands ready to provide all necessary support. The
parties must fulfil their obligations under international
law to unilaterally release all the arbitrarily detained or
abducted, and most urgently, women, children, the sick
and the elderly. They must collect, protect, and manage
all relevant data and documents on detainees, abductees
and missing persons, and establish a mechanism with
the ICRC to manage this information in coordination
with the Office of the Special Envoy. Furthermore,
they must provide families with information, identify
the dead and return remains, wherever possible, to
their relatives. Lastly, they should provide, without
delay, and through appropriate channels, a list of all
places in which persons are being detained and arrange
for immediate access to such locations by a neutral
third party.

Accountability for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights is
central to achieving and maintaining durable peace in
Syria. In that regard, all parties to the conflict must
cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the
Commission of Inquiry.

Finally, I reiterate the Secretary-General's call for
the situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court.

