I thank the President for convening today's meeting, and Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their thorough briefings. The political and humanitarian situations in Syria are clearly interconnected. The country's humanitarian issues will not improve in the absence of peace and stability, which can be achieved only through a credible, balanced and inclusive Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political process. To this end, it is crucial that the momentum of the Constitutional Committee be sustained. We look forward to the convening of the next session and hope that the Chairs will reach an agreement on the agenda soon, so that the discussions may recommence without delay. The Committee can certainly assist in facilitating the wider political process. We therefore reiterate the need for the engagement of all relevant parties, including women, to ensure a sustainable and equitable peace for all Syrians. In this vein, we reaffirm our support for the continued efforts of the Special Envoy. We welcome the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1031), and we note, with regret, the violations of the ceasefire, recorded almost daily, in the north-west of Syria. Hostilities undermine the ceasefire agreement, harm civilians, obstruct the urgent humanitarian response and destroy objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population. It is imperative that parties to the conflict respect the agreement, and we remind them of their obligation to strictly comply with the requirements of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Accountability for acts committed in violation of the law must remain a high priority. We remain concerned about the outstanding issues involving detainees and missing persons. We echo the call for the release of all arbitrarily detained civilians, particularly women and children. Furthermore, the families of those who are missing deserve to know the fate of their loved ones. These actions will also certainly contribute to confidence-building and reconciliation within Syria, in furtherance of the political process. Syria's worsening socioeconomic condition, exacerbated by the severe economic downturn and the global pandemic, is alarming. The country is battling food insecurity, and basic commodities are out of reach. Our concern for the Syrian people is heightened as winter approaches, bringing with it a plethora of new humanitarian needs and challenges. We therefore continue to support the cross-border mechanism and urge all parties to work in partnership to scale up the critical humanitarian response, utilizing all available modalities and in line with humanitarian principles. We further appeal for the lifting of all unilateral coercive measures, which may adversely affect the humanitarian response and the country's already burdened economy. With regard to internally displaced persons, we emphasize that their return to their places of origin or resettlement in new areas must be voluntary, safe, dignified and fully informed. Furthermore, we renew our call for the international community to contribute to Syria's reconstruction efforts. Without this assistance, internally displaced persons and refugees will have nothing to return to, and civilians will be forced to remain without essential infrastructure. Syria will be able to emerge from this conflict and start the lengthy process of recovery only with the steadfast support of the international community. We must therefore adopt a pragmatic and holistic approach when discussing the complex matters affecting the country and its people.
