The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement and my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

At the outset, Bolivia is grateful for the briefing
by Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, in connection with her twenty-fifth
report in compliance with resolution 1593 (2005).
We listened carefully about the progress made in
investigating alleged crimes and about the difficulties
the Office of the Prosecutor has encountered with
regard to investigations and legal activity, both of
which are linked to situations that make it difficult to
comply with the mandate entrusted to her.

Bolivia believes that those who have attacked
civilians in Darfur, violating their human rights as
well as international law, must account for it brought
justice. That is important element in achieving stable
and lasting after several years of conflict in the region.

While we express our support for the work of the
International Criminal Court, we also recognize that
some of the difficulties encountered by the Prosecutor's
Office have brought to light legal conflicts, such as the
one pertaining, on the one hand, to the privileges and
immunities enjoyed by State officials under customary
international law and, on the other, the provisions of
article 27, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute. Such
difficulties could give rise to problems in States'
carrying out cooperation tasks with the International
Criminal Court. At the request of South Africa, the
issue is currently the subject of consultations at The
Hague between the Court and a working group of the
Rome Statute Assembly of States Parties. We hope
that and other consultations will facilitate both States'
duties to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor
as well as the Court's legal tasks. We also hope they
will contribute to the international community's efforts
to strengthen political processes, in this case when it
comes to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

It is also important to recall that when the
Security Council referred the situation in Darfur
to the International Criminal Court - by way of
resolution 1593 (2005) - it not only decided to
activate the Court's jurisdiction to try individuals, it
also encouraged the Court to support international
cooperation to promote the rule of law, protect human
rights and combat impunity, while also emphasizing
non-judicial activities, such as promoting peace and
reconciliation and strengthening institutions. We
believe that cooperation with the African Union is
essential in that regard. We are aware of its undeniable
commitment to the fight against impunity, as set out
in its Constitutive Act. We also recall that the African
Union has established a ministerial committee to
address issues pertaining to this case. In the same vein,
we call for establishing a constructive dialogue between
the African Union and the International Criminal Court
in order to generate trust and facilitate work between
both institutions.

We have seen positive developments taking place
in the Sudan over recent months, including a significant
decrease in clashes between the Government and rebel
groups and an improvement in the Government's
cooperation with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Both recent
reports of the Secretary-General and the UNAMID
strategic review, and even the Prosecutor's own report,
recognize that progress. Bolivia believes that we have
arrived at this point mainly thanks to the joint efforts of
regional organizations, the Government, the Secretary-
General and UNAMID.

It is important to highlight that the evolution and
future of international criminal justice are closely
linked to State cooperation and complementarity.
The International Criminal Court is a complimentary
tribunal to States' primary sovereign prerogative
to administer justice on its territory. Therefore, in
addition to ensuring timely and effective trials, they
must establish local capacities. That is an indicator
which, in the case of Darfur, should be considered with
special attention after more than a decade of conflict.

In full respect for its obligations as a State party to
the Rome Statute of the ICC, Bolivia supports efforts
to achieve justice and combat impunity. We therefore
call on all States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Rome Statute so as to ensure its universal jurisdiction.
In that regard, we believe that the value of the principle
of the universality of international criminal justice is
essential. The debate on impunity for perpetrators of
crimes against humanity is undermined by the relative
capacities of the International Criminal Court due to the
non-ratification of the Rome Statute by certain parties.
That weakens the effectiveness of its work. We cannot
have a sincere dialogue so long as there are countries
that insist on the full rigour of the law yet do not meet
their own international obligations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.

