The President (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
I should like, on behalf of the Security Council, to
express profound sympathy and condolences to the
Governments and peoples affected by a powerful
earthquake which struck the west coast of northern
Sumatra, Indonesia, on 26 December, triggering a
catastrophic tsunami that moved through neighbouring
parts of the Indian Ocean. Over 150,000 people,
including tourists from a wide range of countries, lost
their lives, and many more were injured and made
homeless.

I request members to stand and observe a minute
of silence in memory of those who so tragically lost
their lives in that unprecedented disaster.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Expression of welcome to the new members of the
Security Council and of thanks to the
outgoing members

The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council this year, I should
like to extend very warm wishes for a fruitful new year
to all members of the Security Council, the United
Nations and the Secretariat.

Argentina began its term of office as an elected
member of the Security Council on 1 January 2005.
During the first month of our membership we have
assumed the presidency of this important organ of the
United Nations. We promise to carry out this singular
responsibility with a renewed commitment to the
indispensable work of the United Nations and the
ideals of the Charter.

At the same time, in presiding over this first
meeting of the Council of 2005, I am happy to
welcome the other new members: Denmark, Greece,
Japan and the United Republic of Tanzania. We all look
forward with confidence to their participation in the
work of the Council. Their experience and wisdom will
be of invaluable assistance in the discharge of the
Council's enormous responsibilities.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
express the Council's deep gratitude to the outgoing
members - Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan and
Spain - for their important contributions to the
business of the Council.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President


The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
pay a sincere tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His
Excellency Mr. Abdallah Baali, Permanent Representative
of Algeria to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Council during the month of December
2004. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Baali for the
great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Afghanistan


The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Afghanistan in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Arnault to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I
now give him the floor.


