Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate the United States Mission on its very
able stewardship of the Council this month.

My delegation wishes to congratulate
Ambassador Arias, the new Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), as well as Ambassador
Verbeke, the new Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). I would
also like to express our continued support for the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), as well as for Ambassador Burian, its
Chairman. I wish to thank them all for their very
comprehensive briefings. Lastly, I wish to express our
appreciation to the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) and to Mr. Javier Ruperez, its
outgoing Director. We thank him for his invaluable
contributions, integrity and leadership.

While my delegation appreciates those briefings,
as the Ambassador of Israel I cannot speak only to
technical aspects of counter-terrorism while vicious
and life-threatening acts of terror are occurring in my
country. Allow me therefore to update the Council on
recent developments on the ground.

Israel is under attack. During the past week, over
170 Qassam rockets were fired by Palestinian terrorists
in the Gaza Strip. Those rockets were meant to maim

and kill Israelis - to attack children and to attack
families. Scores of people have been injured. One
woman - 35-year-old Shir'el Freedman - was

tragically killed yesterday when a Qassam rocket hit
her car. In the city of Sderot, the schools are closed, the
shopping malls are empty and the playgrounds are
desolate. Everyone is at home, huddling in their
shelters, hiding under the stairs, waiting for the wailing
sirens to announce the next terror attack. Sderot is a
city besieged by terror.

But there is no justification for those terror
attacks. There is no reason to target Israel. Israel left
Gaza - every single inch of it - nearly two years
ago, hoping that the Palestinians would take control of
their own lives. Sadly, we all know what the terrorists
are trying to accomplish. In recent months, the
situation has grown more and more distressing since it
began last year with Hamas, a terrorist organization,
leading the Palestinian Government. A power struggle
has emerged, where Palestinian factions are at war with
each another. Rather than work to create an authentic
unity Government that meets the standards of the
international community, Hamas tries to unite the
warring Palestinian factions with hatred of Israel.

Hamas therefore fires its rockets to kill Israeli
women and children while cynically trying to provoke
Israel's reaction and bring Israel back into Gaza, and
thereby blame the common enemy of the Palestinian
people, which - as Palestinians are brainwashed from
childhood to believe - is Israel. The international
community has accepted that situation for far too long.
Too many excuses have been made. But we know there
can be no excuses. Enough is enough!

Although Israel has exercised tremendous
restraint, it will not tolerate those attacks. Israel is
ready to take any measures necessary to defend its
citizens. Israel reserves the right to self-defence, as any
other nation would if placed in the same intolerable
situation. We often hear the international community
refer to terrorism as a global phenomenon requiring a
global response. Yet sometimes the absence of
international outcry to the terror that Israel faces shows
a disconnect between rhetoric and reality.

Terror for Israel - as is the case, unfortunately, for
so many around this table - is not a technical matter. It is
far too real, far too ominous, far too deadly and far too
daily an occurrence. The growing lawlessness and chaos
in Gaza is regrettably familiar. We saw it in Lebanon.
Despite the resolve of the Council, Hizbullah is rearming.
Weapons are moving across the border between Syria and
Lebanon, in violation of the embargo and in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). The weapons, we know, are a
poisoned gift from Iran. They travel through Syria to the
hands of Hizbullah undisturbed, in fact abetted.

For that and more, Iran and Syria have earned
themselves an unholy reputation as exporters of terror.
Syria is home to Khaled Mashal, the godfather of the
inter-Palestinian bloodshed, who has shown he cares
little for Palestinian interests or Palestinian lives. Iran
indeed epitomizes terror as a global phenomenon. It is
responsible for terrorism far beyond the region, in such
far-away places as Latin America, where the Argentine
Government has issued warrants for the arrest of senior
Iranian officials in connection with terror attacks there.
While the international community seeks measures to
enhance peace and security, Iran and Syria seek to
increase hostilities and insecurity by giving weapons to
its terrorist proxies and spreading its destabilizing
tentacles.

Iran and Syria, Hamas and Hizbullah represent
one side of a clash that is working to destabilize our
region, and indeed the entire world. In fact, the whole
Muslim world is fractured between two camps,
between the forces of moderation and the forces of
extremism. We see it in Iraq. We see it in Lebanon. We
see it among the Palestinians. Those are warring forces
within Muslim civilization. They are battling for the
soul of Islam. They are battling for the hearts and
minds of the region. The extremists use terror to
intimidate and indoctrinate. They use violence and fear
to terrorize the citizens of the region. This is indeed a
clash of civilization - in the singular.

Recently, in fact as recently as the past few days,
we were emboldened by courageous Arab and Muslim
leaders who are making a stand and are also saying
enough is enough. Therefore, today more than ever, it
is the duty of the international community to embolden
moderates and isolate and marginalize extremists.
While the international community cannot dictate the
outcome of that clash, it can decide how to relate to the
different actors, and it can be clear about what each of
those actors can expect from the international
community.

That is why the international community must
continue to exert pressure on Hamas to embrace the
three basic conditions of the Quartet. Without them,

terror will continue. The Quartet's conditions - to
recognize Israel, renounce violence and terror and
abide by previous agreements - are integral to

ensuring that a future Palestinian State is one that is
founded on the basis of good governance and
democracy.

As I have said, the painful terror that Israel has
faced in the past week makes it difficult to limit my
address purely to the technical aspects of today's
counter-terrorism briefings. I therefore beg the
Council's indulgence in referring delegations to the
printed version of my statement in order to hear our
positions on the truly good work of the Council's
subsidiary bodies.

The international community must understand
that terror will not stop on its own. Terror will not stop
only by embracing the moderates, and terror will surely
not stop by making concessions to the extremists.
Countering terrorism means showing determination,
putting pressure on the extremists, and letting them
know that those barbaric acts are intolerable. Counter-
terrorism is not just about technical resources and
information-sharing; it is about taking action, both in
the technical and in the practical realms. It means
eliminating the threat so that a world of peace, security
and freedom can flourish, particularly in our region,
where it has been repressed, held hostage and ignored
for so long.

