Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his clear and precise
briefing on the issues and challenges of his mediation
efforts. I reiterate France's full support to him.

I will stress today the need to silence the weapons
in Syria permanently and without delay so as to enable
us to move towards a credible political process.

Our number-one priority must be to address Idlib,
where the pursuit of the regime and its allies' offensive
is dangerously undermining the Special Envoy's efforts
to revive the political process. That is the position
that was reiterated by the 28 States members of the
European Union in their statement on Idlib issued
today. In the face of recent tragedies taking place in the
north-western part of Syria, we must spare no effort to
prevent Idlib from becoming a new Aleppo. The lives
of 3 million people, including 1 million children, are
at stake.

The particularly poignant testimony of the
representative of the Syrian American Medical
Society on Tuesday (see S/PV.8561), reminded us that
humanitarian and medical staff and infrastructure
continue to be targeted. We condemn in the strongest
terms the most recent deliberate attack on an ambulance
yesterday in Al-Bara, which killed two humanitarian
personnel from the White Helmets, in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. In such
tragic circumstances, it is particularly odious that the
regime claims that humanitarian workers are working
in collusion with terrorist organizations, while they
carry out their work at such a high risk when far too
often it is at the cost of their own lives.

I also underscore the particular responsibility of
Russia, whose air support is necessary to the regime's
pursuit of its offensive. Combating terrorism is not the
only justification for that offensive, which primarily
affects the civilian population and infrastructure.
The fight against those terrorist groups listed by the
Security Council remains a priority for France, but
it cannot be carried out in violation of international
humanitarian law.

We therefore reiterate our call on Russia to reaffirm
its commitment to the ceasefire and put pressure on the
regime without further delay to stop the fighting, in
particular with a view to enabling the establishment of
a nationwide ceasefire. That is imperative in order for
the political process to move forward smoothly.

In the north-east, we must pursue our efforts to
completely and permanently eradicate the threat of
Da'esh and stabilize the region. That was the message
conveyed unanimously by the political directors of the
international coalition against Da'esh who met in Paris
on 25 June. To that end, France has also decided to
allocate an additional €50 million for Syria, which will
be mainly dedicated to the north-east.

In that regard, I recall the urgent need to make
progress on the political front in order to forge
a meaningful prospect for achieving peace and
reconciliation. Our shared responsibility is to support
the Special Envoy in advancing all aspects of resolution
2254 (2015). The Special Envoy enjoys our full
support in bringing together the various international
stakeholders around the same table, which, in our view,
is a necessary condition for moving forward. He also
has our full support for quickly finalizing a credible
and balanced constitutional package that addresses the
composition and procedural rules of the constitutional
committee. However, we regret that no progress has been
made in that regard. It is clear who remains responsible
for that. The Syrian regime refuses every compromise
and is stepping up delaying tactics to prevent that
first opportunity for dialogue from succeeding. It is
incumbent on the Special Envoy to tell us frankly when
he believes that he has exhausted all possible ways to
achieve an agreement on the committee. If the regime
maintains its opposition, it will be time for the Council
to draw the necessary conclusions and to consider other
ways to make progress.

In this respect, the establishment of
confidence-building measures conducive to the creation
of a safe and neutral environment is vital. This will
require, inter alia, progress on the issue of detainees
and missing persons, United Nations access to refugees
and displaced persons who are returning home, and
commitments by the regime to the safety of individuals
and the return of their properties.

Lastly, I would like to record the importance of
the subject of elections with a view to the upcoming
polling. We must begin to reflect, based on resolution
2254 (2015), on the conditions necessary to ensure that
the elections are free and fair; that all Syrians, including
displaced persons and refugees, can participate; and
that the United Nations will be involved in supervising
the process. The Special Envoy here again has our full
support to make headway in this respect.

To resolve the Syrian tragedy, the Syrians need to
be given the chance to freely express their views once
again about the future of their country.

As we all know, only a political solution based
on resolution 2254 (2015) will allow for Syria to be
stabilized once and for all, for the lasting eradication
of hotbeds of terrorism and for the return of refugees
in safe and dignified conditions. France will continue
its mobilization to that end during the upcoming
international meetings, which we hope will allow for
progress to be made.

We once again call on Russia, which has particular
responsibility in this area, to bring pressure to
bear on the regime to restore the ceasefire and to
obtain commitments from it for the relaunch of a
comprehensive political process. Without credible
political progress, our position on reconstruction,
sanctions and normalization, which is also the position
of the European Union, will remain unchanged.

It would be a serious error of judgment but also
a serious political failure to consider that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us. Faced with the new, incipient
tragedy in Idlib, based on a scenario that we have seen
time and again, no one will be able to say that they have
been caught off guard. But it would be another error of
judgment and another political error to think that the
path of peace is out of reach. We all convinced of the
opposite: that we can create the conditions to open up a
credible political process, build on our common ground
and once and for all bring peace to Syria. There is not
a minute to lose; it is this pressing appeal that I make
today on behalf of France.

