Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would also
join others in thanking Mr. Jack Lang, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and Assistant-
Secretary-General Stephen Mathias for their
comprehensive and useful briefings on the problems of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. I would also like to
thank the Representative of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia for his perspective on the issue.

We have carefully gone through Mr. Lang's
report on the legal issues relating to piracy off the
coast of Somalia (S/2011/30). It is comprehensive and
contains many useful recommendations. It draws our
attention to the disturbing fact that Somali pirates are
operating further and further from the Somali coast.
The shift of attacks to the south and east of the Indian
Ocean reflects the pirates' ability to adapt in order to
bypass the security corridor established by naval forces
and to extend their reach to areas approximately 1,000
to 1,200 miles from the Somali coast. Piracy has also
gotten more sophisticated and has become an organized
and lucrative activity. Indeed, as Mr. Lang's report
states, piracy is gradually becoming an organized
industry. Pirates have developed significant support
structures whereby they are able to hold hijacked ships
and crews hostage for months while their instigators
and supporters hold negotiations for ransom. It is
particularly worrying that the pirates have developed a
modus vivendi with terrorist organizations.

According to the International Maritime Bureau,
a record number of people - 1,181 sailors - were
taken hostage by pirates worldwide in 2010, of which
the Somali attacks account for 1,016 hostages.
Currently, Somali pirates are holding 28 ships with
more than 638 crew members on board. During the
year 2010, 53 ships were hijacked worldwide, of which
49 were hijacked by Somali pirates. Compared to 2009,
there was a 10 per cent increase in the number of pirate
attacks in 2010, the total number being 445.

Studies by different think tanks say that maritime
piracy costs the global economy anywhere between
$7 and 12 billion a year. The figures I cite are global
figures, in contrast to the figures cited by Mr. Lang
were perhaps for the cost of Somali piracy alone.
Nevertheless, since there is still some discrepancy
there, I would, at some stage, like to get a firmer grip
on the figure, but it is certainly in the vicinity of $7 to
10 billion. These figures are cause for major concern to
the international community.

The continuing instability in Somalia does not
permit an effective response to the problem of piracy
even though the Transitional Federal Government has
identified counter-piracy as a major area for
cooperation under the Kampala process. Therefore, the
process needs to be revitalized, and a major capacity-
building exercise needs to be undertaken in areas of
security and police forces, legal and legislative
frameworks, jurisdictional and correctional systems,
and so on.

We agree with the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the need to further strengthen
international cooperation to tackle the problem of
piracy. A comprehensive approach to tackling the
problem has to be found in order to address this serious
issue. In this context, my delegation wishes to propose
the following measures.

There should be reinforced tracking of the trail of
ransom money to different parts of the world, a duty
that was conferred upon INTERPOL at the sixth
plenary meeting of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia. The beneficiaries of ransom money
should be prosecuted for abetting piracy. Consideration
should be given to making the conduct of naval
operations under United Nations auspices the preferred
option. The Somali coastline should be sanitized
through identified corridors and buffer zones, and
fishing vessels around the Somali coast should be
tracked. National laws should be enacted as a priority
to criminalize piracy as defined in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, and suspected
pirates apprehended off the coast of Somalia should be
prosecuted and, upon conviction, imprisoned, as
required under resolution 1918 (2010). This last
suggestion has been made, I believe, by other
colleagues.

Criminal activities in international waters pose a
serious threat to India, a country with a coastline of
over 7,500 kilometres. A large volume of our trade
passes through the Gulf of Aden, estimated at about
$110 billion annually. Approximately 24 Indian-
flagged merchant ships transit the Gulf of Aden every
month. Moreover, more than 6 per cent of seafarers
engaged in international shipping companies are Indian
nationals. We therefore have a strong interest in
ensuring the security of maritime traffic off the Somali
coast and in the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea.

India has been actively engaged in anti-piracy
operations. The Indian navy commenced anti-piracy
patrols in the Gulf of Aden in October 2008. A total of
23 Indian naval ships have been deployed in the Gulf
of Aden since then. In addition to escorting Indian-
flagged vessels, our navy has provided protection to
ships of other countries. A total of 1,487 ships,
including 1,321 foreign-flagged vessels from different
countries, have been escorted by Indian naval ships in
the Gulf of Aden since October 2008. Twenty-six
piracy attempts have been thwarted, and no ship under
Indian escort has been hijacked by pirates. We have
also set up a 24/7 communication centre within the
Indian Maritime Administration for coordination and
facilitation in case of piracy.

Taking serious note of the recent spate of dhow
piracy incidents, India has banned operation of Indian
dhows in pirate-infested areas. As the piracy-prone
area has expanded eastwards, the Indian navy has made
additional deployments off the eastern and north-
eastern Arabian Sea. The Indian navy has also
deployed units to the exclusive economic zone of
Seychelles and Mauritius, and its ships and aircraft
routinely patrol the waters off Maldives. Following
these deployments, there have been no hijack incidents
in the eastern Arabian Sea since December 2010,
following one or two stray incidents that suddenly
occurred during a very brief period at the end of
November 2010.

India, as a founding member of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, has been
fully engaged in the efforts of the Group to share
information, coordinate the actions of navies in
combating piracy in the Gulf of Aden, raising public
and merchant marine awareness, and examining legal
and criminal justice issues with respect to apprehended
pirates. Further, the Indian navy has proactively
cooperated with other navies through the Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction mechanism, and
otherwise.

India will continue to contribute to international
efforts aimed at increasing effective cooperation
among States to tackle the problems of piracy. We also
propose to actively engage in the Council's work in the
follow-through to the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser and in ensuring
the development of effective operational, legal and
institutional responses to the problems of piracy.

