Mr. Cappelaere: I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Security Council today on the plight of
children in Syria. To say that their situation is tragic
would be an understatement. Indeed, it is difficult to
imagine what words could still adequately convey the
unspeakable horrors endured by Syria's children every
day. Tens of thousands of children have already been
killed. Millions have been uprooted from their homes,
some more than once. Too many have been deprived of
basic medical care and safe drinking water. Too many
have witnessed the deaths of their loved ones and the
destruction of the places they once thought are safe:
their homes, their schools, their playgrounds and their
hospitals. Simply put, Syria's children are trapped in a
living nightmare. We must ask ourselves: What is left
of childhood for the boys and girls of Syria?

We have just heard from my colleague, Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, about how devastating the past few days have
been for the people of Aleppo. As we consider the
events unfolding there, I would like us all to pause for
a moment and imagine life through the eyes of a child
who is trapped in that tragic situation. As a boy or girl
in Aleppo today, where do you find comfort and hope
amid the bombs? Determined to learn, you attend school
whenever your parents allow you to leave the house, but
you do not know any more if you will ever come back.
It is hard for you as a child to focus because it is cold
and you do not sleep well, haunted by nightmares and
hunger. Children are wondering why this is happening.
Children are wondering why no one is doing more to
make this stop.

Amir, a five-year-old boy, is one of those children.
Our team met him in Aleppo very recently. He and
his sister were playing outside when their house was
shelled. His sister was injured in the face and eye, while
Amir sustained severe burns all over his body. He had
to undergo two painful surgeries to replace the burned
skin in one of the very few remaining health facilities
in Aleppo. Harsh as it may sound, Amir was lucky. Too
many children today are not as lucky.

In western Aleppo, we met a father living with the
trauma and deep regret of simply letting his eight and
ten-year-old daughters go to school. They left their
makeshift home one morning with their schoolbags on
their back. Only their lifeless bodies returned after a

shell slammed into their classroom. UNICEF colleagues
could barely look into the eyes of the father suffering
so much pain.
As the Council heard last week, the health system
in eastern Aleppo is crumbling. Doctors on the
ground told UNICEF that children with poor chances
of survival are often simply left to die due to limited
capacity and supplies.

The violence must stop. Nothing justifies the
indiscriminate slaughter of civilians, especially
children. Parties to the conflict must protect civilians,
not least children, and allow immediate access for
humanitarian agencies to provide life-saving assistance.
UNICEF, together with its partners, have been standing
and continue to stand ready to respond immediately as
soon as a humanitarian pause is agreed.

Beyond the grim situation in Aleppo, we estimate
that some 6 million children inside Syria are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Over 2 million of these
children are living in hard-to-reach areas, which
humanitarian agencies cannot access on a regular basis.
Nearly half a million children live under siege, cut off
from humanitarian aid and basic services for months at
a time. Some of these children have been living under
siege for two years. UNICEF and partners strive on
a daily basis to deliver timely and quality assistance
to the most vulnerable children throughout Syria.
Allow me to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
humanitarians working courageously on the front lines
for Syrian children.

When we have access, we can achieve a great deal.
During the month of October alone, UNICEF and its
partners reached 2.9 million Syrians with urgently
needed assistance, including nearly 350,000 in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. Since January, over 3 million
children under five have been vaccinated through
polio campaigns. Back-to-learning supplies have
reached nearly 3 million children. Urgent maintenance
to water and sanitation systems have allowed millions
to access safe water. And essential nutrition supplies
have reached nearly 300,000 children in besieged and
hard-to-reach areas through inter-agency convoys.
Working together with our partners, we can and have
made life just a little more bearable for Syrian children.
Sadly, however, we often fail - not due to a lack of
commitment or a lack of readiness. As those children
wait for us, they wonder why.

Schools have come under relentless attack all over
the country. This year has been particularly devastating
for education. Since the beginning of 2016, the United
Nations has documented 84 attacks on schools across
Syria, with at least 69 children losing their lives and
many more injured. Across the country, more than
7,000 schools can no longer be used because they are
either destroyed, damaged, are sheltering displaced
families or are being used for military purposes. Today,
1.7 million children in Syria are out of school.

In the worst areas, safe water is either scarce or
too costly. In collective shelters or households hosting
displaced families, toilets have to be shared by dozens
of people and sanitary conditions are extremely poor.
Only one-third of Syria's sewage is now being treated.
The violence has destroyed water infrastructure and,
in some cases, parties to the conflict have deliberately
cut off water supplies as a war tactic. Earlier this year,
UNICEF reported that water in Aleppo was shut off for
48 days.

Since the beginning of the conflict, families all
over Syria have been reporting grave violations against
their children - committed by all parties. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict has briefed the Council on a
regular basis regarding those violations. The United
Nations verified 1,500 grave violations in 2015 alone,
including killing, maiming, the recruitment and use of
children by parties to the conflict, abduction, attacks
on schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian
access. Harrowing as these numbers are, they represent
only verified cases. Imagine how many more remain
unreported or unconfirmed.

As the violence continues to intensify in Aleppo,
children will continue to pay a heavy price. These
children ask why their loved ones have died. Mothers
and fathers in Aleppo feel helpless as they struggle to
feed their children while the prices of food and other
commodities have almost doubled, putting children at
serious risk of malnutrition. Violence, displacement
and roadblocks mean that many children can no longer
access life-saving health care. Every checkpoint
crossed presents a set of dangers for children: the risk
of being exploited, the risk ofbeing recruited or the risk
of simply getting caught in the crossfire.

We have all seen the images - brave men and
women pulling babies' bodies out from under the rubble;
babies taken out of incubators because of attacks on
hospitals; little boys and girls, many injured, pleading
for help or dead. Yesterday, many of us saw the girl in
the pink coat, standing shocked, terrified and confused
amidst the shelling - searching for her father, whom
she lost in the chaos of havoc and violence. Children
ask us Why; we ask why.
This devastating downward spiral must end. Today,
every Syrian child under the age of five has known
nothing but a lifetime shaped by war. Until recently, over
90 per cent of them attended school, nearly all children
were regularly vaccinated and malnutrition was almost
non-existent. Syria was among the first Arab countries
to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The
protection of children should be, at all times, a primary
consideration for all of us. We have failed them over
the past six years and we continue to fail the children
in Syria. Our failure is not onlyjeopardizing children's
lives, but the future of the country, the region and the
whole world.

UNICEF and its partners will continue to do
everything we can to provide assistance to children and
their families in Syria, wherever they may reside. In that
connection, I take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
and Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Stephen O'Brien,
for their tireless support and determination to help us
reach those children in need.

Let us be clear - as long as the violence
continues, children in Syria will continue to suffer.
UNICEF renews its call on all parties to lift the sieges
across Syria, and to allow and facilitate immediate,
unconditional and sustained humanitarian access to
all areas of the country. We call upon the parties to
uphold their obligations to protect children. These are
their children and their future. They are in their hands.
Until the guns are silenced and remain silent, children
in Syria will continue to ask us why.

