Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like to thank
you at the outset, Mr. President, for scheduling this
open debate on small arms and mercenaries in West
Africa. The world holds its breath in View of the
imminent danger of a major military confrontation in
the Middle East with potential global consequences
that no one can foresee. But we feel that it is equally
important not to forget that there are conflicts in other
parts of the world, involving not weapons of mass
destruction but small arms, not highly trained,
specialized soldiers but mercenaries and child soldiers,
which nonetheless cause tremendous human plight,
misery and death.

It is not easy to add to the list of important and
useful thoughts that have already been put forward in
this room today. However, I would like to stress a
number of points that, from the viewpoint of the
German Government, are particularly important and
relevant.

First, it would not suffice to try to cure only the
symptoms. In other words, we need to focus on the root
causes of armed conflict that incite demand for the
import of weapons and invite trafficking with them.
Furthermore, we need to raise awareness of the
mechanism that makes conflicts of interest turn into
armed violence. Thirdly, we must ensure that small
arms and light weapons get into the hands only of
Government authorities and that they are firmly kept
there. In this context, the trade in weapons and their
further whereabouts need to be made much more
transparent, and those having acquired them need to be
held accountable for their further use.

With the Bamako Declaration and the Programme
of Action of the Conference on Small Arms held in
July 2001, important guidelines have been supplied
with regard to the measures I have just cited. We need
action, determination and, above all, a firm conviction
among the parties involved of the need to implement
the measures necessary to limit and eventually to stop
the flow of illicit small arms and light weapons.

The Governments of the countries affected by
armed conflict have a responsibility to adhere to certain
standards of good governance, order and discipline.
Governments have to show leadership that their
populations can follow. The populations are
encouraged to do their share in promoting peace and
security. There are encouraging examples of grassroots
movements taking their fate in their own hands and
trying to come to terms with the problems of the
reckless and irresponsible use of small arms and light
weapons. In this context, I would like to warmly
commend the work done by the women of the Mano
River Union. We need more of that to happen. The
declaration and prolongation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) import
Moratorium on small arms and light weapons is an
encouraging example of a regional initiative in a region
that is most seriously affected by civil wars and armed
conflicts. It is most welcome as a step to reduce import
demand and to control legitimate imports in order to
prevent illegal imports.

On the other hand, donor countries are called
upon to support efforts made in West Africa to come to
terms with the use of small arms and battling
mercenaries. This can be done in many different ways.
The focus of aid work should be on capacity building,
for instance in the area of setting up national
disarmament commissions, training trainers and
providing know-how in different ways. Mercenaries
need to have a realistic alternative for creating a decent
life. I would also like to mention the concept of arms
for development, that is, the surrender of weapons in
exchange for aid to the communities of those giving up
their weapons. Policies have to be elaborated in such a
way that the whole community will benefit from the
readiness of armed persons to rid themselves of their
weapons, not for the sake of personal profit but in
order to benefit their own community as a whole. In
this context, I would like to mention the Group of
Interested States in Practical Disarmament Measures,
which, under German chairmanship has coordinated a
number of hands-on projects relating to the problems
stemming from the surplus of small arms in West
Africa.

Arms producing countries need to play by the
rules regarding weapons transfers. Germany is in full
support of the ECOWAS Moratorium and respects it, in
line with European Union decisions and its political
principles on the export of military equipment. We
advocate strict adherence to export criteria for
weapons. Not fuelling the conflict with the delivery of
weapons and ensuring that legal weapons arrive at the
legitimate certified end-user, in line with the
exchanged information, are key elements of such
criteria which we would like to see more widely
accepted.

Last but not least, I wish to mention one piece of
the disarmament puzzle which too often is overlooked
or considered a soft issue: disarmament education,
especially with regard to the recruitment of child
soldiers. Disarmament starts at a very early age.
Children need to learn that conflicts are not to be
resolved through violence, but rather through
intelligent bargaining. Children need to learn that the
strength gained through the possession of a weapon
does not help find lasting solutions. There are
commendable efforts being made to develop such
educational programmes, which also include West
Africa. The work of The Hague Appeal for Peace,
operating together with the United Nations Foundation
and the Secretariat Department for Disarmament
Affairs, is just one example. I appeal to the donor
community to give more attention to these efforts.

Let me close by expressing my sincere hope that,
for one of the regions of Africa most severely plagued
by armed conflict, sustainable solutions will be found
to bring a basic degree of stability to its peoples, and
that this debate will give new impulses towards that
goal.

