Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank Special
Representative, Nicholas Haysom, for introducing
the Secretary-General's report on Afghanistan
(S/2015/151*) and for the work that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is
doing in carrying out its important mandate, which
was entrusted to it by the Security Council on behalf
of the international community. We also thank the
Ambassador of Afghanistan for his remarks.

As we renew the United Nations Mission's mandate,
ensuring the maintenance of cooperation between the
United Nations and Afghanistan in the critical political,
social and economic processes underway, this debate
affords an opportunity to take stock of the important
political, security and social economic developments in
Afghanistan - the closing of a cycle in Afghan life
and the opening of the transformation period, with
Afghanistan taking on the leadership and ownership of
its national affairs.

We welcome and hope that the reform agenda,
aimed at realizing self-reliance, which was put forward
by the Afghan leadership at the London Conference,
will lead to a transformation in overcoming the great
challenges that the country still faces as it struggles
to achieve national reconciliation, stability, social
development and sustainable peace.

The political agreement of 21 September and the
establishment of a Government of national unity were a
fundamental break-through in Afghan political life and
a confirmation that political compromise is possible
and relevant for the country's progress in achieving
stability and, ultimately, peace. The Afghan leadership
and ownership of the political process is based on the
fulfilment of the benchmarks outlined in the Secretary-
General's report, the attainment of which is vital in
order to safeguard against the loss of all that has been
achieved through the great and sustained efforts and
investments by the Afghans and the international
community.

Among those benchmarks, the first and foremost
is security - with the creation of sustainable Afghan
security institutions capable of ensuring the stability
and protection of the people of Afghanistan. From the
lessons learned in Iraq with the collapse of the Iraqi
armed forces at the hands of terrorists from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) upon the withdrawal
of the American forces, it would be wise to consider a
review of the timeline for the drawdown of American
troops, which appears to be happening. NATO's
Resolute Support Mission, which will provide training,
advisors, and assistance to the Afghan security forces,
is an element of the confidence-building measures
aimed at strengthening the security situation in the
country.

Reintegration and reconciliation through the
development of national dialogue and regional
engagement to foster a political environment
conducive to peace is another policy objective to be
met. The reintegration of a relatively large number
of anti-Government elements, the efforts to counter
the fundamentalism that fuels violence, the call to
the Taliban to join the peace process, the pledge by
President Ghani Ahmadzai to focus on establishing
peace and other important political initiatives give the
hope that the Afghans might be entering a new and
decisive phase of their lives.

Governance and institution-building, the extension
of State authority throughout the country and the
establishment of democratic, legitimate and accountable
institutions are other crucial policy objectives. The
ability of the Afghan authorities to conduct the electoral
process in 2014 was an important event, to be coupled
with further electoral reforms, the development and
empowerment of anti-corruption institutions, the
strengthening of the transparency of the civil service
and the establishment of a credible judicial and penal
system. Respect for human rights, in line with the
Constitution and international law, protecting civilians,
improving the situation of women and girls, reducing
the number of incidents and the lawful use of force
to combat impunity are crucial processes for the
attainment of sustainable peace in Afghanistan.

Economic and social development is a key
purpose of a Government's policies, supported by
the international community, in order to promote
sustainable economic growth. With Afghanistan taking
leadership and ownership of its national affairs, the
partnership within the international community is
intent on translating coherent support to Afghanistan,
improving the coordination and the alignment of donor
funding with national priority programmes.

Regional cooperation with sustained effective
regional coordination in support of progress, peace and
stability is another fundamental element in the new era
Afghanistan is entering. We take note of the remarkable
development of regional cooperation, the holding of
important summit conferences and their outcomes. A
number of regional initiatives within the framework
of counter-terrorism financing, on countering drug
trafficking and on trade, commerce and investment
show how Afghanistan is effectively committed to a
process of regional cooperation and to consolidating
the country's role as a full and rightful member of
the international community. Finally, countering
narcotics - a critical area given that violence and crime
stem from narcotics and it serves as a main financial
source for the Taliban and the terrorists - decreasing
poppy cultivation and increasing narcotics control, and,
concurrently, the increase in licit agriculture, are key
policies to be pursued by the Afghan Government.

In conclusion, we acknowledge the remarkable
progress achieved by the Afghan people after the
demise of the despicable Taliban regime. We also
acknowledge the sustained commitment of the
international community to Afghanistan. However,
we must recognize that a long, hard and rocky road
still lies ahead if Afghanistan is to achieve stability
and peace. The fulfilment of the benchmarks detailed
in the Secretary-General's report is a complex and
demanding task that requires strong commitment by the
Afghan people and authorities and by the international
community, including the United Nations Mission in
the medium term and, most probably, the long term,
if the Afghan people are to secure social progress,
freedom and lasting peace.

