Ms. Mueller: As we speak, the second Brussels
Conference on supporting the future of Syria and the
region is reaching its conclusion. The meeting, hosted
by the European Union and co-chaired by the United
Nations, has been an important opportunity to renew
and strengthen the commitment of the international
community to the Syrian people. The Conference
reconfirmed the importance of delivering needs-based
humanitarian assistance to all civilians, in line with
the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. Significant funds are
being raised in support of that goal.

The commitments being made in Brussels come
at a critical time, as the needs inside Syria could not
be higher. Of the 13.1 million people in need, some
5.6 million are in acute need. Despite resolution 2401
(2018), attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
have reached some of the highest levels since the
conflict began. In the first three months of 2018, the
United Nations verified 72 attacks on health-care
facilities, as compared to 112 attacks in all of 2017.
At the same time, cross-line access remains extremely
constricted, with only five convoys deploying so far in
2018. A strong response from Member States has never
been more in need.

Over 160,000 people left eastern Ghouta between
9 March and 15 April, following weeks of fighting. Of
those, 92,000 went to sites for internally displaced in
rural Damascus. Nearly 45,000 of those people remain
at the sites, which are at nearly double their capacity.
The United Nations and its partners are responding to
the mounting humanitarian needs of those displaced by
providing food, shelter, health care and other assistance
and protection services. However, assistance alone is
not enough; additional sites urgently need to be made
functional so as to ensure adequate living space for all
internally displaced persons.

Approximately 71,000 people have been transported
to north-western Syria since mid-March from eastern
Ghouta and eastern Qalamoun. In Idlib, lack of
accommodation, continued fighting and insecurity are
ongoing challenges. The latest movements saw people
accommodated in the Euphrates Shield area of northern
Aleppo. Humanitarian access to these areas remains
limited, however, and subject to the restrictions
imposed by the local authorities in place.

While eastern Ghouta is no longer besieged as it
has come under the control of the Government of Syria,
the United Nations has not yet been granted access to
Douma, where an estimated 70,000 individuals remain
in dire need of humanitarian assistance after years of
besiegement and months under intensified shelling
and air strikes. The United Nations was last permitted
to reach Douma over a month ago, on 15 March, with
food assistance for only 26,100 individuals. The United
Nations also requires urgent access to the formerly
besieged areas of Nashabiyah, Kafr Batna, Saqba and
Hamuriyah, where we expect needs to be great. In
and around eastern Ghouta alone, there is currently
a funding gap of $95 million to assist the population
in need.

Late last week, hostilities between Government
forces and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in the besieged area of Yarmouk and neighbouring
areas, resulted in reports of civilian casualties and
destruction of civilian infrastructure. The access points
for over 66,000 people in need are virtually closed. The
United Nations stands ready to deliver humanitarian

assistance to people in need in southern Damascus
areas, but the required approvals and guarantees of safe
passage are necessary.
At the same time, there has been an alarming
escalation of violence between Government forces and
non-State armed opposition groups in northern rural
Horns and southern Hama governorate, impacting an
estimated 210,000 people in the area. The United Nations
has received reports of air strikes and ground-based
strikes resulting in scores of civilian casualties, the
destruction of civilian infrastructure and displacement.
This comes amidst reports ofnegotiations for a localized
agreement between the parties to the conflict.

In Idlib governorate, the situation remains
catastrophic, with almost 400,000 people displaced
since mid-December, in addition to the tens ofthousands
who were displaced from eastern Ghouta and eastern
Qalamoun. There are simply no more sites or shelters
available for the vast majority of new arrivals. There
has been a 25 per cent increase in Idlib's displaced
population as compared to one year ago, with 1.2 million
ofthe 2 million people in the governorate now displaced,
many of them multiple times. This extreme situation
places incredible pressure on the host communities. In
addition, in recent weeks air strikes have hit hospitals
and markets and have come very close to IDP shelters,
reportedly killing scores of civilians, including many
women and children. Fighting between Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham and other non-State armed opposition groups
have added further insecurity. Relief organizations are
providing assistance, including health care, clean water
and sanitation, and education. In order to sustain the
assistance, funding is needed.

In Aleppo governorate, between mid-January and
mid-March an estimated 137,000 people were displaced
by hostilities in Afrin district. The majority of people
fled to Tell Rifaat and surrounding areas. Freedom
of movement remains an issue for those who have
been displaced. Many internally displaced persons
reportedly continue to be prevented from moving
on to Aleppo city, and people with medical referrals
currently have to wait up to 15 days for clearance to
travel to Aleppo city for medical care. While there have
been some reports of returns taking place to Afrin,
the movement back to Afrin also remains extremely
limited as people are allegedly being prevented from
returning. The United Nations and its partners have
scaled up the response to the displaced with regular
deliveries to the area. Between 2 and 4 April, through
cross-border operations from Turkey, United Nations
agencies sent food assistance for over 20,000 people,
as well as health-care and other items of critical need.
Sustained access to those in Afrin is needed.
On 1 April, the United Nations undertook an
assessment mission to Raqqa. Since ISIL was forced
out of Raqqa in October, nearly 100,000 people have
returned to Raqqa city. However, conditions are
not conducive to returns due to the high levels of
unexploded ordnance and improvised explosive device
contamination, widespread and severe infrastructural
damage, and a lack of basic services. Every week,
there have been more than 50 casualties reported due
to remnants of war. An estimated 70 to 80 per cent of
buildings inside Raqqa city are destroyed or damaged.

While public services are slowly resuming, with
bakeries opening and limited access to health services,
the city lacks electricity and mobile communications,
and water is pumped in only a very limited capacity to
the outskirts of the city. Up to 95 per cent of households
that have returned to Raqqa are food-insecure. Some
schools have reopened, although they lack school
materials and other supplies. Following the 1 April
assessment, United Nations agencies are planning
deliveries to complement the ongoing activities of
humanitarian organizations already active inside
Raqqa. It will also complement the response for those
displaced and in need across north-eastern Syria, where
900,000 people receive assistance each month.

I would now like to turn to Rukban, where 50,000
people along the Syria-Jordan border remain in critical
need of assistance, having last been provided aid from
Jordan in January. The International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent received
permission from the Syrian authorities on 8 March to
organize a humanitarian convoy from Damascus, and
on 19 March the United Nations received permission to
join that mission. Initially, the humanitarian operation
was conceived as a drop-off operation, with aid
distributed by local leaders. More recently, discussions
have included entering the camp to deliver assistance
directly to the people. The United Nations continues
to work closely with the United States and the Russian
Federation to make that possible and ensure that those
in need can safely receive the aid they desperately need.
At the same time, basic health-care services and water
continue to be provided cross-border from Jordan.

After seven years of a conflict that continues to see

escalation after escalation, the needs of Syrians have
never been higher. The Brussels Conference showed
the clear resolve of the international community to
place Syria at the top of its agenda and to ensure that
immediate life-saving assistance is available to all in
need. However, those commitments must now turn into
to concrete action. Resolution 2401 (2018) urgently
needs to be implemented. The resolution underlines
a number of areas for implementation, but let me
highlight three in particular where I believe progress
is possible now:

First, we need to see firm steps taken to ensure that
all parties respect the rules of war. Civilians must be
provided protection, with constant care taken to spare
them and the infrastructure they rely on. Attacks on
hospitals in particular must end. The wounded and the
sick must be afforded the treatment and care they need.

Secondly, safe, sustained and unimpeded access to
all in need must be ensured so that aid can reach those
in need. That means facilitation letters must be issued,
allowing cross-line convoys to deploy every week,
while at the same time we must see access to areas that
recently experienced a change of control open up for
regular deliveries.

Thirdly, when convoys deploy, medical items must
stop being removed. There is no reason why items
previously agreed with the authorities for delivery are
removed at the last minute. These are critical life-saving
items and they must be allowed on our trucks.

To quote the Secretary General in his opening
remarks in a video message to the second Brussels
Conference on Syria two days ago:

"At the recent Security Council retreat just a few
days ago in Sweden, I sensed a strong commitment
to humanitarian access - and to overcoming the
obstacles to the delivery of aid to all Syrians."

We owe it to the people of Syria to build on the
momentum and to see concrete improvements on
the ground.

