Mr. Mkapa: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council in the Southern Sudan referendum as
well as to provide clarification on the role of the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan.

I was present in Nairobi when the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) was signed, and it is
remarkable that we are about to witness the
achievement of one of the Agreement's key milestones,
the holding of the Southern Sudan referendum, in less
than a month's time. The signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement brought peace to a great many people
in the Sudan and allowed for the development of the
country. Moreover, the Agreement brought relief to the
countries and peoples of the region, which were also
affected by the North-South conflict in the Sudan. That
is no small achievement.

Let me also take this opportunity to welcome the
presence of the representatives of the CPA parties who
are with us this morning, on whose shoulders rests the
responsibility for the successful conclusion of the
implementation of the Agreement.

The registration of voters ahead of next month's
referendum on the self-determination of Southern
Sudan concluded eight days ago, with the exception of
a few centres out of country, as Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy just stated. The registration process
was conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner,
despite time constraints and limitations in
communications infrastructure and financial resources.
The Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and its
Bureau based in Juba are to be highly commended for
overcoming the many difficulties they faced to conduct
the voter registration exercise.

Our field reporting officers on the ground and we
ourselves found the process to be generally transparent,
with very few cases of rejections reported. No
discernable pattern of irregularities were reported
either. That should help prepare the ground for a
credible referendum on 9 January 2011.

Both parties to the CPA have given important and
unequivocal public assurances about respecting the
outcome of the referendum. Leaders of both parties
have also given assurances about the status of the
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the South
and that their rights and safety will be protected. As the
campaign period gathers momentum, such messages of
assurance by political leaders in both the North and the
South should be reiterated in order to assuage anxiety
among the population regarding the uncertainty of their
future, regardless of the outcome of the referendum.

There has been no progress with regard to the
holding of the Abyei referendum. The Abyei issue has
become part of the larger post-referendum negotiations
led by the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel on the Sudan. We commend the patience shown
by the people of Abyei and we urge the parties to
redouble their efforts to find a lasting solution to this
difficult issue.

Let me conclude by sharing some views on how
the Panel sees its role in the lead-up to the
referendums. As the Secretary-General conveyed to the
Council in September, the Panel's role is to monitor
and assess the referendum processes for Southern
Sudan and the Abyei area, including the political and
security situation on the ground. The Panel will also
engage the parties at the appropriate level to take
corrective measures and, in close consultation with the
Secretary-General, issue public statements on the
referendums.

In our encounters with our interlocutors, we have
stressed that we do not have a certification mandate.
The Panel will focus on playing a good offices role on
behalf of the Secretary-General. The Panel will liaise
closely with international and national observer groups
to ensure that we share as much valuable information
as possible.

