Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie for
her detailed briefing. We believe that it is important
for the Security Council to discuss the issue of the
Sahel in a comprehensive manner. Her assessment of
the situation in that vast region is of great usefulness.
The ever-increasing number of challenges there give
the effective implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel its continued
relevance. The Russian Federation has welcomed that
initiative from the outset, as it holds great promise.

A series of useful projects have been crafted to
help the countries of the region overcome existing
issues. There must be a shift to a practical phase that
brings together a large number of participants from
the various branches of the United Nations system
under one umbrella. It is of paramount importance
that, with support of the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, interested States of the
Sahel establish relevant mechanisms for cooperation.
In time, that will allow the countries of the region to
take a leading role and primary responsibility for the
implementation of the comprehensive Strategy.

We are increasingly guided by the concrete
outcomes of the work of the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel. The operationalizion of the
Group of Five for the Sahel provides a nucleus for
initiatives in that region. Specialized agencies for
continental integration are working well at various
levels, including the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of the Central African States and the Lake
Chad Basin Commission.

Of particular concern is the security threat to
the Sahel, which over the past year has significantly
increased. The instability in the Middle East and Syria
and the lack of an internationally coordinated response
are spreading to the countries of North Africa. That
poorly controlled region has thus become a hotbed for
terrorists and organized crime groups. Moreover, we
note with interest that the southern Sahara is also a
growing hotbed for such activities. We cannot overcome
these challenges with the kind of outside intervention
that occurred in Libya.

The fight against Boko Haram is a relatively
successful example because it was undertaken
by the Multinational Joint Task Force, although a
comprehensive breakthrough is still far from being
achieved. The counter-terrorism activities in the Sahel
have not yet borne fruit, and terrorists believe that they
enjoy full impunity. That was clearly demonstrated by
the recent attacks launched by Al-Qaeda and Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in Bamako.

Joint local mechanisms for security, such as the
Nouakchott Process, remain in their early stages
but progress has been made. The lack of political
sustainability, economic underdevelopment and social
unrest lay the foundation for young people to become
radicalized. We welcome the increased attention being
paid by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
the root causes of the crisis in the Sahel. We hope that
the consistent implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, with the broad
participation of partners, will lead to a qualitative
improvement of the situation in the region.

