Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We also commend the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes, for
briefing the Council.

In armed conflicts around the world, civilians
continue to be displaced, killed, maimed and often
raped. According to the Secretary-General's report, for
35 million people around the world, flight has become
the only option. The deliberate targeting of civilians
and the indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
including suicide attacks, have become widespread in
certain places, creating a climate of fear aimed at
further destabilizing and displacing civilian
populations. In other conflict situations, even militarily
superior parties, including multinational forces, are
often compelled to respond with methods and means of
warfare that violate the principles of distinction and
proportionality, of which civilians again bear the brunt.

Therefore, addressing the specific protection
needs of women and children remains an important
matter for the United Nations system. My delegation
reiterates our support for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
and 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict. That
means that concrete proposals are also needed to
ensure the right of refugees and internally displaced
persons to safe and unimpeded voluntary return.

South Africa, as a signatory to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and its two Additional Protocols
of 1977, wishes to underline the importance of
adhering to the principles contained in those
Conventions and to appeal for the full implementation

of the commitments made by all States parties to those
basic tenets of international law. The Security Council
should also continue to call upon all parties to conflict,
including multinational forces authorized by the
Council, to uphold their international humanitarian law
and human rights obligations and to report on steps
taken to ensure the protection of civilians during the
conduct of hostilities.

The issue of humanitarian access will require
further attention so as to find ways to ensure that those
in need of life-saving assistance receive it and that
those who provide it do so in a secure environment in
which attacks on humanitarian workers are not
tolerated.

According to the Secretary-General's current
report, constraints on or denials of access can take
several forms. Those are constraints imposed by the
operating environment, such as the destruction of
infrastructure; the attempts by parties to conflict to
restrict or block access; time-consuming bureaucratic
procedures for importing humanitarian supplies and
restrictions, or delays in issuing visas and travel
permits for humanitarian personnel; and the constraints
resulting from deliberate attacks on humanitarian
workers.

The Council should look into the Secretary-
General's proposal for establishing mechanisms to
enable United Nations humanitarian agencies to have
some working-level dialogue with all parties to armed
conflict on the ground. Such dialogue would be
necessary for establishing "deconflicting"
arrangements to agree upon the routes and timing of
humanitarian convoys and airlifts to avoid accidental
strikes on humanitarian operations. Such dialogue
would also promote humanitarian corridors and days of
tranquillity.

In the case of the occupied Palestinian territories,
the blockade should be lifted so that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs can have contact
and dialogue with all parties, particularly in Gaza, and
provide the necessary humanitarian assistance.
Therefore, it is important that humanitarian assistance
continues to be provided in accordance with the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict must
remain a priority of the United Nations system. My
delegation is therefore of the view that finding a

common solution to the protection of civilians would
need the cooperation of each and every Member State.
We further believe that the protection of civilians
would be better addressed in partnership with regional
mechanisms, and that strengthening dialogue and
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations would contribute to tackling common
security challenges and ensuring speedy action on the
ground.

Finally, allow me to convey my delegation's deep
regret at the tragic killings that took place earlier this
month of two aid workers, a World Food Programme-
contracted truck driver in Somalia and a country
director of Save the Children in eastern Chad. The
deaths of those humanitarian workers underline yet
again the dangerous and volatile environment that aid
workers have to endure in giving assistance to civilians
caught in armed conflict. The loss of their service is a
loss to all of us.

