Mr. Mohammed (Ethiopia): The situation in Burundi
has continued to deteriorate, reaching its present extremely
alarming and worrisome stage. Today more than ever it has
become a matter of serious concern to the international
community in general and to Africa in particular. The
efforts made at the international, regional and subregional
levels to assist the parties to the conflict in Burundi in
finding a political solution to the problem in their country
have not produced the desired result.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) has been
working actively to assist the people of Burundi in
regaining peace and security. The diplomatic efforts by the
Organization of African Unity and the presence of its
military observer mission in Burundi have demonstrated
Africa's concern at the escalation and turn of events in that
country in the past three years.

The laudable peace initiative and the mediation
launched by the former President of the United Republic of
Tanzania, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, followed and enforced
by the Arusha regional summit of 25 June 1996, had given
rise to new hope and optimism in the search for a political
settlement of the crisis in Burundi.

 

The Heads of State and Government of the Great
Lakes subregion, including Ethiopia, at their summit held
in Arusha on 25 June 1996, reiterated the responsibility
of the leadership of Burundi to restore peace and harmony
to the Burundi people, and accepted the request by the
constitutional Government of Burundi for security
assistance aimed at guaranteeing peace and security for all
the people of Burundi in their quest for a peaceful
political settlement of the crisis in their country. The
summit established a technical committee to look into the
modalities of extending such security assistance to
Burundi, and expressed its profound appreciation and
support to the mediation efforts of former President
Mwalimu Julius Nyerere.

Regrettably, the hope and optimism created by the
Arusha regional peace initiative and by the efforts of Mr.
Nyerere were slowed as a result of the military takeover
in Burundi. The military coup d'e'tat not only posed a
serious challenge to constitutional order and legality in
Burundi, but also threatens the peace and security of the
country as a whole.

The international community rose in unison in
condemning unequivocally the military takeover and in
demanding the prompt and unconditional return of
Burundi to its constitutional Government, including the
restoration of its elected National Assembly.

The second Arusha regional summit, held on 31 July
1996, recognized, among other things, that the immediate
problem with the current political situation in Burundi is
that of illegality, which could lead to the cessation of the
peace process and deepen the conflict in the country. In
this connection, the summit called upon the military
regime to undertake measures aimed at returning to
constitutional order, the immediate restoration of the
National Assembly and the immediate unbanning of
political parties in Burundi. To ensure the implementation
of these immediate demands, the regional summit decided
to exert maximum pressure on the military government,
including through the imposition of economic sanctions.
The summit also called upon the international community
to support the efforts made and measures taken by the
countries of region.

The initiatives of the OAU and the Arusha group are
aimed at creating an environment conducive to
negotiation and peaceful political dialogue among all
political forces and parties in Burundi. There is no
question or ambiguity as to the ultimate responsibility of
the political leaders and people of Burundi to find a

 

lasting solution to the problem in their country. It should be
pointed out, however, that the military coup d 'e'tat of 25
July has made the problem ever more complex, raising
serious doubts about the possibility, under such
circumstances, of a democratic and all-inclusive political
negotiation and dialogue in that troubled region of ours.
Therefore, the return of Burundi to constitutional order
remains a high priority and an essential prerequisite for
confidence-building and mutual trust between all parties to
the conflict. We call once again upon the military
government to take immediate action to restore
constitutional order and legality in Burundi. We also call
upon all the parties to the conflict to desist from any further
acts of violence and to assume the responsibility for
returning their country to normalcy and peace through a
negotiated political settlement.

The immediate resumption of an all-inclusive and
unconditional negotiation and a political dialogue between
the parties to the conflict in Burundi, in the framework of
the Mwanza peace process, is indispensable. The
international community should take practical measures to
assist in creating the necessary conditions for such a
political dialogue and negotiation. In this respect, we should
stress that much remains to be done. We share the feeling
and frustration of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, as stated in his report to the Security Council, that
the response of Member States to the situation in Burundi
has not matched the urgency and seriousness of the
situation in that country. We are also of the view that
efforts at the international and regional levels should be
coordinated and strengthened to achieve the desired
common objective of assisting the people of Burundi. In
particular, we wish to stress the importance of closer
cooperation and coordination between the United Nations
and the OAU as well as with the countries of the region.

Finally, I wish to assure the Council that the
Organization of African Unity and the participants in the
Arusha initiative, including my own country, Ethiopia, are
committed to continuing their efforts to help the people of
Burundi restore peace and security in their country.

