Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): What is happening in my country is an internal
problem. It started about 18 months ago and has
deteriorated since THE legitimate demands for reform
were made by the Syrian people. Those demands were
accepted by my Government, but were followed by
Arab and international interference in our affairs. The
history of the crisis dates back just 18 months.

As for the Israeli crimes committed against Arab
peoples and the Israeli occupation of Arab territories,
they go back decades. In fact, they began with the
creation of the United Nations. We all remember that
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
was first established as a result of Israel's criminal acts,
terrorism and occupation. As a matter of fact, Israel's
acts have led to the adoption by the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the specialized agencies of
the United Nations, of more than 1,000 resolutions
condemning its crimes, occupation and settlement
policy. Had it not been for the 60 vetoes exercised in
the Security Council, Israel's audacity would not have
reached the level that we witness today.

Israel assassinated the first international peace
envoy, Count Bernadotte. Israel has committed many
massacres - in Qibya, in Deir Yassin, and twice in
Qana, where it slaughtered hundreds of Lebanese
civilians who had taken refuge in the United Nations
compound, mistakenly believing that the Organization's
flag would protect them from the evil acts of Israel. It
did not. I remind the Council that a very dear part of
my country, the Golan, is still under Israeli occupation.
In 1981, the Security Council adopted resolution 497
(1981) in which it rejected the Israeli policy concerning
the Golan.

I am not going to speak at length; time is short. Ijust
wanted to jog our memory a little so that we remember
that the Israeli entity has perpetrated State terrorism
and political crimes since its establishment. The proof
is that all its leaders and heads of Government led
armed terrorist groups during the British mandate over
Palestine.

