The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Georgia and Germany, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Matussek (Germany) took the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/77l, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2006/804, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany, the
Russian Federation, Slovakia and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1716 (2006).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.
06-56957

