Mr. Uhomoibhi (Nigeria): It is not often that we
have occasion to celebrate the successful conclusion of a
United Nations peace-keeping operation. Today, however,
El Salvador joins the small but, we hope, growing list of
conflict situations where United Nations intervention has

 

clearly made a difference in the life of troubled nations by
reconciling the conflicting parties and fostering a climate of
confidence and peace.

We pay tribute, therefore, to the accomplishments of
the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador
(ONUSAL), under the authority of the Secretary-General
and his successive Special Representatives, and of those
States that supported the peace process.

It is worth recalling that the United Nations Observer
Mission in El Salvador, ONUSAL, winds up its operation
45 months after the opening of the pioneering human-
rights-monitoring mission that was its initial stage, and 39
months after the formal cease-fire that accompanied full
deployment.

During this period the Salvadorans, including the
Government and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la
Liberacion Nacional (FMLN), have taken significant strides
to ensure dialogue, openness and tolerance. The parties
have generally kept their commitments under extant
agreements, including that on the cease-fire, in the higher
interests of peace and national development.

In spite of these positive developments, following
which, to borrow language from the current draft resolution,
El Salvador has

"evolved from a country riven by conflict into a
democratic and peaceful nation" (S/1995/335, fourth preambular paragraph),

my delegation agrees that much still remains to be done in
the post-conflict era to consolidate the peace that has just
been achieved, especially as certain important aspects of the
Chapultepec peace agreements have still to be honoured.

It is true that the FMLN participated in the 1994
elections as a single political party, and that therefore
governance, in the hands of President Calderon Sol, has
been effective. But we note also that the peaceful transition
to a democratic society has not gone unchallenged, and that
outbursts of violence, such as that witnessed in
January 1995, attest to how fragile and potentially
dangerous the situation still is.

It is to be noted that the land programme as it relates
to the question of human settlements continues to be a
source of serious concern. In addition, the inability of the
Fund for the Protection of the Wounded and War-Disabled
to function, because of lack of funds, also continues to be
a potential source of unrest.

In the light of these difficulties, my delegation has
joined in supporting the Secretary-General's proposal for
the post-ONUSAL period, already endorsed by the
Security Council, for a mechanism to be established in El
Salvador to continue the verification responsibilities and
good-offices functions that ONUSAL has carried out to
date. This accords with the sentiment expressed in the
Security Council's response to "Supplement to An
Agenda for Peace", adopted in February this year, that for
peace-keeping operations to be truly beneficial and
sustainable the United Nations must maintain a continued
interest in the post-conflict peace-building phase.

Finally, we call on all States and international
institutions not to flag in their support for the Government
and the people of El Salvador as they consolidate the
gains already made in the peace process.

As for the Salvadorans themselves, who have rightly
assumed responsibility for the destiny of their country, we
congratulate them and urge them to continue to work
towards reconciliation and development so as to ensure
that peace in El Salvador is secure and irreversible. We
wish them well, and pray that never again will
El Salvador appear on the agenda of the Security Council
as an area of conflict.

