Mr. Wittig: I would like at the outset to thank the
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina for convening

ll-21268
this important debate and preparing the draft
presidential statement.

I particularly welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General and also thank the Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Guterres, for his
comprehensive briefing.

Allow me to make the following remarks in my
capacity as the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I have just five more days as PBC
Chair, but I will relish them.

The question of national capacity development in
the context of post-conflict peacebuilding has been
particularly addressed as a main theme in the
Secretary-General's 2009 report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304).
Today's debate will allow us to delve deeper into the
critical aspect of institution-building in complex post-
conflict settings. To this end, I wish to highlight three
overarching points from which we can possibly
approach institution-building from a peacebuilding
perspective.

First, the principle of national ownership, as the
Secretary-General has made very clear, should stand at
the beginning of any effort to build or rebuild
institutions in countries emerging from conflict. Every
post-conflict situation is unique, there is no one size
that fits all and, thus, approaches to institution-building
might vary considerably.

In many cases, most notably such as in post-
conflict Bosnia and Herzegovina, we should not
assume that the institutions and capacities needed to
transform and rebuild the State and society are
completely absent. We should encourage ongoing
mapping of existing national institutions and capacities
in critical peacebuilding areas - such as in the
security and justice sectors, basic services and
economic revitalization - and build on these existing
national capacities. At the same time, a thorough
analysis and dialogue with national stakeholders are
crucial to prioritization within a broader national
peacebuilding vision.

Secondly, there is an important need to develop a
common institutional understanding within conflict-
torn societies. Institution-building goes beyond
establishing and nurturing organizational structures.
From power-sharing and rotation, and the active
participation of women in decision-making processes,
to the fair distribution of wealth and economic
opportunities, societies emerging from conflict struggle
to rebuild themselves on the basis of new rules of the
game.

Thirdly, it is important to keep in mind that
entities such as the community, community-based
organizations, the private sector and civil society also
represent forms of institutions and are essential to
advancing national reconciliation, restoring trust,
rebuilding the social fabric and generating economic
opportunities in conflict-affected societies.

Peacebuilding is certainly a major challenge for
the whole United Nations system, but how can the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture contribute to
institution-building in post-conflict environments? The
General Assembly and the Security Council tasked the
PBC to focus on, inter alia, institution-building efforts
necessary for recovery from conflict.

I wish to offer a few ideas on how the
Peacebuilding Commission's role could further evolve
in this respect. The Commission's engagement offers a
political forum necessary to facilitate among national
stakeholders the development of their own
prioritization for peacebuilding. The Commission can
encourage the identification of the crucial institutions
and mechanisms needed to make post-conflict societies
more resilient and capable of addressing tensions and
challenges through non-violent means.

The Commission's engagement also provides a
framework for the development of partnerships and
mutual commitments between national Governments
and their international partners in support of national
peacebuilding priorities. The development and
monitoring of its instruments of engagement allows the
Commission to sustain focus on institution-building, to
promote integration and coherence of efforts among
United Nations and non-United Nations actors, and to
help address funding gaps where they exist. As an
advisory body to the Security Council, the Commission
can keep the Council informed of evolving
opportunities for and challenges facing peacebuilding
in countries on the agenda.

Supporting national capacity development for
building, transforming and managing viable
institutions at the earliest stage should remain at the
heart of our collective efforts. In taking forward
relevant recommendations from the 2010
peacebuilding review, the Commission has undertaken

to focus its instruments of engagement on practical
approaches to national capacity development around
critical peacebuilding priorities.

To conclude, I would like to welcome the joint
statement to be delivered by the Chairs of the five
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission later on in this debate. I think that such a
joint statement is a first for this body and testifies to
the efforts to develop synergies among the five country
configurations.

Allow me to add a few brief points in my national
capacity.

First, international support to national institution-
building should be designed in such a way as to
support national ownership, rather than supplant it.
One positive example of this is the phased-out
involvement of international judges and prosecutors in
the Bosnian State Court, which could serve as an
important model in this regard.

In Timor-Leste, we have seen that, while the
development of national capacities went very well, the
early withdrawal of international judges, prosecutors
and investigators was, with hindsight, perhaps
premature. This can teach us some valuable lessons for
the future on how to better sustain the ability of national
actors to continue to fight against serious crimes.

Secondly, we need to understand the term
"institution-building" in a very broad sense. This is the
approach Germany adopts in its bilateral development
assistance. Institution-building, or rather State-
building, is not only about constructing Government
institutions and State capacity; it is about the whole
social fabric of a society and how the State interacts
with its society. Thus, guaranteeing active participation
of women, supporting the establishment of vibrant
social organizations and integrating former child-
soldiers, for example, into their local communities can
all be part of institution-building.

In addition, we must think in medium- and long-
term perspectives. For too long, the international
community has based its approaches on too narrow and
short-term perspectives. Let us face the fact that
building States from scratch takes decades, not years.
One good example of a nationally owned and broad,
long-term institution-building approach is the
institution-building plan of Palestinian Prime Minister
Fayyad - the Fayyad Plan - launched in 2010. It
aims at creating sustainable foundations for a Viable
democratic Palestinian State and focuses on areas such
as good governance, social issues, infrastructure and
economic revitalization.

Thirdly, post-conflict institution-building efforts
should be combined with efforts to build national
capacities in fighting impunity and in vetting human
rights violation perpetrators, especially in the areas of
judicial reform and police and corrections capacities, to
rebuild victims' and public trust in State institutions.
To cite a positive example, Germany funds the
International Legal Foundation's expert day-to-day
mentoring of local lawyers in Afghanistan and the West
Bank, which has led to major changes in the practice of
lawyers, shifts in lawyers' assumptions about their role
in the justice system, shifts in the authorities" views of
the importance of counsel, and the establishment of a
true culture of defence where none previously existed.
Without the involvement of organizations with the
necessary local expertise to build national capacity,
rule-of-law projects fail to develop adequately the
capacities of national justice institutions to strengthen
the rule of law and protect the rights of their citizens.

Lastly, the Security Council should address the
issue of institution-building as early as possible,
especially when mandating, extending or downsizing
existing peacekeeping operations. Germany hopes that,
especially during this phase, the relationship between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission will become closer and more organic.
Germany welcomes the most recent initiatives of the
Council, such as the informal exchange of views
between the Council and the Chairperson of the PBC
country-specific configuration on Liberia, and would
like to encourage more interaction of this nature in the
future. We believe that in this way a more coherent,
comprehensive, effective and timely approach to
institution-building in particular, and post-conflict
situations in general, can be achieved.

In conclusion, we very much look forward to the
soon to be released Senior Advisory Group's review of
civilian capacities and its recommendations regarding a
more effective and comprehensive approach to post-
conflict institution-building. We are confident that the
review will give us valuable guidance on many aspects
that are being touched upon during today's debate.

