Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Let me
join others in congratulating Malaysia on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Let me also express my appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his latest report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409), the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and the representatives of UNICEF and other civil
groups for their insightful briefings.

We welcome the holding of this debate on children
and armed conflict for the second time this year, which
reflects the continuing importance that the Council
and United Nations States Members attach to this
issue. It is also an opportunity to reflect on how best
the international community can lessen the impact of
armed conflict on future generations.

We align ourselves with the statement that will be
made on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) by the representative of Viet Nam.

At this important juncture, the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005), which established the Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
let me express our confidence that, under Malaysia's
able chairmanship, the Working Group will positively
contribute to the ongoing international efforts to end
impunity and ensure accountability, and thus create an
environment in which children are far removed from
armed conflicts.

New challenges have emerged since 2005. As
evidence shows, non-State actors have become more
involved in grave abuses and violence against children
in situations of armed conflict. Hence, the success
or failure of child-protection efforts today depends
primarily on how the issue of non-State actors is
addressed. We believe that, owing to the unique context
of each conflict, it is necessary for the key child-
protection stakeholders in the United Nations system
to work in close consultation with the Governments
concerned in cases involving non-State actors, and that
in accordance with their respective mandates.

Another issue of concern to us is the abduction
of children. We have therefore closely followed the
current discussion in the Working Group regarding
the recommendation in the Secretary-General's report
to expand the tools available to gather information
and report on this issue, which in our view needs
careful consideration by all concerned. As a matter of
principle, protecting children from all forms ofviolence
must be a priority when considering the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

Let me also commend the success of the "Children,
Not Soldiers" campaign in preventing the recruitment
of child soldiers and enhancing public awareness that
children have no place in an armed conflict. The success
ofthe campaign should be replicated so as to deter other
grave violations of children's rights. At the same time,
efforts must be made by the international community
to reduce the impact of armed conflict on children,
with a long-term strategy to lessen past traumas for
the victims and to secure long-term resources for their
successful reintegration and rehabilitation.

The Secretary-General's report on children and
armed conflict is useful in assisting Member States in
determining how to direct limited resources to protect
children where they are needed most. We encourage
closer consultation and engagement between Member
States and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
so as to ensure that, to the fullest extent possible, the
report is based on objective, accurate, reliable and
verifiable information. That commitment is critical to
the protection of children in various situations and must
not be underestimated. In that regard, we endeavour
to seek better ways of establishing engagement and
dialogue, based on the best interests of our children, in
support of that mandate.

For our part, we have consistently remained
engaged with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict regarding the report. We find that dialogue
to be extremely necessary. Indeed, events taking place
in our Kingdom that are mentioned in the report are
duly addressed by the Royal Thai Government, which,
with its sovereign responsibility, has been taking action
to maintain law and order in accordance with Thai
law and the Kingdom's international obligations. We
nevertheless stand ready to develop further dialogue
with the Office in the future in that regard.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating the Kingdom
of Thailand's commitment to combating violations
of children's rights, anywhere and by any parties.
Suffering by children is not acceptable. That must end
immediately, and those responsible must be brought to
justice.

