Mr. Satoh (Japan): Eight months have passed
since the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) was established. We welcome
the progress made throughout East Timor during that
time, thanks in no small measure to the dedicated
efforts of the UNTAET staff under the able leadership
of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who was mandated with
the enormous task of rehabilitating and reconstructing
East Timor virtually from scratch.

This is not to say, however, that the problems
confronting East Timor have been resolved. Indeed,
UNTAET's continuing role in guiding East Timor on
its path to independence will not be an easy one.
Continuous efforts are needed on various fronts,
including national reconciliation and the creation of
employment. The fate of East Timorese refugees in
West Timor, too, still remains a matter of great
concern. In that regard, we commend and support the
efforts made by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

As we reiterated at the second donor's
conference, held in Lisbon last week, Japan remains
determined to extend assistance to the best of its ability
to UNTAET and to the people of East Timor, and hopes
that the international community will likewise continue
to provide support to them.

I would like to add in this context that today's
meeting is extremely important as a means of
maintaining international interest in East Timor. I
therefore pay tribute to you, Mr. President, for inviting
non-Council members to present their views.

Japan, for its part, is also striving to ensure that
East Timor remains on the international agenda. In
December of last year, for example, Japan hosted the
first international donors' meeting, and our Foreign
Minister, Mr. Yohei Kono, who visited Dili in April,
intends to take up the subject of East Timor at the G-8
Foreign Ministers meeting to be held in Japan in July.

Today I would like to comment on a number of
points to which Japan attaches particular importance as
East Timor continues its nation-building efforts.

First, it is essential that East Timor build a
relationship of friendship and cooperation with
interested countries, including its neighbours, in order
to lay the ground for its future independence and
prosperity. In the belief that East Timor's
reconstruction and development efforts could benefit
from the active involvement of countries in the region,
the Foreign Ministers of Japan and of Singapore
recently agreed to collaborate in providing assistance
for human resources development in East Timor. We
also believe that it would be worthwhile for East Timor
to engage in dialogue with its neighbouring countries,
including the members of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN), on regional cooperation.

Secondly, it is important for UNTAET to improve
its public information efforts among the East Timorese
population. It is reported that in the face of massive
unemployment and the slow pace of economic
development, the people of East Timor are feeling
increasingly frustrated. Because that frustration is
sometimes expressed in the form of criticism of
UNTAET, greater efforts are necessary, particularly at
the grass-roots level, to help the people correctly
understand the nature and the limits of the role which
the United Nations can play.

In an effort to bridge that communication gap, the
Japanese Government recently provided funding to
UNTAET to cover the cost of distributing 8,500 radio
sets among the local population.

At the same time, the people of East Timor must
recognize that the nation-building process depends
much on their own self-help efforts. It is up to the
United Nations and the international community to
foster a culture of self-help by involving the local
population directly in their country's nation-building
efforts, with the goal of eventually turning over the
process to the East Timorese. In this regard, we support
UNTAET's policy to seek greater participation by the
local population in the administration and in the
decision-making process.

As we all know, nation-building is a
painstakingly slow and long process, and will have to
continue long after East Timor becomes independent. I
would therefore like to caution against setting the
benchmarks for the attainment of independence
unrealistically high. We must not harbour the illusion
that all of East Timor's problems will be resolved
during UNTAET's time there.

On the other hand, it goes without saying that
donor countries are likewise expected to continue their
efforts. In this respect, we welcome the reaffirmation
of pledges made by donors at the second donor's
conference, held in Lisbon last week. We also welcome
the commitment demonstrated by the donors at the
conference to the timely disbursement of their pledges.
I would also like to stress that it is very important for
donors to give priority to those projects that address the
immediate needs of the East Timorese and that may be
expected to show quick results. Needless to say, the
restructuring of UNTAET which is now being
considered will have to focus on strengthening
UNTAET's aid-coordination function in order to avoid
duplication and to ensure that the assistance extended
by donors is put to the best possible use.

Finally, we must not forget the security
requirements in East Timor. Unless its security is
constantly maintained, efforts for the nation-building
of East Timor cannot proceed smoothly. Fundamental
to ensuring East Timor's security is, indeed, national
reconciliation, and further efforts towards that end are
essential. We were relieved that incidents by former
pro-integration militia members in the border areas
decreased, thanks to efforts by the Indonesian
Government, but certain more recent incidents near the
border raise some concern. We hope that the
Indonesian Government will continue its efforts to
eliminate the security threats posed by these elements.

As East Timor proceeds towards independence,
the local population, donor countries and agencies, as
well as the United Nations and UNTAET, all have
essential roles to play. The Government of Japan, for
its part, will continue to cooperate to the best of its
ability.

