Dato Sri Anifah Aman (Malaysia): I thank
the Russian Federation for convening this meeting.
Malaysia welcomes this initiative, through which we
hope the Security Council can hold constructive and
fruitful discussions on the contemporary conflicts in
the Middle East and North Africa region. Revisiting
underlying causes connected to the seemingly
intractable conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa region at this juncture is a timely initiative. The
region and affected countries and societies are perhaps
worse off today than when those conflicts began.

Your call, Mr. President, for a comprehensive
analysis of the causes of conflicts, for sharing and
exchanging views on possible solutions and for a
reaffirmation of our common commitment to counter
terrorist threats in and beyond the Middle East and
North Africa region is, I believe, a useful exercise for
the Council. Although the scope is ambitious, we are
fully supportive.

Malaysia reiterates its fullest condemnation of all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism and reaffirms
its commitment to combat terrorism in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We strongly reject associating terrorism with any race,
culture or religion.

There is no one-size-fits-all framework in analysing
or addressing the various conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa region. Nevertheless, we may infer
some commonalities to better inform our common
efforts in countering terrorism and violent extremism.

First, due to current political and security instability,
countries such as Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen are
seen as fertile ground by the terrorists. Terrorist groups
exploit the political and security vacuum to increase
recruitment, expand territorial control and smuggle in
weapons. In those cases, terrorism is not the root cause
of conflict but symptomatic of political instability.

Secondly, the presence of terrorist groups in those
and other affected countries has deepened sectarian
divisions, thereby exacerbating political and social
instability. The longer such divisions fester - sowing
discord and fear among the populations - the longer
it takes for the torn social fabric to be mended. Left
unchecked, that will further prolong instability and
serve the terrorists' agenda.

Thirdly, the pre-existing situation of gross human
rights violations and the dire humanitarian predicament
in the affected countries provides a very compelling
narrative for recruitment. While the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters is not new, the current scale
of their involvement in the conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa region is unprecedented.
Furthermore, the terrorists' narrative and
propaganda, particularly by Daesh, is expertly
communicated at a global level through social media
and messaging platforms. To illustrate the pernicious
nature and effects of such messaging, consider
that in Malaysia, a multi-ethnic, multireligious and
multicultural country that is quite geographically
distant from the Middle East and North Africa region,
authorities have arrested more than 100 persons since
2012 who are suspected of linkages with Daesh and for
being or supporting foreign terrorist fighters.

As a further example, a 26-year-old woman, a doctor,
was reported to have left her relatively comfortable
middle-class life to marry a Daesh fighter in the Middle
East whom she had never met and whose language she
does not speak. She even detailed her experiences as
a Daesh "wife" on social media and encouraged other
young women to do the same. In a chilling tweet she
said, "A life without terror is like drinking sea water.
It keeps you thirsty and causes you to be dehydrated."

Against such deeply ingrained extremism, it seems
clear to me that the war must be won not through the
force of arms, but through a triumph of minds, hearts
and wills.

At the national level, Malaysia has intensified
efforts to prevent terrorist groups and cells from
operating in the country, particularly for recruitment
and fundraising purposes. In November last year, the
Government presented a white paper in Malaysia's
Parliament on the threat posed by Daesh and on possible
responses. At the same time, existing legislation
has been strengthened, including on countering and
preventing the financing of terrorism. New legislation
has also been enacted - namely, the prevention of
terrorism act of 2015 and the special measures against
terrorism in foreign countries cct of 2015 i with a View
to addressing the foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon.
A key feature of the prevention of terrorsim act that I
want to share with the Council concerns its provisions
on rehabilitation and de-radicalization. The assumption
underlying those provisions is rooted in the belief that
the fight against terrorism cannot be won through force
or punitive measures alone.

On the social and education front, authorities are
engaging closely with religious and community leaders
to nip radicalization and extremism in the bud, as well
as to disseminate clear and accurate information on the
true teachings of the various faiths and religions.

In terms of capacity for outreach, awareness-
raising and research, we are fortunate to have the
Southeast Asia Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism
in Kuala Lumpur. Additionally, as stated by my Prime
Minister at yesterday's summit on countering the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and countering
violent extremism, Malaysia is actively exploring the
possibility of establishing a regional digital counter-
messaging communications centre.

Malaysia remains convinced that, in the context
of the situation in the Middle East, the threat posed
by terrorism can be effectively addressed by the
international community only if it is prepared to take
a self-critical and unbiased look at the root causes of
terrorism and act to redress grievances, injustices and
gross violations of human rights.

We cannot allow the plight of long-suffering
Palestinians, living under occupation, to be cynically
exploited by terrorist groups and according to their
narrative, couched in terms of good versus evil. In
our view, a just and durable solution to the situation
in Palestine is long-overdue. At this point in time,
prolonged occupation also fuels the terrorist narrative
and may also contribute to radicalization.

Malaysia looks forward to engaging with Council
members on the draft resolution of which the President
spoke about earlier. Malaysia remains committed to
achieving unity ofpurpose and of action by the Council.

In conclusion, I reiterate Malaysia's firm belief
that, in order for the Council to continue to play a
constructive and positive role in conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa region, it must find the will to
overcome differences and speak in one voice.

