Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mariano Fernandez for his briefing.

With support and help from the international
community, Haiti has recently been actively carrying
out post-disaster reconstruction, taking forward the
political process, scaling up its national security and
building institutions, showing considerable progress -
which deserves our recognition. We also note that Haiti
is still faced with grave challenges ahead in
maintaining stability and promoting development -
calling for greater efforts on the part both of Haiti and
the international community. I wish to underscore the
following points.

First, political reconciliation is the key to the
maintenance of peace and stability in Haiti. China is
concerned by the current political situation in Haiti. We
hope that the parties will seize the opportunity,
strengthen unity, enhance mutual trust, settle disputes
through consultations, form a new Government as soon
as possible and consolidate the hard-won gains.

Secondly, post-disaster reconstruction and
development is the central task for Haiti. At present,
recovery and reconstruction is slow. Problems such as
poverty, unemployment, a weakened education system
and poor infrastructure are so acute that they warrant
great attention. The Haitian Government needs to be
better able to bear the primary responsibility for
development, improve governance, attract investment
and create job opportunities. It is also our hope that the
international community will fulfil its assistance
commitments, improve the efficacy of its aid and
provide constructive support to Haiti for its
reconstruction and development.

Thirdly, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) is playing a significant role in
maintaining peace and stability in Haiti. China thanks
Special Representative Fernadez and MINUSTAH for
their efforts and their contribution to the maintenance
of security and stability in Haiti, and it hopes that
MINUSTAH will actively implement its Security
Council mandate and complete its drawdown as
scheduled, while continuing to assist in maintaining
security and stability, taking forward the political
process and strengthening the rule of law and
institution-building.

