Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the assumption by the United
Kingdom of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I thank you for organizing
today's open debate on this important topic.

If one looks at the never-ending list of unresolved
conflicts and the amount of time that this Council
spends annually on debating and seeking resolution to
conflicts, please forgive me for drawing the conclusion
that peace must be boring. Otherwise, how do we
explain the persistent presence of conflicts. Of course,
we recognize the seriousness of this matter and we
therefore want to begin our intervention by highlighting
that for peace to prevail, conflicts should have been
prevented in the first place.

To that end, early warning and intelligence
gathering are most crucial. For those to be successful,
the need for dialogue between aggrieved parties is of
the utmost importance. We recognize that the success
of dialogue is linked to the parties' desire to resolve
conflict. Maintaining peace after such negotiations
would require ongoing dialogue to assist with
reconciling the parties.

Reconciliation has long been recognized as an
essential step that countries must take in their path
to achieve full peace and stability after violence and
conflicts. If we want to ensure that conflicts do not
re-emerge or reignite, some form of reconciliation
between parties must take place. Reconciliation is part
and parcel of any peacebuilding process. Reconciliation
requires that structural injustices in the political,
social, judicial and economic spheres be addressed.
Reconciliation can take different forms, most notably
truth and reconciliation commissions and court
systems. The United Nations has long taken a leading
role in promoting and ensuring reconciliation.

At independence, Namibia faced a daunting task
of reconciliation and nation-building, subsequent to
the collapse of the apartheid system. which thrived on
the principle of divide and rule. Namibia was fortunate
to have had United Nations Special Representatives in
the persons of Sean MacBride of Ireland and Martti
Ahtisaari of Finland, among others, who, together
with the United Nations Transition Assistance Group,
worked tirelessly to bring about an internationally
acceptable transition to independence for Namibia.

My country had to go back to the basics to ensure
that Namibia could enjoy freedom, peace and stability,
while holding hands as "one Namibia, one Nation".
Today we are proud that out of two warring factions
during our liberation struggle, Namibia has succeeded
in integrating those who were fighting on the side ofthe
apartheid South African Government with the People's
Liberation Army of Namibia into one unified national
defence force.

With the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2005, the United Nations further
cemented the importance of peacebuilding and
reconciliation. The aim of the Commission is to propose
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery, to bring together all the relevant actors
and to marshal resources. The Commission notably
advocates for and ensures the inclusion of young people
and women in peacebuilding processes, two essential
actors in peace and reconciliation processes.

However, Namibia wishes to caution that, while the
need to promote dialogue in reconciling parties cannot
be overemphasized, the impact of external parties in
such processes should not be ignored. There are real
dangers that the vested interests of external parties
couldjeopardize reconciliation processes in some cases.

As Namibia prepares to mark 30 years of
independence in March next year, we take pride in the
steps we have taken to ensure our smooth transition to
an independent, free State. With the essential help of
the United Nations and the international community at
large, our reconciliation process has by and large been
a successful one. That success is notably demonstrated
by the fact that we will hold our sixth presidential and
general elections next week.

While some countries continue to be plagued by
conflict and violence around the world, notably in the
Middle East and on the African continent, others are
emerging from them. Reconciliation processes should
form an essential element of any peace process and
should include women. Reconciliation in different
forms allows for wounds to be healed and truth to be
spoken. It remains a fundamental step towards ensuring
a country's peace, security, harmony and prosperity.

