The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representatives of
Liberia and Nigeria, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bull (Liberia)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Ayewah
(Nigeria) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
eighteenth progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia, document
8/1996/684.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l996/70l, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1996/679, which contains the
text of a letter dated 21 August 1996 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Nigeria
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting, on behalf of the Head of
State of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and Chairman of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the final communique of the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States Committee of Nine on Liberia, issued at its
fourth meeting, held at Abuja on 17 August 1996.

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Liberia, on whom I now call.


