Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): At the outset, I should
like to congratulate and thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on the situation in
Somalia. I would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga on his appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. I
thank him for his opening remarks, which provided
further insights into the significant challenges in
Somalia, and assure him of the full support of Algeria
in his new and challenging mission. I should also like
to commend the Secretary-General for producing a
comprehensive and thoughtful report (S/2010/447)
pursuant to resolution 1910 (2010), which provides an
update on main developments in Somalia.

Algeria has always been firmly attached to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation
in Somalia based on respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and national unity. As
a concrete contribution, Algeria provided the logistical
airlift support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) troops. At the International
Conference on Somalia, held in Istanbul in May 2010,
a high-level Algerian delegation participated to renew
my country's commitment towards peace and
reconstruction in Somalia. Algeria also supported the
decision of the African Union summit, held in Kampala
from 25 to 27 July, to deploy additional troops for
strengthening AMISOM.

10-5364]
As Somalia's transitional period approaches its
end, my delegation shares the concern of the Secretary-
General, as highlighted also by his Special
Representative, that the transitional agenda remains
largely unfulfilled. It is time for the Transitional
Federal Institutions to show determination to complete
the transitional tasks. We note the Secretary-General's
assessment in his report that the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) needs to develop credible
Government structures to deliver services to its people.
As suggested by the Secretary-General, we encourage
the TFG to make more effort to implement the Djibouti
Agreement, which should remain open to all Somalis
seeking peace, reconciliation and development.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General's
concern about the substantial resource gaps in United
Nations funding for AMISOM, which continue to
hinder the effectiveness of the Mission and could
discourage potential troop contributors. In addition,
AMISOM. forces should be provided more effective
operational logistics in order to strengthen their
capacity.

We lend our support to an integrated, coherent
United Nations approach to the challenges confronting
Somalia, and welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to take further steps towards establishing an
integrated United Nations presence in Somalia. Algeria
is pleased to note the increased level of coordination
between the United Nations and the African Union.

Algeria considers that responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security lies with
the United Nations. We still believe that the Security
Council has a critical role to play in Somalia and that
the United Nations should provide a stronger mandate
and more resources to those willing to assist Somalia,
particularly the African Union. It is imperative that the
international community provide political, financial
and economic support to Somalia commensurate with
the magnitude of the challenges facing that country.

In conclusion, Algeria pledges its continuing
support for AMISOM, the African Union and the
United Nations in their efforts to bring peace and
stability to Somalia and a prosperous future for the
Somali people.

