Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Ithank
Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto for his
briefing. I am appreciative of the tremendous amount
of work that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has carried out under his
leadership. I listened very attentively to the statements
made by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Saikal, and by the civil society youth
representative, Mr. Bakhtiar.

At present, the political process in Afghanistan
has entered a critical stage. The security situation is of
great concern, and the humanitarian situation is facing
challenges. Peace and development in Afghanistan
have important bearing on the vital interests of the
Afghan people and the security, stability, development
and prosperity of the region. China applauds the efforts
of the Afghan Government to safeguard national
stability, promote national reconciliation and facilitate
economic development. We are appreciative of the
Government's unremitting efforts. The international
community should continue to provide firm support
for Afghanistan.

First, we must provide firm support to ensure that
major elections in Afghanistan are held smoothly.
Afghanistan will hold parliamentary elections in
October and presidential elections in April of next year.
Those will be major events in the political process in
Afghanistan. As electoral preparations enter a critical
stage, all political parties in Afghanistan should
strengthen unity, assume national political stability
as a shared responsibility and resolve differences
through dialogue and consultations. The international
community must truly respect the right of the Afghan
people to choose their own political system and
development path, and provide tailored assistance
to the Afghan Government in order to improve its
governance capacity.

Secondly, we must help improve the security
situation in Afghanistan. The number of civilian
casualties caused by the conflict in Afghanistan
reached a record high in the first half of this year. The
international community should continue to support
the capacity-building of the Afghan National Security
Forces, jointly respond effectively to such threats as
terrorism, transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking and help Afghanistan meet those challenges
through efforts at the regional level. The Taliban
should be urged to respond positively to the Afghan
Government's conditional ceasefire and peace initiative
in an effort to achieve lasting peace and stability in
the country.

Thirdly, we need to pay greater attention to the
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and take measures
to ease the situation. The recent drought has affected
the livelihoods of approximately 1.4 million people in
Afghanistan, thereby exacerbating the already grave
humanitarian situation. The international community
should provide emergency humanitarian assistance to
the Afghan people in terms of, inter alia, industrial
and residential water supply, food and medical care,
and alleviate the humanitarian plight brought on by the
drought. Humanitarian support should continue to be
given to Afghan refugees and their host countries.

Fourthly, we must promote Afghanistan's
economic development and regional cooperation.
Afghanistan boasts rich resources and a strategic
geographical location, and there are broad prospects for
its participation in regional economic cooperation. The
international community, on the basis of Afghanistan's
national development strategy and specific needs,
should help the country to unlock its development
potential and continue to deepen its integration into
regional economic cooperation.

The relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council have positively affirmed
the importance of the Belt and Road Initiative in the
promotion of economic development in Afghanistan and
regional cooperation. It is our hope that all the relevant
parties will jointly promote the development of the
Belt and Road Initiative, strengthen regional economic
cooperation and interconnectivity and help Afghanistan
achieve its economic and social development. We look
forward to positive outcomes at the Geneva ministerial
conference on Afghanistan to be held in November.

China and Afghanistan enjoy long-standing good
neighbourly relations. China hopes that Afghanistan
will achieve peace, security, stability and development
at an early date. The Qingdao Declaration of the
Council of Heads of State of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) reaffirms that the SCO member
States will continue to provide support to the
Afghan Government and its people in promoting the
political process, safeguarding security, advancing
economic development and combating terrorism and
narcotics trafficking.

China will continue to strengthen cooperation
with Afghanistan and other regional countries
through various mechanisms, such as the tripartite
dialogue among China, Afghanistan and Pakistan;
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, consisting of
Pakistan, Afghanistan, China and the United States;
and the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group, in order to
jointly respond to terrorist threats and promote regional
peace, stability and development.

China will continue to help Afghanistan in
leveraging its own strength in its participation in the Belt
and Road Initiative and regional economic cooperation.
China will also promote the complementarity between
the Belt and Road Initiative and other regional
cooperation initiatives. Together with the international
community, China will work tirelessly to promote an
early attainment of peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan.

