Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we congratulate you, Madam President, on the
holy month of Ramadan. We welcome the fact that you
are presiding over this important meeting in which we
are discussing the Palestinian question. This question
is an important, central and sensitive one for both the
Arab and Muslim nations. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his informative briefing. We reiterate
the full support of the State of Kuwait for his efforts to
ease the tensions in the situation, protect civilians and
push for the resumption of the peace process.

We welcome as well the Commissioner-General
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), who
recalled the serious financial pressure the Agency
is experiencing this year in its efforts to continue
providing schools, health centres and many other
services to Palestinian refugees.

We are meeting today a year after the crime
committed by the Israeli occupation forces against
civilian protesters in Gaza on 14 May 2018, which
led to the deaths of 60 Palestinian martyrs, including
children, as well as more than 2,000 injured. It is also
important to note that Palestinian civilians are still
being attacked. We want to reiterate what was said in the
open meeting on this issue last month (see S/PV.8517).
It is important to seriously follow up on the report of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
(A/HRC/40/74) established to investigate violations
committed during protests in the occupied Palestinian
territories in Gaza Strip, with a view to ensuring that the
criminals are brought to justice. Israel, the occupying
Power, is requested to end all acts of aggression against
the Palestinian people and commit to the protection of
civilians and respect for international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, as well as to lifting
the unjust blockade against Gaza.

It is no secret that if we are to establish a
fair, lasting and comprehensive peace through a
negotiating process culminating in the signing of an
agreement between the two key stakeholders, there are
fundamental terms of reference that must be respected,
including the implementation of confidence-building
measures between the parties that not only show a
genuine political commitment to peace but ensure that
they are committed to implementing the provisions of
the agreement.

The Arab countries have reiterated their principled
position of upholding peace as a strategic choice.
That was announced at the Arab summit in Tunisia
on 31 March, at which the participants expressed
their determination to see a resumption of serious
negotiations on a two-State solution as a requirement
for reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
based on international law, relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Today I will
therefore highlight some obstacles that stand in the way
of any agreement or peace initiative.

First, we cannot speak of peace if the Israeli
occupation continues to spread through the confiscation
of land by force. We should point out that the settlements
are still the major obstacle to the achievement of a just
and comprehensive peace. For that reason, on 9 May
Indonesia, South Africa and my country convened an
Arria Formula meeting on the settlements and Israeli
settlers. Such settlement activities, accompanied by
violence perpetrated by the settlers, are on the rise,
and are undermining the possibility of establishing
a viable and contiguous Palestinian State within the
1967 borders. In that regard, we once again condemn
all Israeli settlement activities without legal legitimacy.
We call on the international community to take
responsibility and provide the necessary protection
to the Palestinian people while ending Israel's acts of
aggression, including the recurring assaults made at the
Al-Aqsa compound under the watchful eye of Israeli
forces. These are all flagrant violations of international
law and the relevant resolutions of international
legitimacy, including resolution 2334 (2016).

Secondly, we cannot speak of peace when one
party continues to take decisions on a unilateral basis,
especially since the Secretary-General has warned on
many occasions that unilateral steps and measures can
only undermine the possibility of achieving peace. In
that regard, we reiterate our condemnation of Israel's
decisions not to renew the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron and to withhold part of the
Palestinian tax revenues. That does not just threaten
the financial stability of the Palestinian Authority and
endanger the security of Israelis and Palestinians alike,
as Mr. Mladenov said earlier, it is in defiance of the
Oslo Accords and negates any possibility of ensuring
Israel's respect for future initiatives in favour of peace.

Thirdly, we cannot speak of peace if it is imposed
on Palestinians by force. At its summit, the Arab
League ensured that it would pledge its full solidarity
with the State of Palestine and would not accept any
political or financial pressure with a view to imposing
unjust solutions to the Palestinian question that are not
in line with the main international terms of reference.

Here we also want to recall UNRWA's financial
difficulties just mentioned by Mr. Krahenbiihl, whom
we commend for his efforts and those of UNRWA in
delivering services to the Palestinian refugees. Without
them, the quality of life and future of millions of
refugee children would worsen immediately and bring
more instability to the region. We therefore reject
attempts by Israeli campaigns to end or minimize the
role and mandate of UNRWA and stress the importance
of providing the necessary financial support for the
Agency's programmes and activities. We are pleased to
be able to say that the State of Kuwait is one of UNRWA's
major partners, and that our voluntary contributions
over the past four years have totalled $113 million. We
reiterate our commitment to supporting UNRWA to
ensure that it can continue to provide its services in the
five areas where it operates - the Gaza Strip, the West
Bank, Syria, Lebanon and Jordan.

Fourthly, we cannot speak of peace if that peace
is not based on international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, because it would imply
acceptance of the legality of Israel's actions violating
law, international agreements and customary law. The
current situation and the realities on the ground are
the result of illegal policies and decisions of Israel,
the occupying power, and they are null and void under
international law. In that regard, we note that any
attempts to protect those violations and crimes rather
than holding the State committing them accountable
would undermine the rules and values on which the
United Nations was established and which the Security
Council has also been defending and demanding their
implementation for decades.

Finally, we cannot speak of peace that is not based
on international law. In that regard, we want to point
to the first Arab-European summit, held recently in
Sharm El-Sheikh, at which Arab and European leaders
insisted on their common positions with respect to
the Middle East peace process, including the status
of Jerusalem, the illegality of Israeli settlements
in occupied Palestinian territories and a two-State
solution, in line with United Nations resolutions. They
agreed that this is the only realistic way to bring an
end to an occupation that began in 1967 and includes
East Jerusalem, as well as to arrive at a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace between the Israelis and
Palestinians through direct negotiations among the
parties that deal with all final-status issues.

