Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to begin by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael Keating,
and the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
His Excellency Ambassador Te'te Antonio. I would
particularly like to thank the President of the Federal
Republic of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, who has honoured us with his presence
today. I also thank him for the encouraging news that
he shared with us.

The information provided by the President is
important given the worrying news from Somalia over
the past month. Al-Shabaab has been degraded, which
is good, but the terrorist organization remains active.
Combating Al-Shabaab is a fight against one of the
many manifestations of terrorism, and everyone knows
that fight is very close to our hearts in France. The
fight against Al-Shabaab is a collective one. I would
like to commend the courage and commitment of the
personnel of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in combating that criminal organization.
I would particularly like to pay tribute to the soldiers
who lost their lives in the latest attacks. France, through
the United Nations and the European Union, remains
fully committed alongside the troop-contributing
countries in those efforts. With a View to continuing
to consolidate the progress made over recent years, we
must do more in four areas.

First, AMISOM, which is in the front line of the
fight against Al-Shabaab, in accordance with its
mandate, must conduct offensive operations in the
fight against that terrorist organizationThe situation
on the gournd is complex and the enemy adapts its
strategies as circumstances evolve. In that context, in
order to mount an offensive, AMISOM. must continue
to improve its effectiveness and functioning, thereby
bringing the maximum pressure to bear on the terrorist
organization that is Al-Shabaab.

AMISOM. contingents must act in a cohesive
manner and with a single, clear chain of command,
including shared planning and execution and with better
information-sharing among the various contingents,
which has not always been the case. Resolution
2124 (2013) already called for such qualitative
improvements - an appeal reiterated in resolution
2234 (2015). The declaration by the troop-contributing
countries adopted at the Djibouti summit on 28 February
takes up those varous points. AMISOM. would greatly
benefit from their swift implementation, beginning
with the appointment of a Force Commander, while the
United Nations should once again review the modalities
for logistical support in order to provide better-adapted
and more effective assistance. We therefore call on the
African Union and the troop-contributing countries to
work together to improve the work of the Mission, in
line with its mandate.

I would add that an effective military fight against
Al-Shabaab also requires exemplary conduct on
the part of AMISOM. troops in terms of respect for
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
A military intervention can be successful only if it is
supported by the Somali people. The setting up of the
Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response
Cell should improve efforts in that connection, while
also advancing the credibility and effectiveness of
AMISOM. Similarly, the matter of impunity for some
contingents is also problematic, as it undermines the
reputation of the Mission and makes people on the
ground less likely to embrace it.

But everyone knows that AMISOM. all by itself is
not a sustainable solution and that it is not intended to
stay in Somalia forever. The development of a Somali
security solution will allow us to consider, at the
appropriate time, the drawdown of the Mission and an
exit strategy for the force. That will require the gradual
re-establishment of the authority of the Somali State
over its territory by developing its capacity to ensure
its own security, including that of its security forces.

The role ofthe Somali security forces is particularly
necessary to support the efforts of AMISOM. It is also
necessary to retain the areas liberated by AMISOM. so
that the African Union forces can focus on offensive
actions. The Somali authorities must continually
demonstrate their commitment to this undertaking,
starting by paying their security forces. A number of
bilateral and multilateral international partners are
already active in this area, but their actions should
undoubtedly be better coordinated. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, which has a key
mandate in the coordination of international aid, must
play this role better.

To conclude, I would say that only political action
will permanently free the country from the crisis
in which it has been entangled for for 25 years. This
year is crucial as the election deadlines draw near. We
are encouraged by the progress that has been made
in framework of the National Consultative Forum
and the choice of electoral modalities. Alongside
the preparation of elections, in accordance with the
deadlines, Somali political actors need to demonstrate
their responsibility by completing the federalization of
the country. The development of the Somali security
solution that I mentioned earlier will depend largely on
that eventuality, and it is our shared priority. We count
on all Somali actors to rapidly finalize this project.

France understands the magnitude of the challenges
Somalia is facing, as the level of our collective
commitment demonstrates. Political mobilization must
forthwith consolidate the military gains made in recent
years. We hope that 2016 will be decisive in that respect.

