Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting. We welcome the presence of
the President of Nigeria, the Deputy President of South
Africa and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
Our appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and to Mr. Michel Sidibe, Executive Director
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), for their insightful remarks.

Eleven years after the adoption by the Security
Council of its landmark resolution 1308 (2000), and
following the adoption by the General Assembly of the
2001 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the 2006 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS, this
debate offers us the opportunity to update the
conceptual approach to this issue and take stock of the
progress achieved.

Security conditions certainly influence the spread
of HIV, which has a negative impact on all sectors and
levels of society. It destabilizes the economy and
contributes to the instability of societies. The HIV
epidemic, exacerbated by conditions of violence and
instability, increases the risk of exposure to the disease
as a result of mass movements of people, widespread
uncertainty, reduced access to medical care, and
conflict-related sexual violence committed by members
of armed groups. Populations fleeing conflict areas,
displaced persons or refugees in camp settings are
more likely to be vulnerable.

Peacekeeping operations and their personnel, as
an indispensable tool of the United Nations, can play
an important role in raising HIV/AIDS awareness and
providing means of prevention in post-conflict settings,
because peacekeepers do not operate in isolation from
local communities.

We commend the efforts made by UNAIDS and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations with
regard to the education and training of peacekeepers.
There is a need to further strengthen the process of
voluntary counselling and testing in United Nations-
mandated missions. Training peacekeepers in gender
awareness and child protection and the ability to
recognize and respond to sexual violence and
exploitation will not only influence their behaviour, but
also bring added value to the positive role of
peacekeepers as agents of change.

Member States should be encouraged to
institutionalize the process of the voluntary and
confidential testing of all uniformed personnel and
staff sent to peacekeeping missions and to develop
means of tracking national policies. Given the
sensitivity of this issue, all members of the police and
armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina participating
in peacekeeping operations are tested for HIV/AIDS
and attend pre-deployment training on HIV/AIDS
awareness.

It must be emphasized that in some situations
HIV can negatively affect and be an obstacle to gender
empowerment and the full involvement of women in
peacebuilding efforts. Greater protection of women and
girls has been emphasized through the adoption of
Security Council resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010).

We underline that UNAIDS, the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA), the Department of

Peacekeeping Operations and other relevant actors
should work closely with local communities, targeting
vulnerable groups of persons. They can also be part of
broader activities for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform in
peacekeeping efforts. Addressing HIV/AIDS initiatives
in peacekeeping must be a joint effort involving
Member States, troop- and police-contributing
countries, United Nations agencies and host countries.
Fighting the spread of HIV requires combined
commitment, cooperation, creativity and resources.

An effective response to HIV/AIDS by Member
States requires clear and attainable national strategies
and goals. For that reason, although in the group of
countries with a low HIV/AIDS prevalence, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has developed a strategy to prevent and
combat HIV/AIDS in order to ensure our strategic
response to the growing HIV/AIDS problem in the
world. Post-conflict planning needs to include HIV
programming and to address specific gaps in civilian
capacities.

Complementarity and cooperation among all
United Nations bodies and agencies are necessary.
International actions, such as a response to conflict-
related sexual violence or national efforts to address
the problem of HIV and AIDS, must be better
coordinated and intensified. The responsiveness of
various actors within the United Nations system entails
optimal solutions in order to achieve meaningful and
concrete results. The Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
bodies, such as UNFPA, UNICEF or the World Health
Organization, need to harmonize their activities in that
complex undertaking.

Lastly, I would like to emphasize that HIV/AIDS,
a disease that knows no boundaries, no gender or race,
or even age difference, has become a global concern.
On the other hand, world peace depends not only on
securing borders, but also on securing people against
threats and risks to their security. Through its work, the
Council is undoubtedly committed to seeking solutions
and to addressing the challenges that may arise.
Resolution 1983 (2011) is a clear expression of our
collective will and continuous efforts to enhance the
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security.

