Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): I thank my
British colleagues for calling this important meeting.

We are here today to discuss the use of a chemical
weapon by one Council member on the territory of
another Council member. Let me make one thing clear
from the very beginning - the United States stands in
absolute solidarity with Great Britain. The United States
believes that Russia is responsible for the attack on two
people in the United Kingdom, using a military-grade
nerve agent. Dozens of civilians and first responders
were also exposed. Police officer Nick Bailey was the
first to arrive on the scene and remains hospitalized in
serious condition. Our thoughts and prayers go out to
the Victims of that atrocious crime.

No two nations enjoy a stronger bond than that
between the United States and the United Kingdom.
Ours is truly a special relationship. When our friends
in Great Britain face a challenge, the United States
will always be there for them. Alone, Russia's crime
is worthy of the Council's action. However, this is
not an isolated incident. The assassination attempt in
Salisbury is part of an alarming increase in the use of
chemical weapons. Last year, the North Korean regime
used the nerve agent VX to publicly assassinate Kim
Jong Un's brother in a Malaysian airport. In Syria,
the Al-Assad regime continues to kill its own people
with chemical weapons years after the Council adopted
resolution 2118 (2013) to remove the threat from Syria's
chemical weapons programme. When the Security
Council created a mechanism to investigate chemical
weapons attacks, the mechanism was targeted when it
began to shine a spotlight on Al-Assad's role in killing
his own people.

A growing concern in all that dangerous and
destabilizing activity is Russia. Russia failed to
ensure that Syria destroyed its chemical weapons
programme. Russia put an end to the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism when it found that
Al-Assad was liable for chemical attacks. Russia used
its veto to shield Al-Assad five times last year. It has
also provided cover for Syria at the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in The Hague.

The Russians complained recently that we criticize
them too much. If the Russian Government stopped
using chemical weapons to assassinate its enemies
and helping its Syrian allies to use chemical weapons
to kill Syrian children, and if it cooperated with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
by turning over all information related to this nerve
agent, we would stop talking about it. We take no
pleasure in having to constantly criticize Russia but we
need Russia to stop giving us so many reasons to do so.

Russia must fully cooperate with the United
Kingdom's investigation and come clean about its own
chemical weapons programme. Russia is a permanent
member of the Security Council. Under the Charter
of the United Nations, it is entrusted with upholding
international peace and security. It must account for its
actions.

If we do not take immediate, concrete measures
to address this now, Salisbury will not be the last
place we see chemical weapons used. They could be
used here in New York or in cities of any country that
sits on the Council. This is a defining moment. Time
and time again, Member States say that they oppose
the use of chemical weapons under any circumstance.
Now, one member stands accused of using chemical
weapons on the sovereign soil of another member. The
credibility of the Council will not survive if we fail to
hold Russia accountable.

