The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and
Ambassador Viotti for their briefings on developments
in Guinea-Bissau. It has been several years since the
question of Guinea-Bissau was put on the agenda of
the Council. In recent years, the Government and the
people of Guinea-Bissau, with Vigorous support from
the international community, have made tireless efforts
to find ways and means to restore political stability,
enhance the peace process and promote economic
development. As a result, some progress has been
achieved. Last August, a new Government, headed by
Prime Minister Correia, was formed. Legislative
elections are scheduled to take place in November.
Those events show that people want stability in
Guinea-Bissau; the political situation can be expected
to improve.

China hopes that all parties in Guinea-Bissau will
build upon the election to enhance dialogue and further
increase common ground with a view to consolidating
effectively the process of political reconciliation. The
prolonged political instability in Guinea-Bissau is
rooted in issues of development. The peacebuilding
process cannot be effectively consolidated unless
political reconciliation and economic development can
be pushed forward in parallel. People want peace,
because they want a happy life. They want peace to
take root and they want lasting political reconciliation.
Economic and social development must be promoted
consistently, so that people can feel the benefits that
peace brings to their lives.

We are pleased to see that recently the economic
situation in Guinea-Bissau has been developing in a
good direction. This has resulted from efforts by
Guinea-Bissau itself and at the same time is inseparable
from the support of the international community.
However, Guinea-Bissau has a weak economic
foundation and faces many challenges in the field of
social development. We call upon the international
community to continue its support for Guinea-Bissau in
an effort to combat drug trafficking, create employment
and improve infrastructure. We expect and believe that
with the joint efforts of the Government, all political
factions and the people of Guinea-Bissau, and with
earnest support from the international community, the
process of peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau will
continue to yield positive progress.

Before concluding, we wish to express our
appreciation and thanks to the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau and the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration on Guinea-Bissau for their work. We are
confident that they will be able to make greater
contributions to peacebuilding efforts in Guinea-Bissau.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Guinea-Bissau.

