Mr. Ouch (Cambodia): May I first of all once
again congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I had the benefit of addressing the Security
Council under your able leadership on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in
the open meeting on progress achieved in the area of
counter terrorism. At that meeting I reported on the
vigorous efforts of ASEAN countries to jointly and
individually combat terrorism. It is therefore with
profound sadness that we witness the heinous and
disastrous attacks by terrorists against two ASEAN
member States, Indonesia and the Philippines. I wish to
express my deepest condolences to the Government
and people of Indonesia, the Government and people of
Australia and other countries for the massive loss of
life and deep suffering caused by the attack of
international terrorism in Bali, and also to the
Government and the people of the Philippines for the
terrorist bombings today. We must once again
underscore the importance of regional and international
cooperation against international terrorism.

May I also express my gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his inspiring message delivered yesterday
by the Deputy Secretary-General, Madam Louise
Frechette.

May I also express my gratitude to Ambassador
Dumisani Kumalo of South Africa for requesting this
emergency meeting on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We
fully agree with him that the Security Council is being
asked to consider a matter that has important
repercussions for the entire United Nations. The
maintenance of peace and security lies at the heart of
the United Nations Charter, and the Security Council,
being the main body dealing with collective security,
should be accountable to the entire membership of the
United Nations. As Mr. Kumalo stated yesterday, the
Security Council has to uphold the aspirations of peace
and security for the United Nations as a whole, and not
just for the select few.

The holding of this open meeting of the Security
Council will allow us, the 191 Members of the United
Nations, to express our Views regarding the grave and
dangerous situation in which we find ourselves today.
We should strive for a momentum of peace to prevail in
this grave situation and must at all costs avoid war.

The situation in Iraq has been an issue that has
been the subject of discussion in this body for more
than 12 years now. Nine resolutions have been adopted
that not only called for Iraq to allow inspection and the
destruction of weapons of mass destruction, but also on
the return of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and the return of
Kuwaiti property. We should therefore not lose sight of
the fact that adequate machinery already exists within
the United Nations system to deal with this issue. We
believe that peaceful efforts in the framework of
United Nations mechanisms should be fully utilized
and, if necessary, strengthened. We therefore agree
with the majority of Member States that all avenues
must be exhausted and that the use of force should only
be utilized as a means of last resort. War will have
disastrous consequences and create a humanitarian
disaster of enormous proportions.

We therefore strongly urge Iraq to comply with
all Security Council resolutions unconditionally and in
an unfettered manner. We are pleased to note that Iraq
has responded to the calls of the United Nations
Secretary-General and many Member States, with a
positive attitude in its discussions in Vienna with the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and by sending letters
to the Secretary-General declaring its acceptance of the
return of United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq
unconditionally.

We trust now that the speedy return of the
weapons inspectors is imperative as a means to
alleviate international tensions in this grave and
dangerous situation. Compliance by Iraq with all
United Nations resolutions should allow the sanctions
imposed on Iraq for the past twelve years, which have
caused innumerable sufferings for its innocent civilian
population, to be lifted as soon as possible.

