Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba vigorously condemns the most
recent targeted assassination committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, which claimed the lives of Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin and other Palestinians as they were
leaving a mosque in Gaza. The State terrorism
employed by Israel with modern, lethal weapons of war
knows no boundaries; it must be condemned and must
cease.

This new extrajudicial execution adds to Israel's
long history of aggression, violations of the most basic
human rights and physical and psychological harm to
the Palestinian people. Included among those
reprehensible practices are illegal settlements, house
demolitions, arbitrary arrests, torture, premeditated
extrajudicial executions and the building of a
separation wall on Palestinian lands. In addition, the
Palestinian economy has been suffocated, while Yasser
Arafat - legitimate President of the Palestinian
Authority - is kept in confinement.

Despite the appeals of the international
community, the crisis in the Palestinian territories
continues to worsen, while the number of dead and
injured - the vast majority of them innocent
civilians - rises. According to information provided
recently by the Secretariat on the loss of human life
caused by this conflict, approximately 4,200 people
have died since September 2000. Of those, nearly
3,300 are Palestinians, which constitutes one of the
most massive, flagrant and systematic violations of
human rights in the world today.

The delegation of Cuba reaffirms the need to
respect international humanitarian law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949, relative
to the protection of civilian persons in time of war.
Cuba reaffirms its full support for the cause of the Arab
peoples - particularly the Palestinian people -
against Israeli occupation and aggression, and we
express our deep solidarity with their resistance and
rebellion.

At the same time, Cuba expresses its
condemnation of the suicide bomb attacks and other

acts directed against Israeli civilians - innocent
victims of the spiral of violence brought about by their
Government's policy - while we oppose the

manipulation of such isolated acts to call into question
the exercise of legitimate self-defence by the
Palestinian people and to justify both targeted and
large-scale actions against the Palestinian population.

Violence and the use of force cannot lead to the
solution that the world awaits to a conflict that could
have been resolved many years ago if the Security
Council had acted decisively. In the case of the
Palestinian question, there is clearly a double standard
at work in the Council. Practically half the number of
times that the United States has exercised its veto in
the Security Council - 39 times - it has done so in
relation to the Middle East question. Twenty-seven
such vetoes were directly linked to the situation in the
Palestinian territories under illegal Israeli occupation.
This does not even include the constant threats of veto
that have prevented the adoption of a considerable
number of draft resolutions which were either not
brought to the vote or had been significantly watered
down.

In order to move towards a just solution to the
Palestinian problem, the United States must
immediately suspend its financial support for
aggression and its provision of military supplies to
Israel, which include tanks, helicopters, missiles and
aircraft used against civilians. The deliberate
extrajudicial killings carried out by Israel not only
claim lives, but also dispel any hope for progress
towards a long-awaited peace.

There can be no just and lasting peace in the
Middle East until the Israeli occupation ends; until the
Palestinian people exercise their legitimate right to
establish an independent State, with its capital in East
Jerusalem; until all the occupied Arab territories are
returned and Israel withdraws from Gaza, the West
Bank and the Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967;
until Israeli provocations in southern Lebanon end;
until the guaranteed return of Palestinian refugees; and
until the elimination of the illegal Israeli settlements, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 465
(1980).

