Mr. Salame: Allow me to congratulate the People's
Republic of China on its presidency of the Security
Council this month. I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Council on our work in Libya.

Since my previous briefing, in early September
(see S/PV.8341), the violence in Tripoli finally ended.
In the one month of fighting, over 120 lives were lost,
including those of 34 women and children. As a result
of the ceasefire agreement brokered by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), the
parties agreed to stop the violence. On 25 September,
most of the attackers from outside the city withdrew.

Since then, we have sought to transform a challenge
into an opportunity. We have dedicated ourselves to the
consolidation ofthe ceasefire - on the ground and at the
political level - to minimize the prospect of a similar
crisis. The new security arrangements committee for
greater Tripoli crafted a comprehensive security plan
for the capital that has received the endorsement of
the Presidency Council. Armed group elements will
withdraw from key installations and official buildings,
while reserve forces will be deployed on the edge of the
city. A joint operations centre has been working well to
coordinate that process to move forward.

The implementation has indeed started. Several
armed groups have withdrawn from positions in
ministries and indicated a readiness to hand over
the port and civilian terminal of Mitiga airport to
State control. There is a fragile but palpable sense of
improvement across the capital. The concept that we
have been working on is clear and balanced. While
armed groups from outside the city should not attempt to
invade it again, armed groups operating within the city
must stop using their position to penetrate, intimidate
or control the sovereign institutions. Looking forward,
the city should be protected by disciplined, regular
police forces. Success in the capital is crucial, not only
because it houses most of the Government institutions
and 30 per cent of the Libyan population, but also
because what works in Tripoli can be a model to be
repeated in other cities across the country.

Among the drivers of conflict are the appalling
conditions in the prisons. Hundreds of Libyans and
foreigners are illegally and inhumanely detained and
used to extract ransoms. Some prisons have become
incubators for extremist ideology and terrorist groups.
While the crisis prompted the issuance of a decree
ordering the judiciary to review the files of the
thousands of prisoners who have been languishing in
jail, only 255 of those prisoners have been released.
That process needs to be expedited and the armed
groups must return control of the detention facilities
to the authorities. Prisons that have effectively become
for-profit private enterprises operated by armed groups
under State cover should be immediately shuttered.
The Mission has established a special task force on
prison reform.

The unity of the Council was invaluable in its
support of our efforts to broker the ceasefire. The
threat and application of sanctions to those involved in
violent or criminal action appear to have had a tangible
effect in altering the behaviour of many armed actors.
Impunity must end. The phenomena of armed men
assaulting medical facilities and personnel, extorting
money from financial institutions and women waiting
in line for banking services are immoral, illegal and
criminal. That must cease immediately. That was my
message on Tuesday when I visited Al-Jalaa Hospital
for Women and Childbirth to express the solidarity of
the United Nations with staff, after health workers there
were assaulted by members of an armed gang.

The appointment of a new Minister of the Interior
signalled a decision to seriously engage on security in
a robust and more determined manner. I am pleased to
report that the Minister's first decree was to establish
a human rights unit within the Ministry. There is now
a window of opportunity to address the tremendous
challenges that Libyan security institutions have faced
since 2011, and UNSMIL has seized it. The forthcoming
conference on Libya, to be hosted by the Government
of Italy in Palermo, is an occasion for Member States
to offer tangible support for the training of professional
security forces. I thank the Member States that have
already offered assistance. Libyans should be helped
to turn the page on their reliance on armed groups for
their protection. In the medium term, we should also
contribute to unifying and restructuring a professional
national army and contribute to the Egyptian-led process.

The violence in September reflects the underlying
fragility in the country. The Libyan conflict is in
large part a conflict over resources, and until that is
resolved, stability will remain elusive. Libya is wealthy.
Oil production reaches up to 1.3 million barrels of oil
per day. This country of 6.5 million people has seen
revenues of over $13 billion in the first half of the year
alone. However, those figures obfuscate the truth.
Libyans have been increasingly impoverished, while
criminals employ violence and patronage networks
to steal billions from the national coffers. Ironically,
the violence in Tripoli offered a unique opportunity
to introduce long-awaited and much-needed economic
reforms. On 12 September, a range of economic
measures were launched in order to improve the
living conditions of the Libyan people and reduce
opportunities for militias in the shadow economy.

The imposition of fees on foreign currency
transactions caused an almost 25 per cent drop in
the black-market exchange rate. Closing the gap
between the official and black-market rate reduces the
margin for exploitation. Prices have dropped for basic
goods - sugar, bread, school supplies and second-
hand cars. Many of the long-standing concerns have
been mitigated, with the liquidity crisis receding and
the queues outside banks shrinking. Where there used
to be deficits, the public coffers now enjoy a surplus.

That was only the first step. More must be done to
further normalize the situation and prevent gains from
being rolled back. The phasing-out of fuel subsidies for
direct cash transfers will increase the real income of
poor families while preventing billions of dinars from
falling into the hands of smugglers.

One of the country's underlying dysfunctions is the
division of its main financial institutions. To promote

reunification and financial accountability, UNSMIL
proceeded with the request made by the Presidency
Council to the Security Council on 10 July for a financial
review of the Central Bank of Libya and its parallel
branch in the east. Yesterday, I hosted the second
meeting between Central Bank Governor Al-Kabir and
Deputy Governor Al-Hebri, at which an agreement was
reached on the terms of reference and the way ahead.
Here too, the upcoming Palermo conference could
provide an opportunity to gain more practical support
for establishing a system for redistributing national
wealth to the benefit not of overnight millionaires but
of the entire population.

Security and the economy are two of the three
pillars required for stability. The third is the political
pillar. The Presidency Council's cabinet reshuffle on
7 October ushered in four new ministers. The United
Nations will support further appointments to help
improve the delivery of services and security to the
Libyan people. UNSMIL focus remains on policies,
not on politicians, and on improving institutions,
not on promoting individuals. Efforts to amend the
Presidency Council continue. UNSMIL welcomes the
continued contact between members of the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State, which
started in the meetings UNSMIL organized between
them in the fall of 2017. We shall see ifa true agreement
can be reached.

The Libyan people, the United Nations and the
international community have given the House of
Representatives every opportunity to act in the best
interests of the country, but the House has failed to
uphold its responsibilities. Months after a binding
commitment to producing the legislation required to hold
a referendum on the draft constitution and presidential
and parliamentary elections, no such legislation has
emerged. It is now clear that the postponed sessions
and contradictory public statements have been intended
simply to waste time. The body calling itself Libya's
sole legislature is largely sterile. To both Houses,
elections are a threat that must be resisted at all costs,
but to the citizens elections are a means of liberation
from the ineffective and increasingly illegitimate
authorities. According to our latest poll, which I
received this morning, 80 per cent of Libyans insist on
having elections as soon as possible.

Countless Libyans are sick and tired of military
adventurism and petty political manoeuvres. The time
has come to give a wider and more representative group
of Libyans the opportunity to meet on Libyan soil, with
no external interference, in order to identify a clear
path out of the present impasse, reinforced by a clear
timetable. They want to move forward with the National
Conference, and I agree. That is the way forward. A
summer of tragic events - with terrorist attacks, the
oil crescent crisis, Derna battles and, most recently,
the Tripoli clashes - have compelled us to delay this
important, potentially historic event, which evidently
cannot be organized in times of acute polarization or
armed clashes.

Now, conditions are more propitious. The National
Conference is to be held in the first weeks of 2019.
The subsequent electoral process should commence in
the spring of the same year. The Conference will be
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. It will build on and
develop the contributions of the thousands of Libyans
who participated in the 77 preparatory meetings held
throughout the country and abroad in the spring of
this year. The Conference will provide a platform for
and give voice to the Libyan people. With it, they can
push the Libyan Political Agreement institutions - the
House of Representatives, the High Council of State
and the Government of National Accord - to take the
necessary and long-awaited steps to move the political
process forward.

The Conference is neither intended to be a new
institution, nor is it an effort to replace existing
legislative bodies. Rather, as provided for by the Libyan
Political Agreement itself, it shall create a space for
Libyans to crystallize their vision for the transition and
no longer be ignored by their politicians. International
support for the National Conference recommendations
will be crucial to ensuring its success.

I must now address the situation in the south of
the country, which is becoming ever more precarious.
We are seeing a complete collapse in the provision
of services to the population, rising terrorism and
criminality, rampant lawlessness, threats to the oil
fields and the water infrastructure upon which the
nation relies, foreign armed groups on Libyan soil and
shortages of everything, from fuel to cash and from
medicine to food. The problems are countless and
no State institutions are there to tackle them. Long
ignored and marginalized, and now used as a theatre
for outsiders, resentment in the South is deepening.

We encourage Member States to support the
Libyan authorities in addressing the foreign presence.
The threat posed by open borders has facilitated the
presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), Al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups across the
south of Libya. That threat was again highlighted by
the 29 October ISIS attack on the village of Al-Fuqaha.

We will continue working with the local authorities
to provide humanitarian assistance, and urge the
Government of National Accord to step up its delivery
of services. We would of course welcome the Council's
efforts in that regard. To that effect, this month we
will organize a specific briefing to the international
community on the situation in the south in all of
its complexity.

While the east remains more stable, political, there
are still political, humanitarian and security challenges
there, including the way people coming from Derna are
being treated. By my next briefing, we will have opened
a United Nations office in Benghazi, which will enable
us to better serve people across the east of the country.

I also welcome the Presidency Council's decision
to establish the Women's Support and Empowerment
Unit on 24 October, in line with the Libyan Political
Agreement. This is a landmark development for all
Libyan women. UNSMIL remains committed and
ready to provide support to the Unit, and urges the
international community do the same.

Libya is caught in a futile and destructive cycle,
fuelled by personal ambitions and the nation's stolen
wealth. While it is endowed with great human and
material resources, Libya is fast becoming a tragedy of
lost opportunity. The risks are too high to allow that to
continue. Civilians are being killed in indiscriminate
fighting, terrorists are looking at Libya as a shelter
following their defeats elsewhere, human rights are
violated on a daily basis, and the next generation of
Libyans is being held back from fulfilling its potential.

Despite the complexity of the crisis, the solution
is straightforward. The path to stability requires that
the demands and needs of the Libyan citizens guide
the way and that politicians follow. Together, we must
support the citizens in addressing their institutions,
pressing them to listen and compelling them to deliver
on what is required of them.

Having taught international relations for a good part
of my life, I acknowledge that competition and rivalry
between Powers is normal, and somehow legitimate,
but the reflection of that on Libya is truly detrimental.
Too many use it as an excuse to maintain an unfair
and volatile status quo that impoverishes Libyans and
transforms the country into a source of alarm for its
neighbours and beyond. The unity of the international
community is therefore crucial if we want progress in
Libya's stabilization. The real challenge is to rebuild a
united, legitimate and sustainable State - no less than
that.
