Mr. Hill (Australia): We congratulate South
Africa for initiating this important debate.

It goes without saying that the United Nations,
and particularly the Security Council, plays a vital role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
But the United Nations cannot and does not provide
assistance to every State threatened by conflict or
instability.

Rightly, there is a growing recognition among
States of the important contribution regional
organizations and arrangements can make to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Given
the shared responsibilities and interwoven interests of
their member States, regional organizations and
arrangements are often uniquely placed to respond to
challenges to regional peace and security. Their efforts
should be complementary to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and, as is proper, are
often undertaken in close cooperation with the United
Nations.
But there remains scope to enhance interaction
between the United Nations and regional organizations

and arrangements. Australia welcomes regular dialogue
between the United Nations and regional organizations
and arrangements, including exchanges of information
to avoid duplication of effort, sharing of operational
experiences, joint training and personnel exchanges.

Efforts by the United Nations and regional
organizations and arrangements to maintain
international peace and security must be
complementary and be based on an assessment of
comparative advantage. The United Nations and
regional organizations should share experiences and
lessons learned, not only concerning how to end
conflict, but also concerning how to prevent conflict.
Together, we must develop more proactive strategies
for heading off the likely emergence, or often the re-
emergence, of conflict.

Australia has played an active role in leading
regional responses in our own region - in East Timor,
Bougainville, Fiji and the Solomon Islands.
Participation of regional States, together with United
Nations endorsement and involvement, helps to ensure
the legitimacy of these operations and continued
regional support.

For example, the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) has
assumed a leading role in efforts to return Fiji to
democracy, consistent with the Nasonini Declaration
on Regional Security adopted by Pacific Island Forum
leaders in August 2002. That Declaration committed
PIF States to act collectively in response to security
challenges, including the adverse effects of
globalization such as transnational crimes, and
unlawful challenges to national integrity and
independence.

As a further example, all 16 members of the PIP
have committed personnel to the Regional Assistance
Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI). At their most
recent meeting, in Nadi in October 2006, PIF leaders
agreed it was important for RAMSI to continue,
acknowledging the strong contribution it has made to
the restoration of security, governance and
rehabilitation of the economy of the Solomon Islands.
Endorsement by the United Nations and the
Commonwealth Secretariat demonstrated the wider
level of international support for RAMSI.

In these and other examples, the contribution and
participation of regional personnel result in a level of
ownership and belief in what are regional solutions to
regional problems. The engagement of regional States
to resolve a regional conflict helps to ensure
appropriate treatment of cultural sensitivities on the
ground, as neighbouring States are often more familiar
with the cultural context in which they operate.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Regional Forum (ARF) is the Asia-Pacific's
primary and most inclusive forum for multilateral
security dialogue and cooperation. Australia is
currently promoting within the ARF civilian-to-
military and military-to-military cooperation on
disaster relief. We plan to co-host with Indonesia in
early 2008 an ARF exercise to develop standard
operating procedures for use in regional disaster
response. Australia strongly supports collaboration
between the United Nations and the ARF. We co-hosted
with Malaysia the inaugural ARF Peacekeeping
Experts Meeting in Malaysia in March 2007, at which
the Deputy Chief of the Integrated Training Service of
the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations presented the keynote address.

In this context of our own extensive involvement
in regional organizations and arrangements in the Asia-
Pacific, Australia warmly welcomes the African
Union's commitment to assist in the resolution of
African conflicts. We applaud the AU's significant role
in efforts to resolve a number of serious conflicts,
including through mediation and the provision of
peacekeeping forces in Burundi, Darfur and, now,
Somalia.

The AU should be a priority partner for the
Security Council. Cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU should continue to be enhanced,
including through the provision of capacity-building
support. Individual States and other regional
organizations can also help to build AU capacity,
which will be to the benefit of us all. In today's
globalized world, peace and security in any one
continent has flow-on benefits.

Australia looks forward to working with the
United Nations and other States to share our
experiences and lessons learned in helping regions to
manage their conflicts and to explore ways in which
the United Nations can support regional organizations
and arrangements. We encourage further interaction
among the Secretariat, regional organizations and
arrangements and relevant States to develop those
mechanisms.
07-28766
