Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I would like to
take this opportunity to share with the Council some
observations concerning the two Sanctions Committees
that Italy has had the honour to chair over the past two
years, namely, the Sudan Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) and the
Security Council Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). I will start with the
Sudan Sanctions Committee, and then I will talk about
the Sanctions Committee on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

The work undertaken by the 1591 Sanctions
Committee, on the Sudan, has been quite challenging.
While all the members of the Committee share a
common objective - to bring peace and stability to
Darfur - their understanding of the role of sanctions
in ending the conflict, and of the conflict itself, is
different. That is evident in the fact that, after almost
four years in existence, the Committee has yet to
designate any individual as subject to the travel ban
and the assets freeze. The Council designated four
individuals who are currently subject to the targeted
sanctions. In addition, experience with sanctions has
shown that it is difficult to monitor - and therefore to
enforce - an arms embargo covering only part of the
territory of a country, as in the case of Darfur.
Notwithstanding those constraints, the Committee has
been able to discharge its mandate, which is to monitor,
and not enforce, the measures imposed under
resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1591 (2005).

The Committee has regularly reported to the
Council on the lack of compliance with the existing
measures by all parties to the conflict. It has provided a
forum to discuss the implementation of those measures
and has assessed the reports of the Panel of Experts, as
mandated by resolution 1591 (2005). The direction that
both my predecessor, Ambassador Spatafora, and I
have given to the work of the Committee in order to
achieve those limited, yet important, results has been
based on a constant drive for consensus as the best way
to keep the Committee united on key tasks.

Our work, however, has not been as effective as
we would have liked. In particular, many Panel
recommendations have not been given the desired
follow-up because of the lack of consensus. I Wish the
08-64915
new Chairman a more productive biennium in that
regard. On that point, I have noted with interest
remarks made by some delegations during my last
briefing to the Council encouraging a review of the
decision-making procedures of the subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council in order to better align their work
with the direction given to them by the principal organ.

I wish to thank the members of the Committee for
their active contributions. I also wish to thank present
and past members of the Panel of Experts for having
been the Committee's eyes and cars on the ground,
often under very difficult conditions. My thanks also
go to the Secretariat staff for their sound advice and
accurate drafting. My recommendations for the future
are as follows.

My first recommendation is to also reach out to
other sources of information on Darfur, in particular
within international and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). In that connection, I wish to add
that, last Friday, for the first time since its
establishment, the Committee heard a briefing by an
NGO about information it had gathered concerning
ongoing violations of resolutions 1556 (2004) and
1591 (2005). I hope that such a practice can continue.

My second recommendation is to promote
dialogue with the countries in the region and to explore
further the opportunities provided by the mandate of
the Committee in that regard.

My third recommendation is to ensure liaison
with the mediation of the political process and with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). In that connection, I wish to note
that, while the Council gave UNAMID a mandate to
monitor the arms embargo, the mission does not yet
have the resources to effectively carry out that task.

The rationale behind my three suggestions is that
the Committee does not operate in a vacuum and
cannot remain self-referential. On the contrary, it needs
to be in tune with the other components of the Security
Council's strategy for Darfur, whose common aim is to
bring peace and stability to all Darfurians. As I
mentioned before, despite the differing views on the
role of sanctions, all members of the Committee
strongly share that objective. Building on that common
ground will be the key to the success of the Committee.

I should now like to refer to the 1718 Committee.
As I near the end of my chairmanship of that
08-64915
Committee, I am pleased to brief the members of the
Security Council on that important body.

In discharging its mandate, the Committee was
guided by paragraph 12 of resolution 1718 (2006).
Since 1 January 2007, the Committee, while ready to
meet as frequently as necessary to carry out its duties
effectively, held 14 sessions of informal consultations
at the expert level and one formal meeting.

Owing to keen interest from Member States
outside the Council, but also on the part of many
represented on the Council, the Committee addressed
the issue of implementing subparagraph 8(a)(iii) of
resolution 1718 (2006), concerning the ban on the
export of luxury goods to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. In that connection, on 21 February
2007, the Committee issued a letter to Member States
clarifying that any definition of luxury goods as may
be necessary for Member States to implement that
provision of the resolution would be the national
responsibility of individual Member States. The
Committee also reaffirmed that the measures contained
in subparagraph 8(a)(iii) of resolution 1718 (2006) are
consistent with the objectives of the resolution and are
not intended to restrict the supply of ordinary goods to
the wider population of the country, or to have a
negative humanitarian impact on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. The Committee further
referred Member States to national reports submitted
pursuant to paragraph 11 of the resolution as cases of
national definitions and implementation with respect to
luxury goods.

On 15 March 2007, the Committee issued two
letters in reply to communications received from the
International Air Transport Association and the
Permanent Mission of Uganda to the United Nations,
which had sought guidance on specific cases of
cooperation with the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea after the adoption of
resolution 1718 (2006).

On 20 June 2007, at a formal meeting, the
Committee adopted the guidelines for the conduct of
its work. That document - which was transmitted to
all States for their information and use as necessary
and which was posted on the Committee's web page -
serves as a tool to guide the work of the Committee
and to facilitate the implementation of the measures
imposed by resolution 1718 (2006).
3

In accordance with its mandate, the Committee
continued the process of determining additional items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology to be
specified for the purpose of subparagraph 8(a)(ii) of
the resolution, and of adjusting the lists contained in
documents S/2006/814, S/2006/815 and S/2006/853
through the consideration of amendments proposed by
the members of the Committee.

Paragraph 11 of resolution 1718 (2006) calls
upon all States Members of the United Nations to
report to the Security Council within 30 days of the
adoption of the resolution on the steps they have taken
to implement effectively the provisions of paragraph 8
of the resolution. As of 15 December 2008, the
Committee had received reports from 73 countries and
one organization - the European Union - concerning
the implementation of the resolution. In that regard,
Member States' reports are issued as official
documents of the Committee and are also accessible
electronically on the Committee's website, unless a
State requests that its reply be kept confidential.

In subparagraph l2(e) of resolution 1718 (2006),
the Security Council mandated the Committee to
designate individuals and entities subject to the
measures imposed by subparagraphs 8(d) and (e) of
resolution 1718 (2006) - for instance, targeted
financial sanctions and the travel ban, respectively.
Since its inception, the Committee has received no
request for designation on the basis of the criteria
contained in the two subparagraphs to which I have
referred.

Since July 2007, no information relevant to the
implementation of its mandate has been brought to the
attention of the Committee.

While affirming that the primary responsibility for
implementing the provisions of the resolution rests with
States, the Committee stands ready to facilitate the
implementation of those measures once it is requested
to do so. The Committee continues to cooperate with
Member States and relevant organizations upon
receiving specific requests in that regard.

