We thank the Permanent Mission of Indonesia, as President of the Security Council, for convening today's important discussion under the agenda item "Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace", on the theme "pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace". The briefings by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, former Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation of New York University, have provided us useful insights into the various dimensions of the challenges we face today. We are in the midst of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has caused global disruption on a scale that had not been experienced by this generation. The pandemic is still raging and its implications, though hard to foretell in exact terms, is certain to be profound and multidimensional. We do, however, need to remember that while pandemics can exacerbate the humanitarian consequences of any conflict situation and present obstacles to traditional tools for conflict resolution and maintenance of peace and security, including United Nations peacekeeping operations, COVID-19 is a health crisis with far-reaching economic and humanitarian implications. Ina 9 April Security Council meeting, the Secretary-General outlined several trends related to the pandemic, with implications for conflict prevention. Those include erosion of trust in public institutions, a rise in societal tensions associated with national Governments' response measures, conflicting public health risks posed by the desire of Governments to contain the spread of virus and easing lockdowns in order to soften the impact on economies. Some conflict actors are also exploiting the current climate of uncertainty to press their agendas, including through the spread of misinformation to foment discord and violence and even sponsor opportunistic terrorist attacks. Peacebuilding, as a concept, essentially involves a range of initiatives, including conflict prevention, peacekeeping, reconciliation, institution-building, strengthening democratic frameworks, the protection of rights and development. A combination of several factors is needed to finally ensure the success of any peacebuilding effort. We must use this paradigm to look at peacebuilding in the context of the pandemic. COVID-19 has adversely impacted almost all initiatives that usually help contribute to peacebuilding. In some ways, it has served to exacerbate conflict situations to the extent that we now have to tackle more strife and conflict, as well as a growing humanitarian crisis rather than address some of the other important issues relating to peacebuilding. That is where our current challenge lies. How do we prioritize between various needs? National peacebuilding efforts and attempts to address the various facets of peacebuilding have been weakened by the diversion of national resources to tackle more immediate humanitarian issues of life and death. Opportunities for innovative solutions have also shrunk. For example, the use of digital solutions to bring communities closer together, especially through the sharing of life-saving information on how to survive the pandemic, and the involvement of women and young people to strengthen social cohesion need to be enhanced but require strong international support. COVID-19 has also impacted internationally driven support for peacebuilding approaches due to interruptions in international travel and global trade and decreasing resources of even the wealthiest nations. Consequently, itis important for international players to look at models of international development and humanitarian action that will strengthen not just the national response to COVID-19 but also promote the essential pillars of peacebuilding. When national and international resources are dwindling, prioritization becomes essential. Let us not forget that conflict and violence are the single biggest impediments to development and the fulfilment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). If tensions over scarce food, a breakdown in civic trust or rumours about the virus fuel violence and discord, then the core efforts to curb the spread of the virus will be undermined and progress towards the SDGs will be reversed. According to the Sustainable Development Goals Report 2020, an estimated 71 million people are expected to be pushed back into extreme poverty in 2020. India has been a positive contributor to international peace and security. We are a major troop-contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping operations, including through women peacekeepers. As a responsible stakeholder in global- health supply chains and despite the pressures to guarantee medical supplies domestically, India has ensured timely access to essential drugs, medical services and medical equipment for over 150 countries in order to combat the pandemic. India has also responded to the Secretary-General's demand for an immediate upgrade to the medical facilities of United Nations peacekeeping missions by agreeing to deploy additional medical personnel and equipment to the military hospitals in Goma and Juba, which are affiliated with the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, respectively. Given the context of the pandemic, India has the following ten suggestions to offer. First, our immediate focus should be on ensuring that the humanitarian needs of a community in a conflict are met so that lack of availability of goods and services to fulfil minimum needs itself does not become the basis for greater conflict. Second, national Governments should support and engage local peacebuilders to help design and lead COVID-19 sensitization and response efforts to help mitigate further conflict, prevent violence, adapt and sustain peace processes and rebuild social cohesion. Third, if peacebuilding is to endure then it must rest on institutions and not on individuals. Consequently, the strengthening of national institutions combined with the strengthening of democratic structures should not be compromised in the face of the crisis brought about by the pandemic. It is only when institutions are strong can other factors, like equitably addressing the needs of the communities in conflict and the strengthening of human rights, be effective. Fourth, it is clear that human-centred and cooperative approaches, which are at the core of peacebuilding work, are needed. We also need resilient approaches that can enhance local capacities, skills and attributes, and enable communities not just to bounce back but to build back better. These locally owned, conflict-sensitive, gender-sensitive and trauma-informed peacebuilding approaches are highly cost- effective and sustainable. They must not be sacrificed due to short-term reallocation of funds to what are deemed immediate pandemic responses. Short- and long-term responses to COVID-19 must be aligned. Fifth, donors and international organizations should sustain financial support to and partnership with local peacebuilders during the crisis. They should also provide flexibility for rapid programme redesign, as well as redirection of resources to respond to emergency situations. Sixth, performance in peacekeeping must be ensured. The Secretariat needs to carry out realistic assessments of contingents being selected and deployed in the mission areas. Troop competencies need to be a critical requirement of selection criteria. Troop-contributing countries should guarantee adherence to training plans, including with respect to predeployment and mission training, so that key mission tasks are not left to learning on the job. Seventh, it is of vital importance that our efforts are focused towards preventing a lapse or relapse into conflict. Poverty and lack of opportunity pose some of the most formidable barriers to sustainable peace. Development is therefore critical and should have the attention of the international community. Eighth, ensuring women's participation in peacebuilding is not only a matter of women's and girls' rights. Women are crucial partners in shoring up three pillars of lasting peace: economic recovery, social cohesion and political legitimacy. Gender capacity should be deployed in peacebuilding initiatives, gender-responsive analysis of key issues mainstreamed across mediation work and gender-inclusive language incorporated in peace agreements. Ninth, peacebuilders must mobilize to identify and counter misinformation. Community engagement and effective communication are critical to combatting the "infodemic" of false information that often drives fear and division. Tenth, increased support for psychosocial and trauma-healing programmes during the crisis and through the recovery process needs to be provided. While we are still in the early stages of adapting to the new reality of peacebuilding during a global pandemic, we must build back better to regain stability and spur peace and prosperity in a world that may have been changed forever. Ensuring a strong social-cohesion and peacebuilding focus and learning how societies and institutions recover from a crisis such as this is at the heart of turning the tide on the greatest reversal of human development and making it into a decisive leap forward.
