Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I would like to
start by congratulating Mr. Valentin Inzko for his
assumption of his position as High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and wishing him every
success in his important work. We thank him for his
comprehensive report (see S/2009/246) and insightful
briefing before the Council today. We also welcome
Mr. Nikola Spiric, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the Council
and thank him for his statement.

My delegation has closely followed the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period.
We therefore welcome the positive developments that
Mr. Inzko has identified in his report, most notably the
adoption by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly of an amendment that incorporates the Brcko
District into the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution
and ensures its access to the constitutional court of the
country. We acknowledge the progress that the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina have recorded in
an effort to meet the five objectives and two conditions
set by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC) to expedite the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to the European
Union (EU) Special Representative.

However, we are deeply concerned about the
mounting divisive and nationalistic rhetoric that
challenges the sovereignty and constitutional order of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the actions and statements
by some key actors that challenge the authority of the
High Representative and the PIC Steering Board.
Given the overall fragile political situation of the
country, we are preoccupied by the attempts by certain
circles to keep rolling back previous reforms and
undermine existing State-level institutions.

While reiterating the full support of Viet Nam for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we also note with concern
the recent attempt made by a certain institution to seek
the right to secession. This, in our view, really casts
doubt on its announced commitment to the rule of law
and impedes further progress towards the building of a
secure and stable multi-ethnic State. It also contravenes
the Dayton Peace Agreement, which states that no
entity has the right to secede from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In the light of the ongoing political tension, it is
important for the major political parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to show their flexibility and willingness
to compromise so as to make real progress towards
important political issues. There is also a need for
Bosnian political leaders to translate the 8 November
agreement into concrete actions, including by
addressing the integration of those displaced persons
who cannot return and the issue of compensation for
property that cannot be restored to owners. All that is
even more essential in anticipation of next year's
elections and potential ensuing problems, such as
possible heightened nationalistic rhetoric and reduced
space for compromise, to name just two.

Finally, we commend and support the important
role of the High Representative in facilitating the
implementation of the Dayton Accords and the
adoption of the individual requirements set forth in the
EU Partnership and its Stabilization and Association
Agreement. Viet Nam remains fully committed to
supporting the genuine common efforts of the
international community contributing to building a
secure, democratic and stable multiethnic State in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

