Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to express our sincere appreciation to the Egyptian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today's important meeting.

I also offer my thanks to the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, the Permanent
Observer of the African Union (AU) to the United
Nations, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to the African Union, and the Permanent
Representative of Kenya for their respective briefings.

Indonesia also associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Struggling against colonialism and other obstacles
to development, African nations have had to navigate
a difficult path. Overturning apartheid, the gradual
building of institutions and the launch of policies for
peace and progress were no small achievements. Not
surprisingly, their enterprise as a whole has resulted
in annual economic growth greater than 5 per cent for
over 15 years. Nevertheless, like many other developing
countries, including my own, Africa is still confronted
with many challenges from poverty to natural disasters
and from pandemics to terrorism, as well as issues
related to refugees and transnational crimes. I would
stress once more that these challenges do not belong
solely and exclusively to Africa. Indeed, many other
regions on other continents also face these challenges,
requiring a similar serious, concerted undertaking by
the United Nations and the international community.

Encouragingly, various debates at the United
Nations, including the high-level thematic debate on
peace and security that took place earlier this month,
reflect widespread general agreement and enthusiasm
for the key messages that came out of the recent three
major reviews - of United Nations peace operations,
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. In keeping with that spirit,
Indonesia urges all concerned Member States and
the United Nations system to intensify their focus
on conflict prevention, integration and partnerships,
with a view to resolving conflicts peacefully. In so
doing, it is important to ensure that credible political
solutions be the drivers in the design of peacemaking
and peacekeeping initiatives and that nationally owned
comprehensive efforts in the areas of peace and security,
development and human rights be adequately supported
politically and sustained financially.

A robust regional partnership is what the African
countries have envisioned for themselves. The African
Union together with its mechanisms, in just 14 years,
has shown an impressive depth and solidity. We applaud
all of the members of the AU for enabling it to play
an increasing role in social, political, economic and
security issues.

The African leaders' declaration on achieving a
conflict-free Africa is both commendable and a key
pillar of the AU's visionary Agenda 2063. Many African
mediators and peacekeepers have already performed
admirably in challenging situations. We believe in
the importance of the role of regional organizations
in preserving peace and stability, as they are the ones
that fully understand their respective regions and
their cultures.

As a longstanding friend of Africa and an observer
in the African Union, Indonesia supports the five
thematic priorities of the AU's new road map for the
period 2016-2020 in the framework of the African
Peace and Security Architecture. Those efforts
need the full support of the United Nations and the
international community.

Similarly, in our region Vision 2020 of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations describes a
group of nations that is outward looking and lives
in peace, stability and prosperity in a partnership of
dynamic development and in a community of caring
societies. It has contributed greatly to peacefully
managing disputes, thereby assuring our region's
collective well-being.

Since the convening of the Asia-Africa Conference
in Bandung more than six decades ago, where the first
generation of Asian and African leaders resolved to
chart their nations' destinies based on new solidarity
and vigour, Indonesia has attached high importance
to its relations with Africa. The comprehensive way
forward elaborated at last year's Asia-Africa Summit,
in a declaration on reinvigorating the new Asia-Africa
strategic partnership, outlines important steps aimed
at bolstering the AU in achieving its aims. Among
other things, the 2015 Bandung message calls for
strengthening the roles and capacities of regional and
subregional organizations in the two continents in
areas of peacekeeping, post-conflict reconstruction
and peacebuilding, through enhanced regional, South-
South and triangular cooperation and in accordance
with the principles of impartiality, the consent of the
parties and national ownership and leadership.

Indonesia will continue its unwavering support
to African countries. Our bilateral cooperation and
training programmes in civilian capacity-building
and other fields will expand further. Currently, 1,537
Indonesian troops and police are participating in eight
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa.
The Indonesian National Defense Forces Peacekeeping
Centre, which has already imparted training in
multidimensional peacekeeping and peacebuilding to
personnel from a number of African countries, will
continue to do so.

In conclusion, Africa is facing interconnected
challenges in fully realizing its potential, thereby
requiring an interconnected undertaking among Africa,
the United Nations and the international community.
As a longstanding friend of Africa that has supported
the freedom of its nations since the Asia-Africa
Conference of 1955, Indonesia remains committed to
supporting Africa in achieving its vision of enduring
peace and prosperity.

