Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I join others in thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his valuable briefing. Let me begin by saying that the United Kingdom very much welcomes the establishment of the civilian- led transitional Government in Mali. We commend the decisive action taken by the Economic Community of West African States in response to events in Mali in August and the strong role of the subregion in supporting the progress made since then. The last time we met to discuss Mali, on 19 August, the United Kingdom called for a return to civilian government as soon as possible to deliver for and engage with the frustrations of the long-suffering Malian people. We therefore echo the Secretary-General's call for the transitional authorities to take ownership of implementation of the 2015 Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The 2015 agreement remains the bedrock of building stability and peace in the country. I am pleased to hear from Special Representative Annadif that a signatory group' has_ entered the Government, and I am pleased to hear that implementation of the agreement is a key part of the new Government's mission. But let us be frank - there has simply not been enough progress on the political track since 2015, neither have the former Government and its Ministers nor the signatory groups taken seriously enough their obligations to deliver on that agreement. Meanwhile the people of Mali have suffered and peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have paid with their lives. I therefore wish today to pass a clear message to the new Government of Mali and to all the signatories of the 2015 agreement. There is no time to waste. There can be no more evasion of responsibilities. They must now demonstrate that they are serious - serious about securing the country and serious about providing services to their people who need them, especially in the north and in the centre. I see in the Chamber today the representative of Mali, and I look forward to hearing from him later. He is an excellent colleague and always has important things to say. But I would just like to say to him - and I hope he can report this to his Government - that by our next meeting I hope he will be able to tell us about substantive progress on the following five issues. The first issue is the implementation of the 2015 peace agreement. I do not mean words about an intention to do so, but actual steps in that direction. I want to echo the representative of Estonia's words on the importance of the participation of women. Secondly, concrete steps must be taken to return the State to the north and the centre of the country and to provide services to the people who live there. Thirdly, the catch-up phase of the disarmament, demobilization and _ reintegration process must be completed. Fourthly, reports of human rights violations and abuses must be investigated, and action must be taken against impunity. Fifthly, political, administrative, electoral and institutional reforms must be undertaken to prepare the grounds for elections. None of us expects miracles in three months, but I think we need to see action on all those strands and evidence of progress. We are there to support Mali. The United Kingdom will be following up both in New York and in Bamako. We continue to play our part. Our bilateral spend in the Sahel is now over $100 million a year, which is primarily humanitarian in nature, and, through multilateral channels, we contribute a third of $390 million a year. Furthermore, the United Kingdom will deploy a long-range reconnaissance task force to MINUSMA this year. With respect to MINUSMA, may I just say that we welcome the progress made by the Mission under trying circumstances, including the difficulties and challenges presented by the coronavirus disease. The rationale for mission adaption to increase MINUSMA's flexibility and mobility of operations remains strong. MINUSMA will, of course, continue to have a vital role to play in supporting implementation of all of the points I have just made. But we will look to the Malian authorities, of course, primarily, working with MINUSMA, to reinvigorate the process. Let me end by saying again that we are in the Chamber to support Mali. We are here to support the people of Mali and the Government of Mali. We are here to support the country's transition. But we expect to see tangible progress in the next reporting period.
