Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (interpretation from French):
I am fully aware that the hour is late, and consequently
my statement will be brief. I simply wish to assure the
Security Council that the Burundi regime is fully prepared
to enter into a dialogue with all those groups and factions
that are claiming any rights whatsoever. The Security
Council should thus take account of this solemn pledge
by the new regime.

Secondly, it should be pointed out that the report of
the Secretary-General, which on the whole does reflect
the unfortunate reality, tends to concentrate on the
situation that prevailed before 25 July last. This report
would have been much more useful if it had been updated
so as to include mention of the massacres.

Today, the situation is far from being as alarming as
it was presented and described by a fair number of
speakers.

In this regard, on Friday, 23 August, the
Government published a statement in which it invites the
entire international community, starting with Amnesty
International, to immediately begin investigations of this
monstrous allegation by the representative of Amnesty
International in Burundi. Today I received a copy of a
message sent by the Government of Burundi to the
Secretary-General and to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, inviting them to
increase the number of human rights observers, since the
current Government,

"in the face of the lethal acts of violence of all kinds
which have been perpetrated for three years against
the innocent civilian population",

is firmly resolved to take all appropriate preventive and
repressive measures to end the cycle of violence as soon
as possible. Indeed, it intends to ensure lasting respect for
human rights, integrity and the safety of all human beings
in Burundi. I wish to communicate this to the Council
now, before officially passing the document to you, Mr.
President, or to your successor, the Ambassador of
Guinea-Bissau.

Regarding the mission entrusted to former President
Nyerere, eminent colleagues are often concerned with
defending certain ideas. However, we had also stressed
from the outset, before any external political intervention,
 

that the new regime urged President Nyerere to reactivate
the talks and bring together all the groups and parties
involved in the conflict. In this connection as well, I would
like to assure the Security Council and the international
community that the present regime did not succumb to
begging or" to force. It fully intended to follow that
imperative.

Finally, we might invoke a concept of a celebrated
philosopher, Hegel, who was a compatriot of yours, Mr.
President. He said - and I quote this without the text, but
I think I quote it correctly - that "history teaches us that
man learns nothing from history". This quote is addressed
to certain colleagues and certain speakers who spoke
somewhat critically. possibly in a way rather
disproportionate to the real state of affairs and without,
perhaps, taking into account the history of their own
countries. But as we have had occasion to point it out,
Burundi will certainly be able to resume the true and
authentic democratic process.

