Mr. Liden (Sweden): Today's decision to establish
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) is an important contribution of the
international community to the process of peace and
reconciliation in Sierra Leone. My country gives special
importance to the fact that, in addition to monitoring the
military and security situation and the process of
disarmament and demobilization, the mandate also
includes monitoring respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights.
UNOMSIL will continue and strengthen the
important work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Francis Okelo, and his colleagues, whose
devoted efforts I would like to take this opportunity to
commend.

The strongest imperative now for Sierra Leone is of
course the cessation of hostilities, followed by
disarmament and demobilization. Equally important,
however, is the need for a wider perspective on how to
reach a long-term solution. The emphasis given in the

 

draft resolution to the need to engage in a genuine process
of national reconciliation, reconstruction and rehabilitation
is therefore essential and thus also seeks to address the
fundamental causes of the conflict. The Government of
Sierra Leone should be commended for the actions taken in
this field, aimed at stabilizing the country and strengthening
democratic institutions.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has played an important role in the process
towards peace in Sierra Leone. Its Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) should be encouraged to coordinate its efforts
with UNOMSIL. The joint efforts of the United Nations
and ECOMOG, as a subregional organization, are well in
line with the overall ambition of the international
community to support and strengthen African peacekeeping
capacity.

The continued resistance to the legitimate Government
and the violence perpetrated against the civilian population
by members of the Revolutionary United Front and the
Armed Forces Revolutionary Council are unacceptable.
Sweden strongly condemns the atrocities committed against
the civilian population by the rebels. We urge all parties
involved to respect human rights and international
humanitarian law.

There is also continuing concern about the political
instability in the region as a whole. The recent meeting
between the Presidents of Sierra Leone and Liberia on 2
July was, however, a positive step. We also welcome the
constructive cooperation of the Liberian Government in
supporting the possible deployment of military observers
along the border between the two countries.

The importance of coordinated and comprehensive
action cannot be overestimated. Although the responsibility
lies primarily with the Government of Sierra Leone, the
international community also has a Vital role.

Bearing in mind the grave humanitarian situation,
Sweden welcomes the humanitarian efforts made by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
organizations, despite the limited financial resources made
available to date. In this context, I would like to mention
that, in June, Sweden decided to contribute approximately
$1 million to support UNHCR in assisting Sierra Leonean
refugees in Guinea (Conakry) and Liberia, in addition to
our previous contributions to humanitarian efforts in Sierra
Leone.

