Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Allow me to congratulate
you, Madam President, on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. We have no doubt that it will be a successful
month, and Rwanda pledges to work with you. Allow
me to also congratulate you and your delegation for
organizing this important open debate. Your presence
here demonstrates your sincere commitment to peace
and security on our planet and the value you attach to the
role of national, regional and subregional organizations
in that regard.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his presence here and for the willingness
he has shown to engage with regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union (AU) and
the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), of which Rwanda is a member. I extend my
greetings and welcome to the representatives of the
various regional and subregional organizations who are
here with us this morning. And I would like to take
this opportunity to welcome my colleague Ambassador
Samantha Power of the United States, whom I look
forward to working with.

I fully endorse the statement made by
Ambassador Tekeda Alemu of Ethiopia on behalf of the
Chairperson of the AU, and I would now like to make a
few comments in my national capacity.

This debate is an opportunity for us to exchange
views and focus on how to strengthen cooperation
in maintaining international peace and security.
We believe that while primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security is vested
in the Security Council, the evolving nature of conflicts
and threats to peace and security around the world
necessitates partnership with regional and subregional
organizations for reasons such as geographic proximity,
expediency and burden-sharing.

It is indeed true that regional and subregional
organizations have a significant contribution to make.
Experience has shown that regional organizations
have advantages of local knowledge, proximity and
the ability to mobilize and respond quickly that often
surpass the bureaucratic and procedural processes
typical of United Nations interventions maintaining
peace and security around the world. For instance,
on the African continent, the United Nations and the
African Union have cooperated on several initiatives,
notably the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Mission in Darfur and the African Union Mission
in Somalia. And the Economic Community of West
African States has exercised irreplaceable leadership
in support of the United Nations in Cote d'Ivoire and
Mali. Convincing evidence of regional organizations'
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security has also been strongly manifest in the joint
efforts of the African Union and the United Nations in
Burundi, Ethiopia and Eritrea, the Sudan and, more
recently, in Mali.

Furthermore, the AU, the United Nations, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community
have cooperated as guarantors of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. The ICGLR in
particular was established in recognition of the fact
that political instability and conflicts in its member
States have a considerable regional dimension and
thus require a concerted effort. That subregional
organization has been a major driving force in the quest
for peace and security in the region. We commend its
growing and important role there, and the steps it has
taken to confront the challenges that the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo poses for the region
and the international community.

Outside the African continent, we should recall the
role of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
Cambodia and that of the Organization of American
States in Haiti and Nicaragua, as well as between
Honduras and El Salvador. Although the Security
Council was responsible for arriving at a final settlement
in most of those conflicts, the contributions of both
organizations were remarkable, and helped to make
the case for a greater role for regional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

It should be noted, however, that despite those
significant developments, cooperation between

the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has yet to reach its full potential and
should be substantially streamlined. We encourage the
Security Council to engage with such organizations and
to regularly take the position of the African Union and
its regional economic communities into consideration.
We therefore urge the Council to continue desk-to-
desk dialogues on issues of mutual interest, and to
increase consultations with regional and subregional
organizations on how to take that partnership forward
in a mutual and beneficial manner. We believe that
promoting cooperation between such bodies will
enhance complementarity and lead to effective
coordination, while at the same time minimizing
duplication of efforts.

Mutual respect and open communication are
the foundation of any successful and productive
partnership, especially in the case of complex joint
endeavours such as United Nations-authorized military
interventions, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction activities. We believe that efforts
to improve strategic cooperation should emphasize
ways whereby the Council can interact more regularly
and substantively with the executive representatives of
those organizations on matters that are directly linked
to peace and security in their jurisdictions.

In that regard, Rwanda looks forward to the annual
consultative meeting, scheduled for later this year,
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. In its capacity as Chair of the Ad-hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, Rwanda will also ensure that the Group is
involved in the preparations and follow-up for this
meeting, in accordance with paragraph 18 of resolution
2033 (2012). As has been to some extent the case with
the AU, the Council should consider extending that
practice to other regional organizations and holding
periodic meetings with their representatives for
discussing areas of common interest. Such a practice
would be an important step forward and might produce
other innovative ways to intervene.

I should not, however, underestimate the challenges
related to financial resources and technical capacity
that often compromise the goals and ambitions of
regional and subregional organizations. My delegation
will reiterate its call for enhancing the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing regional
organizations' peace- and security-related efforts. It
is our view that they should be encouraged to assume
ownership oftheir initiatives as much as possible and to
strive for self-reliance. As a partner, the United Nations
should seek to actively assist such organizations in
capacity-building. The announcement by African
leaders in June that they will be establishing a rapid
reaction force, fully funded by African countries
themselves, is a good step in the direction of self-
reliance.
Furthermore, regional organizations have a great
deal of expertise to share with member States and one
another, including in the areas of electoral supervision,
security sector reform, law enforcement, border control
and so on. In the spirit of South-South cooperation,
such best practices could be communicated more
systematically between regions and between countries.
Rwanda has been partnering with the United Nations
and regional organizations and member States wishing
to share its best practices, including those relating to
high-level police expertise with Somalia, Liberia and
Mali; and we stand ready to do so in the future.

In conclusion, I should stress that although
significant progress has been made in improving
mutual cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, it cannot hide the fact that
much remains to be done. It is important to take that
partnership forward, based on a solid strategic platform
that takes into account the comparative advantages of
regional organizations, recognizing that the complexity
of today's conflicts means that no single organization
can effectively address them on their own.

