Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I join
my colleagues in thanking the briefers for the useful
information we heard under this agenda item at the
beginning of the meeting, the scope and diversity of
which were surprising.
Many aspects have been highlighted here with
regard to the current situation in Afghanistan. Egypt
commends the Afghan Government for the major
efforts they made to put together a National Framework
for Peace and Development in Afghanistan. The
international community has welcomed the plan,
which was an important element in the success of the
ministerial-level Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
taht took place at the beginning of October. We also
welcome the commitment displayed by the international
community in order to continue politically and
financially supporting Afghanistan. And we also
welcome the statements made at that Conference with
regard to the intention to provide $15.2 billion between
now and 2020.

We urge the international community to honour
its commitments to support the ambitious reform plan
put together by the Government of National Unity.
In the same vein, we congratulate the people and the
Government of Afghanistan on the positive development
represented by the peace agreement signed at the end of
September between the Government and Hizb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin). We hope that this will be an example
followed by other Afghan factions and that it will lead
to peace throughout Afghanistan.

Terrorism remains the greatest challenge facing
Afghanistan. The Government's efforts aimed at
countering terrorism along with the international
support it has garnered for that purpose is the most
suitable way to put an end to this phenomenon, as
is the case in many regions of the world - be it in
Central Asia or other regions of the world. The ongoing
activities and spread of Da'esh/Khorasan Province in
Afghanistan is a major danger, and we must be relentless
in our efforts to combat it by pooling the efforts of the
international community.

On the other hand, drug trafficking in Afghanistan
is a parallel threat to that of terrorism. The growth of
this problem, as was highlighted in the report of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime published
in October represents a step back in combating drug
trafficking. The figures in the report show that drug
trafficking fuels illegal activities, central among them
terrorist groups and armed militias. It is therefore
essential to encourage international and regional
cooperation in order to fight drug trafficking. In that
regard, we appreciate the convening of the Central
Asian conference on drug trafficking in Afghanistan,
which was recently organized by Tajikistan.

The worsening of the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan in recent months is an additional challenge
for Afghanistan, and the international community must
shoulder its responsibilities and provide adequate
support to the Afghan Government in order to help
it meet that challenge. The report (S/2016/1049) of
the Secretary-General illustrates how serious the
situation is.

Egypt maintains strong, friendly relations with
the people and the Government of Afghanistan. We
are always ready to support stabilization efforts
throughout the Afghan territory and we are always
ready to support the efforts of the Afghan Government
in combating terrorism.

In addition to its efforts to promote development and
improve the living conditions of Afghans, the Egyptian
Agency for Partnership and Development marshalls
coordination among various Egyptian agencies to
respond to the needs of Afghanistan. Our strategic
training programmes for Afghan armed forces and
police are an example of how successful that cooperation
can be, and they fill an important need in Afghanistan
thanks to Egyptian expertise in those areas. That has
enabled us to train 2,567 Afghan police officers. Egypt
also provided LE1 million Egyptian in humanitarian
assistance, in addition to training for nurses, diplomats
and legal experts, as well as assistance for more than 500
Afghani students at Al-Azhar University. Moreover,
we have deployed efforts in Kabul to raise awareness
among the public with regard to tolerance with regard
to Islam. We promote assistance and cooperation in
other areas as well, especially in the field of energy, in
particular renewable energy.

Lastly, Egypt reiterates its support and solidarity
with the Government of Afghanistan in its attempts to
achieve peace and stability. The goal is the same as the
goal of combating terrorism. In that regard, we would
like to express our appreciation and gratitude to the
Ambassador of New Zealand, who chairs the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011).

