Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish to begin by thanking your country,
Chad, and your Foreign Minister for convening this open
debate on terrorism and transnational organized crime.
In particular, we wish to thank you for the initiative
of submitting an important and very comprehensive
resolution - the first on this topic, the content of which
Spain fully endorses.

I also offer our deep condolences to Pakistan and
the victims of heinous terrorist attack on a school
in Peshawar, and to express Spain's solidarity and
willingness to continue working to end the violence and
scourge of terrorism.

I note the reference made this morning by the
Foreign Minister of Luxembourg to the consequences of
such crime on children. Terrorist tactics clearly have a
disproportionate impact on them. In this sense, I believe
it righ to condemn the recruitment and use of children,
especially in the context of suicide attacks. Children
associated with extremist groups should be treated
primarily as victims. Their detention for association,
or sometimes under the assumption of their association
with extremist groups, is certainly worrisme because
they may be exposed to degrading and inhuman
treatment. It is important to be very careful to respect
international standards of juvenile justice.

Unfortunately, terrorism has increasingly
demonstrated its global character and the need to fight it
through international cooperation. This requirement is
even more graphically evident in connection with cross-
border crime. Here, capacity-building is particularly
important because such crime specifically targets
State structures, thereby weakening the principal
actor in the fight against terrorism. Besides being the
principal agent on the front line against terrorism,
the State is also a principal actor in guaranteeing the
human rights of its people, and must never abandon
respect for those rights and the rule of law in its efforts
to address both terrorism and organized crime. State
institutional quality is therefore essential in firmly
meeting the challenges in the field of criminal justice
and in imposing the rule of law against attacks that
may not only strike the law itself but also the officials
responsible for enforcing it.

Even if terrorists do not directly engage in cross-
border crime, their connections are obvious, and often
benefit from the proceeds of crime, immediately or
through transit fees, extorsion or paid protection of
criminals. As stated in the concept note (S/20l4/869, annex) accompanying resolution 2195 (2014), this
scenario enables terrorists to replace the State in
various places and functions.

Since 2012, Spain has signed various bilateral
agreements to combat organized crime, including
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Its
agreements of recent years with Cote D'Ivoire, Moldova,
Panama and Uzbekistan complement the network
of bilateral counter-terrorism cooperation of Spain
with various countries of the Sahel and North Africa.
Beyond the bilateral environment, however, Spain's
national security strategy considers cooperation to be
indispensable in the multilateral arena as an effective
and legitimate framework for combattng terrorism and
transnational crime, including prevention, capacity-
building and the due treatment of victims. This effort
is ongoing. Just a few minutes ago, the Spanish police
detained three young people who had intended to fly
to Syria to join the Islamic State. We work on this
every day, in solidarity and coordination, to meet the
challenges under discussion today.

In the framework of the United Nations, we
consider it essential to maintain an ongoing and
committed cooperation in the framework of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and the
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism (UNCCT).

Under-Secretary-General F eltman this morning
summarized the main instruments that the CTED, the
CTITF and the UNCCT use in the broad context of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida, the Sahel and other regions ofAfrica
or Central Asia. Mr, Feltman also referred to the role of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with
which Spain signed a memorandum of understanding
last year to provide technical assistance for projects to
prevent international terrorism and combat corruption,
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime.

In a statement which Spain fully endorses, the
observer of the European Union has described the
Union's main activities in the fight against cross-border
crime. Here, I will simply note that Spain participates
very directly in the implementation of its counter-
terrorism programme for the Western Sahel, and the
civilian mission EUCAP Sahel Niger, dedicated to
strengthening the capacities of the Niger in the fight
against terrorism and organized crime.

In the context of resolution 2195 (2014), it is also
necessary to strengthen cooperation, particularly with
Africa. Spain does so in projects with the African
Union and the African Centre for Studies and Research
on Terrorism with respect to the continental capacity-
building for preventing and combating terrorism, to
which we have devoted more than $1 million, and to
the Serendi centre in Somalia for rehabiliating former
fighters of Al-Shabaab, for which we have earmarked
€1 million.

Terrorism is a criminal phenomenon that requires
long-term action and unflagging attention. States
face the challenge of being faster than terrorists and
criminals in using technological advances to create
more effective cooperation networks than they do.
Initiatives such as that presented today by Chad and
the resolution adopted today by the Security Council
show the need for constantly updating and adapting our
response to terrorism, which increasingly regenerates
itself and assumes new and diverse forms. I therefore
commend you, Sir, for your country's initiative and
offer my gratitude to the members of the Security
Council.

