Mr. Isakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Guehenno, and Mr. Piot for
their extremely informative briefings.

We attach great importance to the coordination of
international efforts, with a central role being played
by the United Nations, to deal effectively with the most
burning global challenges, one of which is undoubtedly
HIV/AIDS. We believe that consideration of this issue
is appropriate in the context of the peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations. The global fight
against HIV/AIDS requires firm political leadership,
personal commitment and agreed specific measures,
backed up by technical and financial resources. This
was a point well made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Russia, Mr. Ivanov, when he spoke in
September this year at the General Assembly's special
session on the review of the implementation of the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, which had
been adopted at the twenty-sixth special session of the
General Assembly in 2001.

The General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council have already done a lot in elaborating
an effective strategy to react to the spread of
HIV/AIDS. We would also commend the practical
work done in this area, primarily by UNAIDS, and also
by the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the United Nations Population Fund,
the United Nations Development Programme and a
number of other agencies in the United Nations system.

A major role is being played by Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, who is constantly focused on this
issue, who is personally committed and who was
actively involved in establishing the Global Fund to
Combat HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.

From the very beginning, the Russian Federation
has supported the idea of setting up that Fund; we
helped in the organizational and legal arrangements
and in its actual establishment. We have already
contributed $4 million to the Fund and, in December,
we plan to contribute a further $1 million out of the
total amount pledged by the President of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Putin, namely, $20 million.

HIV/AIDS is a serious hindrance to development
for States. This devastating epidemic gobbles up the
resources and potential of countries and has a negative
impact on the overall socio-economic situation, and in
the final analysis, as in the case of any other serious
global problem, it has a negative impact on
international security and stability.

Given this context, overall consideration by the
Security Council of this issue is quite understandable.
The Council considered it in connection with the
impact of AIDS for peace and security in Africa in
January 2000, and in connection with peacekeeping
operations in July 2000.

