The President (interpretation from French): I now
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/1996/596.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Botswana, Chile, Egypt, France, Germany, Guinea-
Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland, Republic
of Korea, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America

Against:
None

Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation

The President (interpretation from French): The
result of the voting is as follows: 13 votes in favour, none
against and 2 abstaining. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 1067 (1996).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.

The events of 24 February - the shooting down of
two civil aircraft by the Cuban Air Force, leading to the
deaths of four persons - prompted a strong emotional
reaction expressed in the Security Council's presidential
statement of 27 February.

Beyond the emotions, two imperatives arose: to
establish the facts and to recall the rules, respect for
which should guarantee that a tragedy of this kind will
not reoccur.

The International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) has already helped to meet these goals. The
report of the investigation undertaken by the Secretary
General of that organization describes the chain of events

 

that led to the incidents of 24 February. Two points have
emerged with particular clarity. The first is that these events
occurred in a context of tension caused by repeated
violations of Cuban airspace in previous months. The
second is that weapons were deliberately used against
unarmed civil aircraft without prior recourse to procedures
that would have made it possible to divert these planes and
avoid the fatal outcome.

The resolution adopted by the ICAO Council recalls
rules applicable to this case. These are those codified in the
Protocol adding article 3 bis to the Convention on
International Civil Aviation. This article lays down the
basic principle of the non-use of weapons against civil
aircraft in flight. It also formulates several principles aimed
at protecting States against the effects of the use of civil
aircraft for purposes inconsistent with the aims of the
Convention. The ICAO Council was right to recall these
rules and to appeal for the ratification of the Protocol
adding article 3 bis.

The resolution adopted today by the Council, which
my delegation supported, is completely consistent with the
results of ICAO's work. It notes a fact that no one disputes:
the shooting down of two civil aircraft on 24 February
violated the principle of the non-use of weapons against
civil aircraft in flight. It also clearly recalls the principle
that every State has complete and exclusive sovereignty
over the airspace above its territory and the principle that
each Contracting State shall take appropriate measures to
prohibit the use of any civil aircraft registered in that State
for any purpose inconsistent with the aims of the Chicago
Convention. The French delegation, moreover, attaches
great importance to the resolution's appeal to all States
which have not yet done so to ratify the Protocol adding
article 3 his and to implement it pending its entry into
force.

The resolution adopted by the Security Council thus
makes an essential contribution to the strengthening and
consolidation of international law, which we hope will
prevent any repetition of events such as those we witnessed
last February.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.


