Mrs. Frazier (Malta): We thank Belgium for organizing this open debate on the role of transitional justice in attaining and maintaining sustainable peace and security by breaking cycles of violence and delivering a sense of justice to the victims and promoting accountability. Malta fully aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the Permanent Observer of the European Union. We would like to add a few remarks in our national capacity. Transitional justice processes and mechanisms are a critical component of the United Nations framework for strengthening the rule of law. They incorporate the key elements of criminal justice, truth-seeking initiatives, reparations for victims and reform of public institutions that serve as our course of action and underpin the practical side of delivering transitional justice. In post-conflict situations, judicial and non-judicial measures that are implemented to redress the legacies of human rights abuses are an obligation. The international community, under the auspices of the United Nations, has a particular obligation to ensure that justice is served. It is imperative that, sooner rather than later, the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity be brought to justice. That is the only way that a transition can really and truly commence and that the victims who have suffered the brunt of the atrocities committed against them can move towards closure. Tragically, impunity for perpetrators of conflict-related violence targeting the most vulnerable in society continues, which is why strengthening accountability for such crimes is crucial. It is the responsibility of all States, in accordance with their obligations freely undertaken under the relevant multilateral treaties, and of the international community as a whole, to address such crimes, protect survivors and bring perpetrators to justice. In that context, we commend the significant progress on international justice made by the International Criminal Court in combating conflict- related sexual violence. Malta supports all efforts to end impunity, including gender-sensitive transitional justice processes and building the capacity of law enforcement and justice systems to handle cases in a gender-sensitive way. The international community has come to understand that transitional justice needs to be an essential part of post-conflict reconstruction, including national transition processes. It is a concept that needs to be tailor-made - avoiding a one-size-fits-all approach - according to which the sensitivities and nuances of every scenario need to be considered. In addition, the principles of accountability for violations of human rights law and of international humanitarian law should be upheld as overarching principles together with international law obligations. Malta believes that cooperation among different international institutions under the aegis of the United Nations is key to identifying appropriate common strategies for an integrated response to post-conflict reconstruction, based on the respective comparative advantages. Against that background, we are pleased that a number of United Nations agencies have already identified how transitional justice can be best served through their work on the ground in those situations. In our view, prosecution is one of the key formal mechanisms through which transitional justice is metedout. Malta reaffirms that prosecution initiatives should be based on the clear principle of combating impunity in compliance with international fair-trial principles. In that regard, the link with the International Criminal Court is crucial. Malta continues to support to the Court as an independent transitional justice agent within the framework of its wider commitment to a rules-based international order. Furthermore, we laud the invaluable work carried out by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda - strengthening the rule of law and bringing justice to thousands of victims, while spearheading the shift from impunity to accountability. Today we have mechanisms that are entrusted with the responsibility of seeking to counter actions that are not in conformity with the principles of justice of international law. We recognize that, in its role to maintain international peace and security, the Security Council is ever more prepared to include human rights, policing, judicial and legal systems and prison system responsibilities in mandates. In that regard, we urge the Security Council to take further proactive steps to ensure that the voices of women and men and girls and boys are heard equally when transitional justice activities take place. As we celebrate 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), achieving gender equality and women's empowerment - in particular by ensuring the full and effective participation of women and girls in all spheres - should become essential prerequisites for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Similarly, States have an important responsibility to protect children worldwide. As we celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention of the Rights of the Child, Malta remains committed to continuing to safeguard the rights of the child and to contribute to efforts to render the use of children in armed conflict a thing of the past. In conclusion, those challenges demonstrate that transitional justice is often the driver of political change. Malta firmly believes that the objective of transitional justice is to signal that impunity cannot triumph and that justice will be served.
