Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to express our appreciation and gratitude to
the Government of the United States, represented by
Secretary of State John Kerry. We would like to thank
the United States for its initiative to convene and preside
over this very important Security Council meeting on
maintaining international peace and security.

This meeting is taking place on the basis of recent
conferences and meetings, in particular the Jeddah
meeting, organized by Saudi Arabia and presided over
by Prince Saud Al-Faisal, as well as the Paris meeting,
presided over by the President of the French Republic,
in which Mr. Laurent Fabius also participated. Those
meetings sought to mobilize the necessary resources to
deal with the terrorist threat and to adopt a different
approach in support of the sister nation of Iraq in its
clashes with the terrorists who have taken control
of vast areas of Syria and Iraq. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant has gone beyond political and
geographical borders and is now a threat not only to the
political stability of the region but also to international
peace and security.

Today, the world faces an imminent threat that is
unprecedented in its savagery and in its capacity to
take root in society and to take advantage of political
and security vacuums and national unity issues within
States for its own purposes for political reasons or
owing to marginalization and division on religious or
other grounds. That threat seeks to establish its own
military and economic position and has given rise to
the situation facing us today.

The situation could further deteriorate if the
international community does not immediately act
robustly and decisively. Resolution 2170 (2014) lays
the groundwork for a comprehensive fight against all
aspects of the threat, in particular foreign fighters
and funding by international groups. In that context,
we support the idea of a Security Council meeting
on foreign fighters, to be presided over by President
Obama. We also endorse the initiative of Bahrain
to organize a conference to address the issue of the
financing of terrorism. We also welcome the Council's
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/20. I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his efforts in
that regard.

Jordan and King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein have
long warned about the possible spread of the Syrian
crisis beyond its territory, in particular to Iraq. The
failure of the inclusive political process in Syria and
in Iraq have therefore given rise to a climate conducive
to that terrorist organization, which moved from
Syria to Iraq, and vice versa. That situation allowed
the establishment of a network of alliances and took
advantage of the vacuums and political consequences
that I have mentioned. That led to its ability to control
large areas ofterritory in Syria and Iraq. Combating the
organization therefore requires an inclusive political
process in order to restore national unity among the
various stakeholders in Iraqi society in line with an
inclusive Iraqi ownership.

In that context, the establishment of a new Iraqi
Government under the leadership of the new President
is an important step. We hope that it will move forward.
We support the efforts of the new Government in Iraq
to fight terrorism. I would like to thank Mr. Al-Jaafari
for his statement and for his briefing on the situation.
Jordan stands by Iraq in its efforts to promote stability
and security and to maintain its territorial integrity.
We call on all Iraqi political forces to participate in an
inclusive political process and in taking decisions, to
preserve the unity of the Iraqi people and to promote
national understanding.

In Jordan, as His Majesty the King has affirmed,
we are working to help combat extremism, terrorists
and their supporters and, in particular, to cut off their
financial sources. We are devoting our expertise and
efforts to deal with such extremism, including through
our efforts in the Security Council to overcome terrorism
and extremism, to promote dialogue among the various
faiths and ethnic and religious groups and to encourage
a better understanding of the noble religion of Islam. I
would like to recall the Amman Letter, issued a decade
ago, which, together with the many meetings in that
context, moved us forward in that direction.

We are all concerned about the fight against
extremism and in its various manifestations and
affiliated groups. We participate actively in regional
and international efforts to combat terrorism and
to deal with extremism. Our action on the basis of
Jordan's national interests and its clear and sincere
position against the terrorism that targets us and has
led to crimes on our territory and against our people.
Restoring peace, security and stability in the sisterly
nation of Iraq directly concerns our own security.

That group has committed heinous crimes against
entities and parts of the very social fabric of the region.
That is an important part of our society. It is dear to
our hearts and has contributed to our heritage and the
nation-building. Islam is innocent of such heinous
crimes committed in its name. Our duty today as a
region and as the international community is to take
immediate measures to put an end to that cancer and
to its poisonous and destuctive thinking before it can
spread further and before it is too late.

