Mr. Prosor (Israel): I want to begin by extending
Israel's thanks to Under-Secretary-General Radhika
Coomaraswamy, who worked tirelessly to protect
children throughout her tenure as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. Although we did not always
agree, Ms. Coomaraswamy provided a unique model
of professionalism and leadership within the United
Nations system.

I would also like to congratulate Ms. Leila
Zerrougui on her appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We look forward to working with
her closely and with her staff to further the important
mission.

In too many corners of the world today, children
are scarred by hate, not sheltered by love. They are
exploited in conflict, not protected by law. They
are targeted with violence, not treated with care and
compassion. In his report (S/2012/26l), the Secretary-
General offers numerous important recommendations
for action. We echo his call on all States to ratify the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. Targeted measures should be put in place
against persistent perpetrators of grave Violations
against children, who are listed in the annexes to the
annual report.

United Nations peacekeeping operations should
incorporate specific provisions for the protection of
children. The consequences of inaction are clear. When
we fail to protect children, we fail to protect our future.
And today, the world is failing to protect the children of
Syria from the guns, tanks and fighter jets of the brutal
regime of Al-Assad.

Over the summer, an 11-year-old Syrian boy
named Ali Adil Sayyid spoke to the German magazine
Der Spiegel. He told the magazine of the night that
Al-Assad's forces massacred his entire family in Houla.
He said,

"I woke up again just before 4 a.m., when men

came into the house. My brother and I were lying

in the living room. When my sister Rasha tried to
run away, one of the men shot her. My brother Adil
was still sleeping when a man shot at him The
man also shot at me, but he didn't hit me. I rolled
over on my side and played dead."

Ali was the only member of his family to survive.
An estimated 20,000 others in Syria have shared the
fate of his family, including thousands of children. The
stories coming out of Syria are a stain on the conscience
of the world. The children of Syria cry out to us. It is
time for the world to hear their call.

I speak before the Council today not only as the
Permanent Representative of the State of Israel, but also
as a father. I am very proud that I have raised my three
children - Lior, Tomer and Oren - in Jerusalem. Yet
they grew up in a reality where abnormality became the
norm. From infancy, they saw that every school, every
kindergarten had to be protected by an armed guard.
After watching them climb onto a school bus every
morning, my wife and I waited with anticipation, until
they had arrived safely at their destination. With every
siren, we felt the same sense of anxiety.

For more than a decade, terrorists in Gaza have been
deliberately targeting our children with rocket attacks
on schools, playgrounds and densely populated Civilian
areas. This month, Israel's children started their school
year with the all-too-familiar sounds of exploding
rockets. Every morning, the parents of southern Israel
wake up not knowing whether their children will spend
the day in a classroom or a bomb shelter. This is the life
that Israeli families live, day in and day out.

The international community cannot accept this
abnormality as a normal way of life. No family, no
child should live under those circumstances. Yet this
Council has not yet uttered a word about those attacks.
The silence speaks volumes. There is no monopoly on
the suffering caused by terrorism. All of the children
in our region suffer. Hamas and other terrorist groups
deploy minors as suicide bombers. They use children as
human shields. They use Palestinian schools to launch
rockets at Israeli schools.

Across the Middle East today, terrorists and
extremists are poisoning the minds of the next
generation, teaching them to hate, vilify and
dehumanize Israelis and Jews. In Gaza, kindergarten
graduations feature plays where five-year-old children
pretend to be jihadists and suicide bombers. This hate,
anger and intolerance have exploded across the Middle
East over the past week. The deadly attacks and riots
outside embassies across the region show the danger
of turning a blind eye to extremism. Those who teach
fanaticism today are creating a tinder box that will
inevitably ignite tomorrow.

The international community has a clear duty
to end this culture of incitement. We need education
that promotes peace instead of hate, tolerance instead
of violence, and mutual understanding instead of
martyrdom. The Jewish philosopher Martin Buber
said that "youth is the eternal chance for the bliss of
humanity". With each new generation, society has the
opportunity to start afresh. With each child, we have
the chance to plant the seeds of a more prosperous and
peaceful future. The United Nations has a duty to plant
such seeds to shield children from the poison of hate
and protect them wherever they are threatened.

