Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me first thank all those around the table, who have worked very hard to achieve tonight's result, in particular our colleagues and friends from Kuwait and Belgium, who have worked very hard for two years to keep the humanitarian mechanism alive. As we sit here, it is night in Idlib. The people there went to bed last night not knowing if they would wake up and continue to receive humanitarian aid. The good news tonight is that they will wake up tomorrow, they will continue to get humanitarian aid and, despite the suffering that they have endured from displacement and the bombings of hospitals and schools, at least the flow of humanitarian aid will continue. The cross- border operations are essential to the provision of aid. We have done everything we can to keep them alive so that those 2.7 million people will continue to receive humanitarian aid. That decision comes, however, at a very heavy price. Tomorrow morning, 1.4 million people in the north-eastern part of Syria will wake up not knowing if they will be able to continue to get the medical aid that they desperately need. Contrary to what our Russian colleague said, it is not possible for the entire population there to get everything from different sources. As our British and French colleagues said earlier, eight to 10 trucks are waiting just outside Al-Yarubiyah to deliver that aid to the population in need - medical aid that maintains the lives of people. I would appeal to the Russian Ambassador and Russia to do everything to see to it that those eight to 10 trucks get through to the people who are in need of that aid. We voted against the oral amendment proposed by the Russian Federation with regard to General Assembly resolution 46/182, for the specific reason that Al-Yarubiyah is not under the control of the Syrian Government and they cannot exercise authority there, and we therefore need the Russians' support. I once again appeal to the Russian representative to do everything so that those people who are now asking if they will be able to get their dialysis treatment and all other medical treatment will be able to get it in future.
