Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his important
briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Selma
Korjenie for the information that she has given us
today. Indonesia would like to assure the Office of the
High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina of its
support in fulfilling its mandate. We also welcome the
extension of the Office's mandate as provided for in
resolution 2496 (2019), which we just adopted.

Though there has been no significant progress
towards achievement of the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative, we hope that it can find a creative
solution that can assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in
addressing the current stagnation on the ground. After
hearing High Representative Inzko's statement, we
are now quite concerned about the issues of genocide
denial, ethnicity rules for representatives elected to the
Presidency, the lack of commitment to the rule of law
and the ongoing absence of municipal elections. I think
these are very bad indicators for progress. I would like
to focus on several points.

The first is the need to put an end to the
destabilizing rhetoric. All parties should refrain
from such rhetoric and statements, which can lead
to nothing but destruction and instability. We are
quite alarmed by the High Representative's mention
of separatist statements, expressions of separatist
tendencies and of course support for the dissolution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a country that highly
values sovereignty and territorial integrity, we find
that very alarming. Such allegations and rhetoric will
only make the tensions even more critical, and it is
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina who will pay
the price. It is the people whom we are struggling and
fighting for in the first place, with a view to making
their lives as peaceful and prosperous as they can be
in the world. Indonesia strongly believes that if the
issue is to be resolved, all parties must use peaceful
means and dialogue. But we need more than goodwill
to start a dialogue. We need sincerity to build trust, not
inflammatory accusations that disrespect previously
agreed policies and agreements. Trust and confidence
can be built only if past agreements and commitments
are faithfully implemented.

My second point is on the implementation of the
rule of law. We support the High Representative's
view on the necessity of maintaining the rule of law,
particularly with regard to the status of the many
unimplemented court decisions. The rule of law
should be respected in order to maintain and further
strengthen the basic structure of democracy. The lack
of commitment to the rule of law throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a fundamental problem that must be
addressed immediately.

My third and last point is unity. Differences in
political views and interests should not cause people
to suffer. We must not forget that our main purpose
is to build a stable and prosperous community, not
the opposite. We have to find strength, stability, and
prosperity in being together. Unity is important, and
although the differences are real, we must act for a
better future. Progress will be a distant prospect until
there is unity in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Indonesia calls on all the parties to respect the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the existing
legislation and the integrity of State-level institutions.
And of course we call on the international community
to continue to help Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve
peace and stability. In that regard we also believe that
regional organizations and neighbours know best what
to do.

I have one question for the High Representative
regarding the concern he expressed about the
possibility of backsliding. The question is what can we,
the Council, do? Does he have a concrete suggestion for
what can be done to avoid further backsliding? I do not
really know, but I wonder whether including regional
organizations, for example the European Union or
other regional organizations in Europe, could improve

stability and peace. That is perhaps another option that
could save more lives.

I would like to conclude by expressing Indonesia's
long-standing support for the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their quest to find a lasting solution
that can accommodate the needs of all stakeholders as
peacefully as possible. There is talk of reconciliation.
Reconciliation is not a choice, but the only option
for achieving peace for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Let us not forget that what our discussion
in this Chamber today is all about is the people.

