Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): As
President of the Security Council for the month of July
2013, the United States was responsible for preparing
the introduction of the draft Security Council annual
report to the General Assembly. We were pleased to
document the Council's work this year.

The draft report before the Council includes
a comprehensive account of all the meetings and
activities of the Security Council, as well as the range of
thematic issues covered during the reporting period. In
summarizing such a large amount of content, we aimed
to strike a careful balance so as to maintain a useful
amount of substance while also keeping the report as
concise and readable as possible.

Overall, we hope that the report will not sit forgotten
in a corner of the Security Council's website, but will
be a useful tool for those interested in reviewing the
Council's work. In drafting the report, we relied
primarily on the Council's monthly assessments, which
are agreed by consensus throughout the year. We
found these to be valuable and recommend that those
interested in more detailed accounts of the Security
Council's work look to these informative reports.
While responsibility for assembling the report
fell to our delegation this year, ultimately the report
is the result of collaboration among Council members.
To ensure that the report accurately and adequately
reflected the Council's work activities and decisions,
the text was reviewed by the States that were members
of the Security Council during the reporting period.
Throughout this process, Council members had the
opportunity to review and reach agreement, and I
would like to express my appreciation to the members
for their assistance. Their commitment and cooperation
were essential to achieving this result, not just on the
report but on the year of work that it describes.

We would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to the Secretariat for the deep institutional
knowledge and invaluable advice it shared as we worked
on the draft.

