Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate.

First and foremost, I should like to welcome
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, in her post as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. She can count on my delegation's
support inthis new undertaking. I should like also to take
this opportunity to thank and commend Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy for her extraordinary work. I wish also
to express my gratitude for the presentations made this
morning and for the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/261), which details the progress made and the
outstanding challenges in this area.

The protection of children in armed conflict is a
matter of great importance to Mexico. Children are the
weakest link of society, and we must therefore spare no
effort to ensure that they are not caught up in the spiral
of violence created by armed conflict.

The Security Council has developed a series of
mechanisms to meet this humanitarian challenge. The
key objective of those actions must be to ensure the
accountability of perpetrators and the non-recurrence
of such acts through an assessment of the progress
made by the parties involved and, where appropriate,
the action taken in the context of international justice.

In that regard, we have before us the verdict
handed down by the International Criminal Court in
March 2012 against Thomas Lubanga, which creates a
positive precedent and contributes to the progressive
development of international case law to deter and
prevent violations of the rights of children.

We have witnessed important successes in this
area. For example, various parties to conflicts have
been removed from the lists contained in the reports of
the Secretary-General, and thousands of boys and girls
who had been recruited by armed groups have been
returned to their communities of origin.

At the same time, we continue to face significant
challenges. We are concerned about the increase in
the number of children maimed or killed as a result
of indiscriminate attacks and through the use of
methods and means of combat that are prohibited under
international humanitarian law.

The Security Council has an array of tools at its
disposal that it must continue to use, in particular in
order to address the challenge posed by of persistent
perpetrators, as indicated by the Secretary-General
in his report. Thus we call on this organ to strengthen
the mandates of peacekeeping operations, political
missions and peacebuilding missions in order to ensure
the protection of children, recognizing the important
contribution made by advisers in the field of child
protection.

We encourage the Security Council Working Group
on children and armed conflict to continue to use all
instruments available to it and to continue to carry out
visits to the field in order to garner more first-hand
information concerning this scourge.

Finally, we commend the work of the four sanctions
committees that have included grave violations of the
rights of children in the criteria for their work, and we
support the recommendation made by the Secretary-
General that the other committees adopt similar
parameters.

We recognize the work of the German delegation
in leading the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and we support the impetus that it has given
to the discussion of the subject. The resolution adopted
this morning (resolution 2068 (2012)) will make it
possible to take stock of the progress achieved and of
gaps in action needed in the field.

However, it is a matter of concern that the Security
Council was unable to draw on the unanimous support
of its members to adopt a resolution on a matter that
has always enjoyed consensus. We regret that the haste
and the inflexibility of a number of States prevented the
resolution from getting the number of supporters and
sponsors that it had garnered on previous occasions.
That is further proof of the urgent need to reform the
working methods of the Security Council in order to
ensure that they are more transparent and accessible
and truly reflect the interests of the international
community.

We express the hope that in the future the Security
Council will be able to continue to work constructively
to meet the legitimate needs of children who are
involved in armed conflicts against their will.

