Mr. Sumi (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
respective Tribunals for briefing us on the latest
developments concerning their completion strategies.
The contribution of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) to the
development of international criminal justice cannot be
overstated.

Today, I would like to touch upon three points,
namely, the completion strategy, cooperation and the
residual mechanism.

First, the completion strategy. Japan had been
strongly urging and expecting the Tribunals to
complete all judicial proceedings by the end of 2010,
in accordance with resolution 1503 (2003). Although
Japan recognizes that proceedings are ongoing, it is
regrettable that the goal of completion could not be
achieved. We would like to strongly encourage the
Tribunals to complete their work expeditiously and
urge them to make all possible efforts to bring their
tasks to completion while continuing to ensure fair
trials.

Regarding the requests of the Tribunals for
extension of the terms of judges, we consider that a
necessary measures in order to accomplish the
completion strategies in an expeditious and cost-
effective manner. Japan therefore is prepared to take
active part in the work on the required measures
together with other members of the Council.

We also take note of the necessity of staff
retention for the success of the work of the Tribunals.
We take this occasion to state our high appreciation of
the Judges, Prosecutors, Registrars and all the other
staff of the Tribunals for their unyielding commitment
to the fight against impunity.

Now I would like to draw attention to the issue of
cooperation, cooperation by States. The arrest of the
remaining fugitives is absolutely essential for success
of the Tribunals. It is regrettable that two suspects
indicted by the ICTY - Ratko Mladic' and Goran
Hadzic' - and 10 under indictment by the ICTR,
including Felicien Kabuga, have yet to be
apprehended. We continue to encourage the relevant
States to cooperate fully in securing the arrest of all
indictees as soon as possible.

The referral of cases to national jurisdiction is
also an important part of the completion strategy.
Among others, we highly appreciate the efforts made
by the Rwandan authorities to realize the referral of
cases.

With regard to the ICTY, cooperation by States of
the former Yugoslavia in areas such as access to
archives, documents and witnesses is also vital. We
take positive note of the efforts made by Croatia
through its task force to further improve the quality of
the administrative investigation in response to the
request of the Prosecutor regarding the missing
documents. We take positive note as well of the
expeditious support by Serbia for the cases before the
court, and the satisfactory support provided by Bosnia
and Herzegovina in response to the requests of the
Prosecutor, including witness protection. We trust that
those States will continue their efforts in that direction.

Now, on the issue of the residual mechanism,
Japan attaches great importance to the rule of law and
considers that impunity in the case of the most serious
crimes must not be condoned and that the individuals
involved must be brought to justice in accordance with
international standards. The residual mechanism of the
ICTY and the ICTR should serve to that end. Japan has
been actively participating in the discussion on the
mechanism in the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, under the chairmanship of
Austria. We appreciate the efforts of the Office of
Legal Affairs, which recently submitted an additional
report on the location of the mechanism. We will
continue to consider actively and carefully the relevant
draft resolution and statute, with a View to their early
adoption.

In conclusion, the present reports of the two
Tribunals will be the last before Japan concludes its
present term of membership in the Security Council. I
would like to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation for the sincere efforts made by the
Presidents, the Prosecutors, the Registrars and all staff
members of the Tribunals, as well as those of Austria in
its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group,
towards the achievement of justice.

