Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

One of the principle problems and challenges facing
the United Nations 67 years after its founding is that it
has failed to profoundly reform the Security Council
into a transparent, democratic and effective body.
Cuba underscores once again that the Security Council
requires comprehensive, urgent and far-reaching
reform. There can be no true reform of the United
Nations until the Security Council is reformed. Council
reform must necessarily include the modification of its
working methods. The changes introduced in recent
years to the working methods of the Council have been
modest and limited. They do not guarantee the genuine
participation of the membership in the work or meetings
of the Council. Most changes have been formal.

The most important decisions, especially regarding
highly topical issues, remain the purview of the
permanent members of the Council and, at times, not
even all ofthem. Most members of the Security Council
have little scope to influence important decisions.
Those of us who are outside the Council have even less.

The open debates that ocassionally accompany
the adoption of presidential statements or resolutions
are mere formalities, and we have repeatedly seen the
Council adopt decisions before all speakers inscribed on
the list have been heard. The Council must act on behalf
of all Members of the Organization, in conformity with
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
requires the guaranteed and genuine participation of
the 193 present Members of the United Nations in its
work and decisions. Cuba reiterates its view that the
following urgent changes must be made to the working
methods, as a minimum.

The number of public meetings must be increased
and become the norm, in keeping with Articles 31 and
32 of the Charter. Closed meetings and consultations
should be held only in very exceptional cases. States
concerned should be allowed to participate in the
deliberations of the Council on questions directly
affecting them, in keeping with Article 31 of the
Charter. Resolutions and presidential statements
should reflect the views expressed by Member States
in public debates. Non-Council members should have
guaranteed access to subsidiary bodies, including the
right to participate in their discussions. The rules of
the Council, which are still provisional after almost
70 years, should be formalized in order to improve
transparency and accountability.

We are concerned by the growing trend on the
part of the Security Council to consider topics and
assume functions that are not within its mandate,
thereby usurping the roles assigned in the Charter
to other organs, in particular the General Assembly.
Such violations of the mandate established by the
Charter of the United Nations must end immediately.
We again urge the members of the Council to review
the agenda of this organ with a view to aligning it with
the functions to be carried out by the Security Council
under its mandate.

The Council must strictly abide by the provisions of
the Charter and all resolutions of the General Assembly
as the principal deliberative and most representative
policymaking body of the United Nations. The Council
must give adequate account before the General
Assembly, presenting annual reports that are truly
analytical, as well as special reports, as called for in
Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter. Unfortunately, such
special reports have yet to be seen.

The question of the veto is intrinsically linked
to that of the working methods of the Council, in
particular its decision-making mechanisms. The veto
is an anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege that
should be eliminated as soon as possible. Until it is,
it will be important as a first step to consider various
options for limiting the use of the veto, such as
restricting it to measures adopted by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter; establishing the option for
the veto to be overriden by the affirmative votes of a
certain number of members of the Council, depending
on the number of members of an expanded Council; or
establishing the option for a two-thirds majority in the
General Assembly to override the veto.

A more transparent Council would be a more
legitimate Council. A more inclusive and accessible
Council that truly takes the opinions of Member States
into account would be a more effective Council. Let us
dispense with the rhetoric and usual ritual in discussing
this important item. We are not lacking ideas or
proposals. What is needed is action.
Let us eliminate once and for all the secrecy and
lack of transparency in the work of the Council and
the exclusion of the vast majority of members of the
United Nations from its work and its decisions. Let us
discuss proposals on reforming the working methods,
such as those reiterated today by my delegation, and
those of the Non-Aligned Movement, which Cuba fully
supports. Let us not delay that exercise any further.

