Mr. Pascoe: Since the Annapolis Conference,
bilateral negotiations between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization have commenced. Strong,
international engagement has been reflected in a
landmark donors conference, a Quartet meeting and a
meeting between the Quartet and members of the
League of Arab States - all in Paris on 17 December.

At the same time, developments on the ground,
including new settlement activity and ongoing
violence, have been a cause of concern. The goal in the
weeks and months ahead must be to generate real
momentum on all aspects of the peace process.

On 17 December, the Secretary-General joined
representatives of 68 States and international
institutions at a donors conference in Paris, which was
hosted by the French Government and was aimed at
securing financial support to the Palestinian Authority
over the next three years. Donors commended the
Palestinian Reform and Development Plan presented
by Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayyad and
pledged a reported $7.4 billion in assistance to the
Palestinian Authority.
We welcome the breadth and depth of donor
support and we commend the efforts of all who were
involved in making the donors' conference a success. As
the Secretary-General stressed, the promise of Paris will
only be realized if all partners - the Palestinian
Authority itself, donors and the Government of Israel -
now exert a common effort. Donors will need to follow
through on pledges, as will the Palestinian Authority on
implementing its reform agenda; Israel will need to ease
significantly restrictions on movement and access. The
four co-chairs - France, Norway, the European
Commission and Quartet Representative Mr. Blair -
have committed to following up on the conference.

On the same day as the Paris conference, the
Quartet met and "reaffirmed the importance of
Palestinian economic and institutional capacity-
building in order to lay the foundation for a viable and
prosperous Palestinian State in the West Bank and
Gaza". (Press release SG/2134, 17 December 2007)

Expressing its strong support for the Palestinian
Reform and Development Plan, the Quartet urged
donors to resume direct bilateral assistance to the
Palestinian Authority and endorsed a final extension of
the Temporary International Mechanism until the end
of March 2008. As I mentioned, the Quartet meeting
was then followed by a quite productive meeting
between the Quartet and members of the League of
Arab States.

In addition to his role in the preparation of the
donor conference, Quartet Representative Tony Blair is
continuing his efforts to secure agreement on and
implementation of joint projects between the
Palestinian Authority and Israel, which are crucial to
bringing about improvements on the ground.

I would like now to turn to the bilateral
negotiations. Pursuant to the Annapolis joint
understanding, Israeli-Palestinian negotiations formally
began on 12 December, in a meeting of the joint
steering committee headed by Israeli Foreign Minister
Livni and Mr. Ahmed Qureia. The Quartet welcomed
this development and reaffirmed its commitment to
remain closely involved and to support the parties'
efforts to conclude an agreement before the end of
2008.

Central to improving the situation on the ground
and to building confidence to support bilateral
negotiations, is action by the parties, in the words of
07-65518
the Annapolis joint understanding, to immediately
implement their respective obligations under the Road
Map. In this respect, we note that on 4 December
tenders were announced for the construction of 307
new housing units in the Israeli settlement of Har
Homa. The Secretary-General reaffirmed the United
Nations position on the illegality of settlements.

Members of the Council will recall that phase one
of the Road Map requires the Government of Israel to
freeze all settlement activity, including the so-called
natural growth. The Secretary-General has received
written protests from the chief negotiator of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, the Secretary
General of the League of Arab States and the Foreign
Minister of Saudi Arabia.

The Quartet expressed its concern over the
tenders, calling on the parties to refrain from steps that
undermine confidence and underscoring the importance
of avoiding any actions that could prejudice the
outcome of permanent status negotiations. We reiterate
the call of the Quartet for both parties to make progress
on their phase one Road Map obligations, including an
Israeli freeze on settlements, removal of unauthorized
outposts and opening of East Jerusalem institutions, as
well as Palestinian steps to end violence, terrorism and
incitement.

In this regard, following the November
deployment of 300 additional security personnel in
Nablus, the Palestinian Authority recently deployed
some 500 armed police officers to the West Bank city
of Tulkarem in an effort to seize unlicensed weapons
and impose law and order. Tensions have risen between
Palestinian security forces and armed militants -
notably in Hebron, where the Governor's house was
recently attacked. This underscores both the progress
being made and the continuing challenges facing the
Palestinian Authority in asserting its control in the
West Bank.

There is a need for support to and reform of the
Palestinian Authority security forces to ensure their
effective performance. Continuing and enhanced
security cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
security forces is also essential. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
obstacles to movement in the West Bank now stand at
563. Construction work on the barrier within occupied
Palestinian territory, in deviation from the Green Line
07-65518
and in contravention of the International Court of
Justice Advisory Opinion, continues.

The insecurity facing civilians on both sides of
the conflict is underscored by figures over the
reporting period: 37 Palestinians were killed and
71 injured by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF),
2Palestinians were killed and 21 injured in internal
violence and 11 Israelis were injured by Palestinian
militants.

The worst violence took place in or emanated
from Gaza, from which 216 rockets and mortars were
fired by Palestinian militants, either at crossings points
or at Israel. We condemn these indiscriminate attacks,
which endanger civilians in Israeli communities
adjacent to the Gaza Strip. They have caused injuries
and damage and disrupted the lives of thousands of
Israelis. These attacks also threaten the safety of
humanitarian workers at the crossings.

The IDF has conducted deadly raids into the Gaza
Strip, targeting militants allegedly responsible for
rocket attacks. Islamic Jihad has threatened to resume
suicide attacks inside Israel. The Israeli soldier Gilad
Shalit is spending his nineteenth month in captivity in
Gaza. Israel continues to express concerns about
alleged smuggling of weapons and materiel into Gaza.
In these volatile circumstances, we continue to urge
full respect by all parties for international humanitarian
law.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
remains of grave concern. The crossings into Gaza
continue to be restricted for people and goods -
though a number of Gazans were successful in leaving
through the Rafah crossing to participate in the Hajj to
Mecca. Only 13 basic categories of food and household
items, medical supplies and some water sanitation
equipment are being allowed into the Strip from Israel.
Reductions in fuel announced on 28 October also
continue.

Cash money is unable to enter into Gaza owing to
restrictions on the import of dollars and other
currencies, except for specified disbursements, such as
the salaries of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the
Palestinian Authority.

Exports from Gaza have virtually stopped since
June. Members of the Council will recall that the
November 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access,
3
designed to ensure a sustainable Gaza economy, set a
target of 400 trucks per day exiting Gaza with exports.
As a measure of the current situation, a total of 77
trucks have left Gaza through Kerem Shalom since
June - 7 left in August with potatoes and 66 in
December with flowers and strawberries. At least 14
Palestinians have died after permission to exit Gaza for
medical treatment was denied or delayed. Without the
resumption of the regular flow of imports and exports,
Gaza's socio-economic and humanitarian conditions
will continue to deteriorate.

I welcome Prime Minister Fayyad's stated
willingness for the Palestinian Authority to man re-
opened crossings, and call on all parties to take up this
proposal with a sense of urgency and responsibility.

Turning to Lebanon, the presidential election
continues to be the focus of negotiations among
Lebanese political leaders. There appears to be
agreement in principle on the candidature of General
Michel Suleiman for the presidency. However, the
parties remain deeply divided on the next steps to bring
about the election of General Suleiman, who is
currently serving as the Commander of the Lebanese
Army. The Lebanese Constitution requires that two
years lapse before a State official can be elected
president - and of course that would have to be
changed.

The opposition has stated that there must first be
agreement on the composition of the new Government
before the Parliament can meet to elect General
Suleiman as President. The 14 March Coalition
maintains that any such agreement should come after
the election of the president. Despite several initiatives
and efforts by various parties to break the deadlock, the
Lebanese have yet to reach agreement on that issue. As
a result, and since the last briefing of the Council, there
have been further postponements to the parliamentary
session to elect the new president. The next session is
currently scheduled for 22 December.

The Secretary-General and his representatives in
the region have been in close contact with Lebanese
leaders, and more broadly with regional and
international leaders, to try to find a solution to the
prolonged political crisis. On 17 December, while in
Paris for the Palestinian donor conference, the
Secretary-General called a meeting on Lebanon
attended by representatives of Egypt, France, Italy,
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Spain, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Kingdom, the United States, the European
Union, the European Commission and the European
Council. The statement following that meeting
reaffirmed strong and non-negotiable support for
Lebanon and its people. It urged that Parliament be
allowed to convene immediately to fulfil its
constitutional duties and insisted that outside Powers
act in compliance with the decisions of the Security
Council and fully respect Lebanon's Constitution and
democratic institutions.

The ongoing lack of agreement and the resultant
constitutional void are matters of great concern. The
current situation is dangerous and unsustainable. It is
of fundamental importance for the Lebanese State that
all Lebanese leaders seek a solution that enables
presidential elections to take place immediately. That is
all the more necessary given the continuing attacks on
Lebanon's sovereignty and stability, most recently
illustrated by the brutal assassination of General
Francois el-Hajj of the Lebanese Armed Forces.

In South Lebanon, the situation has remained
calm. However, an increased number of Israeli air
violations were recorded at the end of November. As
noted in last month's briefing, overflights are
violations of resolution 1701 (2006), and also
undermine the credibility of both the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed
Forces. In addition, the request for the Israel Defense
Forces to provide technical strike data on cluster
munitions is still pending.

The next few months are critical for the renewed
peace process between Israel and the Palestinians.
Solid progress will be essential in the bilateral
negotiations. That, however, is unlikely to be achieved
or to be sustainable without serious improvements on
the ground. Donors must follow through on their
commendable Paris commitments, and the parties must
act to fulfil their responsibilities so that a new climate
of confidence, security and physical mobility is
established.

The Quartet envoys will continue to meet to take
stock of the situation in the important period ahead,
and the Quartet principals have agreed to meet
regularly in 2008 to review progress and provide
support for the parties' efforts. It will also be essential
for the Quartet and Arab League partners to remain in
close contact to support the bilateral process and to
coordinate closely regarding the broader regional
dimensions of peace, bearing in mind the importance
of the Arab peace initiative. The Secretary-General and
the United Nations will continue to work for a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
based on Security Council resolutions.

