Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman and United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein
for their contributions to this debate.

Serious and grave violations of human rights serve
as a warning sign ofinstability and conflict, especially
in the absence of accountability for such violations.
Human rights violations of the type and scale that we
are witnessing in North Korea have an impact well
beyond the country in which they are committed.
Lithuania therefore decided to be part of the group
of nine Security Council members that called for this
public meeting on the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The threat to international peace and security
posed by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has not been limited to its clandestine nuclear weapons
and ballistic missile programmes and proliferation
activities. The threat also stems from the massive and
atrocious violations of human rights of its own people.
The scale and gravity of the human rights violations
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as
detailed in the 2014 report of the Human Rights
Council on human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (S/2014/276, annex), gives no room
to argue with its judgement - the Government of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has manifestly
failed to comply with the responsibility to protect
its own people, and international action is required.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea, a State
Member of the United Nations, has for decades pursued
policies involving crimes that shock the conscience of
humankind. The international community must accept
its responsibility to protect the people of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. To remain silent in the face
of gruesome crimes would amount to condoning them.
Those responsible for that nightmare must be brought to
justice for their actions. The situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea should be referred to the
International Criminal Court. We also believe that the
Security Council should consider imposing targeted
sanctions against those in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea who are responsible for crimes
against humanity.

The millions ofpeople who suffer under the regime
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea deserve
to have their plight and their human rights violations
known. The United Nations and its partners should
ensure coherent and well-coordinated strategies to
address such violations. The Security Council should
consider the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea as a regular item on its
formal agenda. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Seoul should
continue to collect information on the ongoing human
right violations.

We urge the authorities of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to engage without delay with the
United Nations representatives and international
interlocutors, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur. Such
engagement should be followed by concrete action,
including acknowledging the existence of human rights
violations, allowing unimpeded access to international
human rights and humanitarian organizations and
starting the implementation of the recommendations of
the commission of inquiry.

To conclude, let me reiterate the conclusion by
the commission of inquiry that the crimes against
humanity in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
will continue as long as the policies, institutions and
patterns of impunity that lie at their heart remain in
place. The Security Council should therefore demand
that the authorities of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea implement the recommendations by the
commission of inquiry without delay.

