Mrs. Arce de Jeannet (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Mexico is very honoured
by the presence of the various Ministers from the
Central African region who have participated with us
in today's debate on strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations system and the Central African
region in the maintenance of peace and security. Those
Ministers' statements should be the object of thought
and study for all Council members.

The Strategic Partnership for Lasting Peace is an
initiative that Mexico has been promoting in the
Security Council with a view to consolidating the
activities of the various bodies and organizations of the
United Nations. The Partnership might even be applied
outside the United Nations system and might help to
improve the Organization's cooperation with other
regional and subregional agencies involved in conflict
settlement and in the promotion of economic
development.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is recognized in Chapter VIII of
the Charter. Proper interaction among these bodies
ensures not only better knowledge of the situation on
the ground, but also a strategy that is commensurate
with needs. In Central Africa, a region that has been
continually afflicted by war and violence, urgent action
is required on the part of Governments themselves,
subregional bodies and the United Nations system,
based on a strategic pooling of efforts to establish and
build peace.

Peace-building in Central Africa requires
attention in at least three principal respects: first,
conflict settlement, or peacemaking; secondly, the
promotion of economic development and institution-
building; and thirdly, conflict prevention, or addressing
and eradicating the causes of conflicts. All that should
be based on the concept of strategic partnership in
order to guarantee positive results.

Despite the vast natural resources of the Central
African region, it is evident that the region's capacity
to use them for development has not been fully
utilized, given the continued violence and the civil
wars. Conflict situations have not only blocked social
and economic advances, but have also diverted income
from the exploitation of natural resources to illicit
purposes, in particular the purchase of weapons and the
black market.

Changing the face of Central Africa and
transforming it into a region of peace requires a
regional effort. For that, we must rely, above all, on the
resolve of the countries concerned, through individual,
bilateral, subregional, regional or international actions.
There can be no successful peace initiative without
political will.

We have taken note of the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
adapt to the region's new realities. Its observer status in
the United Nations offers the Community a panoply of
opportunities to interact with the Organization with a
view to achieving its objectives. We encourage its
members to intensify its activities and to strengthen its
links with the African Union and with the United
Nations.

The work of the United Nations to strengthen
institutions and national capacities in order to promote
national and regional development should be
accompanied by effective measures on the part of the
international community for the development of human
resources, for the effective mobilization of financial
resources, for the transfer of technology and for access
to markets. In that context, my delegation should like
to express its highest praise and support for the
initiative of African countries to establish, within the
framework of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD), a peace and security
mechanism to deal with the political and social
vulnerability caused by conflicts. We believe that
NEPAD's attention to questions related to the
prevention, management and solution of conflicts; to
peacemaking and peacekeeping; to reconciliation,
rehabilitation and reconstruction after conflicts; and to
combating the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and anti-personnel mines is part of an
overall strategy to eradicate the causes of conflicts with
a view to peace-building on the continent.
The promotion of economic development is
absolutely necessary, given that the wars on the African
continent are the principal cause of poverty,
displacement and the destruction of communities. War
has had an immediate economic impact that prevents
development and thus undermines the economic and
social well-being ofthe region's countries.

Regional and subregional organizations should
have the necessary capacity to support their members
in overcoming the crises caused by war. Preventing
Central Africa from being regarded as a high-risk
region for investment should be the objective of the
regional agencies. Coordination of activities with the
United Nations and with the Bretton Woods institutions
is not only positive, but essential. The United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa has been working to
support the economic development of the 53 African
countries. Its relationship with the Economic and
Social Council ensures better coordination of efforts.

Undoubtedly, economic integration and the
development of robust regional structures may help to
eliminate the negative effects of conflicts. While Africa
should be devoting resources to peacemaking and
peace-building, it is important that subregional and
regional bodies be able to establish measures for
conflict prevention. Establishing and/or strengthening
the necessary structures to prevent conflicts is a basic
task.

Due attention to disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement activities
for former combatants, to the processes of
reconciliation, to institution-building and to the
promotion of economic development are basic
conditions for the elimination of the causes of
conflicts. Civil society must take an active part in those
activities in a coordinated way with the Governments
and the various agencies charged with addressing such
issues.

We encourage the Governments of Central Africa
to continue to work to strengthen subregional
organizations in order to adapt, redefine or strengthen
the objectives and structures of those bodies, as they
deem appropriate. In the process of identifying
measures, there should be input from the countries of
the subregion, which are best acquainted with their
realities and needs. That would serve to adequately
define goals and to improve coordination and synergy
of efforts between the various agencies responsible for
peace-building.
We applaud the decision by Economic
Community of Central African States to establish new
mechanisms to address Africa's problems. In that vein,
the joint meeting to be held tomorrow here at
Headquarters between the Community and the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa will contribute to
improving relations between the two bodies, thereby
ensuring more sustained attention to the problems of
the subregion.

Mexico knows we can count on the resolve of the
countries of Central Africa to work to strengthen their
subregional mechanisms and to define the guidelines to
govern their activities. No one can address, design and
implement measures that take into account their
interests better than the people of Central Africa
themselves.

In following the example of the Organization of
African Unity, its predecessor, the African Union is
taking a leading role in activities aimed at promoting
peace. We have no doubt that the strategic partnership
between the African Union, various subregional
mechanisms and the United Nations will bear fruit in
the form of the peace that the countries of the region so
much wish to see. A number of countries of the Central
African region are demonstrating their resolve to
establish, and build upon, peace. The recent efforts by
the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Uganda, Angola, Burundi and the
Central African Republic attest to the determination
and commitment of those countries to achieve peace.
The African Union has the necessary experience to
support subregional organizations and strengthen the
strategic partnership to produce a lasting settlement to
conflicts. We hope that proper use will be made of that
experience.

Mexico has faith in the capacity and the
conviction of the countries of Africa to bring about
peace. As I stated earlier, Central Africa is showing
signs of its commitment to peace. We would like to
take this opportunity to applaud those efforts and to
reaffirm Mexico's support for the decision that these
States are taking to move forward with the peace-
building process. We are convinced that the strategic
partnership at the subregional level, combined with
regional and international actions - and in particular
with the resolve and commitment of the countries
concerned - will enable Africa to become a continent
of peace. The Security Council should closely follow
these activities and be prepared to act in support of
those efforts.
