Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Let me take you back,
Mr. President, to a warm summer's day in Beirut 32
years ago, exactly on a very significant day for you and
your people: 14 July 1974. I want to describe the scene
to you and to my Lebanese colleague. Cafes and bars
bustling with young people, beaches filled with happy
holiday-makers - the Switzerland of the Middle East.
How different that scene is from the one on Beirut's
streets today, 32 years later. But that difference did not
start this week or last year. The difference started only
one year after the scene Ijust described, in 1975, when
the Lebanese began their long descent into oppression,
depression and terror. Lebanon is a country that has
been held hostage for more than 32 years by tyrants
from the north and terrorists in the south, a country
whose fun-loving, business-minded, entrepreneurial
and liberal population has been tormented by decades
of oppression, sectarian strife, fundamentalist violence,
religious conflict, Syrian control, political
assassinations, terror and full-fledged civil war.

In May 2000, Israel took the painful and
politically difficult decision to fully withdraw from
southern Lebanon, having been compelled a few years
earlier to establish a security zone there in order to
prevent terrorist attacks and rocket shelling from
Lebanon into Israeli towns and villages. The
Security Council acknowledged Israel's complete
withdrawal from southern Lebanon and its full
compliance with Security Council resolution 425
(1978) in a presidential statement on 18 June 2000
(S/PRST/2000/21).

That was Lebanon's moment of truth. Would its
Government look inward and free its people from the
stranglehold of terror? Or would it allow its territory to
become a base from which Hizbollah terrorists would
launch attacks against Israeli civilians? Tragically, the
Lebanese Government chose the latter.

The Lebanese Government got a second chance
after the partial implementation of Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004), which resulted in the
withdrawal of most Syrian forces from Lebanese
territory. Again the Council and the entire world were
waiting to see how Lebanon would respond to this
historic opportunity. Yet again, unfortunately, the
Lebanese Government chose to succumb to terror
rather than vanquish it, to let its southern region be
occupied by terrorism, rather than disarm it, and to
relinquish control over its country rather than exercise
its full sovereignty. Seldom before has the description
of a people as never missing an opportunity to miss an
opportunity been so apt. Lebanon, sadly, did not heed
the demands of the international community and did
not obey the repeated resolutions of the Security
Council. Today, sadly, the Lebanese people are bearing
the cost of that inaction and ineptitude.

Two days ago, Hizbollah terrorists, operating
with impunity in southern Lebanon, unleashed a
sudden and unprovoked attack into Israeli territory.
Scores of Katyusha rockets rained down on Israeli
towns and villages, causing many civilian casualties. In
this midst of this horrific assault, Hizbollah terrorists
infiltrated Israel, killing a number of soldiers and
kidnapping two more, who were taken deep into the
terrorist stronghold of southern Lebanon. Israel had no
choice but to react, as would, indeed, any other
responsible democratic Government. Having shown
unparalleled restraint for six years while bearing the
brunt of countless attacks, Israel had to respond to this
absolutely unprovoked assault, whose scale and depth
was unprecedented in recent years.

Let me emphasize this indisputable fact: Israel's
actions were in direct response to an act of war from
Lebanon. Although Israel holds the Government of
Lebanon responsible, it is concentrating its response

carefully, mainly on Hizbollah strongholds, positions
and infrastructure. The hundreds of Katyusha rockets
fired from Lebanon in the last few days demonstrate
the magnitude of the immense arsenal of rockets and
other weapons that Hizbollah has amassed over the last
few years, a danger we have repeatedly warned against.
Many of the long-range missiles that have hit Israeli
towns, including Nahariyya, Safad, Rosh Pina and the
port city of Haifa, were launched from private homes
with families residing inside, where a special room was
designated as a launching pad with a family playing
host to the missile. That is yet another example of the
cynical and brutal way the Hizbollah organization uses
civilians as human shields, with complete disregard for
human life.

Over the last 48 hours, more than 500 Katyushas
and mortar shells were fired into the northern part of
Israel, killing two civilians and wounding hundreds
more, among them women and children. Israeli
civilians and eight soldiers have been killed, hundreds
have been wounded. It is very important for the
international community to understand that while
Hizbollah executes this vicious terrorism, it is merely
the finger on the blood-stained, long-reaching arms of
Syria and Iran. Hizbollah, together with Hamas, Syria
and Iran, comprise the world's new and ominous axis
of terror, an infamous club, the entry fee to which is
the blood of innocents and the terrorizing of the entire
world.

Membership in this club requires an
unfathomable capacity for evil. The President of Iran
has repeatedly denied the Holocaust while gleefully
preparing the next one. Many of the long-range
missiles fired into Israel in recent days were Iranian
missiles, made by the same regime that is now trying to
possess nuclear weapons, the same regime that is
funding Hizbollah to the sum of $100 million a year.

Do we dare to ask ourselves how many families
in Lebanon today are being prepared to house dirty
bombs and other weapons of mass destruction,
courtesy of Iran?

Syria, another member of this club, is a well-
known protector and financer of terrorist organizations,
playing host to them in its capital, Damascus. The
Syrian Government, which still regards Lebanon as
southern Syria, works ceaselessly to undermine all
efforts towards a peaceful future in the region.

Lebanon is today occupied by terror, whether in

the south where it is directed at Israel or in Beirut

where it kills opponents of Syria and former prime

ministers. The real occupying power in Lebanon is

terror, terror instigated by Hizbollah but initiated,
funded and perpetrated by Syria and Iran.

The Lebanese Government, having missed so
many chances in the past, at such a horrendous cost to
its people, today has another chance to free itself from
the stranglehold of terror, another chance to release
itself from the evil control of Syria and the deadly
influence of Iran, and deploy its forces the south,
exercising its sovereignty over a free Lebanon.

There are words that speak far louder and clearer
than anything I can voice today. These are voices of
Lebanese: brave, patriotic Lebanese parliamentarians
and ministers who, just over the last two days, have
cried out to all of us from the brink of the abyss in their
beloved country.

Let me quote some of these courageous
statements. There are the words of Lebanon's
Communications Minister, Mr. Marwan Hamadeh, who
only yesterday said that "Damascus gives the orders,
Iran supplies the equipment, Israel reacts and Lebanon
is the victim". Or there are the words of Elias Atallah,
a Lebanese politician representing the majority of its
parliamentary members,

"We welcome any Arab and international support,
but strongly oppose any enforced involvement of
Lebanon by regional players' considerations" -
reference to Syria and Iran - that are not within
the interests of the Lebanese people for the sole
attempt to achieve opportunistic benefits at the
expense of the Lebanese people. The Syrian
regime indulges itself in teaching Lebanon and
Palestine lessons according to its own interests
through these peoples. Why do those who always
protect their regime express understanding of its
reasons and preferences and do not express any
understanding of Lebanon's reasons and
preferences?"

Or, there are the words of an unnamed Lebanese
minister who said - again, only yesterday - "The
Hizbollah has not only kidnapped two Israeli soldiers;
it has taken the whole of Lebanon hostage".
With your permission, Mr. President, I would like
to make a personal appeal to my esteemed Lebanese

colleague. Your Excellency, you know deep down that,
if you could, you would add your own brave voice to
those voices of your brave compatriots and colleagues.
You know deep in your heart that, if you could, you
would be sitting here right next to me, right now,
because you know that we are doing the right thing and
that, if we succeed, Lebanon will be the beneficiary.

I believe that most members around this table, as
well as many others in this Chamber, including our
neighbours, realize that reality.

The Security Council and the international
community have a duty today to help the Lebanese
people achieve the goal of a free, prosperous,
democratic Lebanon. The sad and tormented life of that
war-torn land has today entered another sad chapter in
its history. It is up to every one of us to help write that
chapter to ensure that this opportunity is seized, not
only for the benefit of the Lebanese and the Israeli
peoples, but for the sake of generations to come.

