The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

First, I should like to express my thanks to
Ambassador Takasu, Chairman of the Committee
09-26005
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), for his
useful briefing to the Security Council on the activities
of the Committee in the past 90 days. We welcome the
Committee's adoption of its annual report for 2008
(S/2008/839).

Once again, Libya stresses the need for
intensified international efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the question of Iran's nuclear programme in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1803
(2008) through stepped-up diplomatic efforts to
encourage dialogue and consultations with Iran
towards a comprehensive and appropriate long-term
solution to this issue. This would open the way for the
establishment of full relations and fruitful cooperation
with the Islamic Republic of Iran on the basis of
mutual respect and international confidence in the
civilian nature of Iran's nuclear programme.

In this regard, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya calls
on all parties concerned to initiate direct negotiations
towards this objective as soon as possible. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya reiterates its conviction that a
comprehensive and non-selective approach must be
adopted towards non-proliferation. All States, without
exception, must subject their nuclear installations to
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
safeguards.

We regret that the Security Council has not, to
date, given appropriate attention to the issue of Israel's
nuclear weapons, even though Israel refuses to accede
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) or to subject its installations to IAEA
safeguards. This is frustrating. The peoples of the
region aspire to a nuclear-weapon-free Middle East on
the basis of the decision taken by the States parties to
the NPT at their Review Conference and the relevant
General Assembly resolutions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.35 am.
