Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me, Sir, to convey our best wishes for
success in your term as President of the Security Council
for the month of March. Allow me also to congratulate you
for convening this formal meeting and to convey the warm
feelings that Argentines have for Poland, a country to
which we are linked by strong ties of friendship and
cooperation. Likewise, I am pleased to extend our
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Kenya for
his outstanding leadership of the Council last month. The
work of Ambassador Mahugu not only does credit to him
and to Kenya but also lends prestige to the developing
world,

My delegation is taking part in this Security Council
debate with renewed sadness and concern. After only five
months, the organ with the ultimate responsibility for world
peace and security is obliged to meet to urge the parties not
to depart from the peace process.

In the resolution of any conflict, the antagonists must
be parties to the peace process. That role not only carries
obligations but alsocalls for specific attitudes, such as not
altering the climate of understanding necessary to move
ahead in any negotiation.

The decision of the Israeli Government to build
settlements in East Jerusalem is viewed with the greatest
concern. Argentina shares that feeling, and we hope that
Israeli politicians will reflect on the consequences that
these measures are having on the future of the peace
process. The settlements in occupied territories run
counter to international law and run counter to resolutions
adopted by this Council in the past.

Much progress has been made toward peace in the
Middle East, and many lives have been sacrificed in that
cause. Accordingly, the efforts and commitments of the
international community should not waver but should
rather grow stronger. We hope that at this stage the Israeli
Government will refrain from adopting decisions that can
lead to altering the de facto situation in Jerusalem or to
hampering the success of the negotiations on the final
status of that city. We should all be aware of the
importance that Jerusalem has for the various cultures that
have been a part of its history.

As was stated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs for
Argentina, Guido Di Tella, in the previous debate on the
situation in the occupied Arab territories:

"The security of peoples depends on moderate
policies, and certainly not on extreme formulas of
any kind". (S/PV.3698 (Resumption I), p. 24)

Today, once again, we feel at one with those States
that are committed to the cause of peace, which Wish to
give their support to the negotiating process that began in
1992, and want to preserve the climate of understanding
that is required for that purpose.

