Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: In recent months, I have
consistently referred to urgent, unfinished domestic
business in Iraq. Today, perhaps inevitably, I will brief
the Security Council on protests and civil unrest. These
protests, which were initially driven by young people
in particular, have given voice to their frustration with
poor economic, social and political prospects, and
to their hopes for better times, free from corruption,
partisan interests and foreign interference. Hundreds
of thousands of Iraqis from all walks of life have
taken to the streets out of the love for their homeland,
emphasizing their Iraqi identity. All they are asking
for is a country that can reach its full potential for the
benefit of all its citizens,

However, they are paying an unimaginable price
for their voices to be heard. Since early October, more
than 400 people have been killed and more than 19,000
have been injured. As we commemorate the fallen and
pay our respects, their ideals and demands remain
more alive than ever. One of the protesters told me in
the clearest of terms that he would rather not live at all
than live without dignity and freedom. That is what the
protests are all about. Last week, I Visited a hospital in
Baghdad and met with a 16-year-old boy who had been
heavily injured by shrapnel. His mother said that the
lack of all prospects makes our teenagers desperate and
that it makes them think and act at least twice their age.
Her son is only 16 years old, but 16 years is a very long
time if one is waiting for political leaders to live up to
their promises.

These young people have no recollection of how
horrific life was for many Iraqis in the time of Saddam
Hussein. However, they are very much aware of the life
that was promised after Saddam Hussein, and through
the power of connectivity, they know perfectly well that
a better future is possible. I have often said that the
current situation cannot be judged without putting it in
the context of Iraq's past, and that is true. What we are
witnessing is an accumulation of frustration over the
lack of progress for so many years.

After years, even decades, of sectarian strife and
conflict, a renewed sense of patriotism has taken
hold, symbolized by the 16-year-old boy I met in the
hospital, as well as his countless brothers and sisters
demonstrating in Iraq. Some well-known Iraqis refer
to it as the battle of a nation. Let me underline that any
successful nation needs to warmly embrace the potential
of its young people. That is all the more important in
Iraq, with its remarkably young population.

Events spun out of control on the very first night
of the demonstrations, with authorities immediately
resorting to excessive force. The high loss of life, the
many injuries and the violence, combined with a long
period of undelivered promises, all resulted in a huge
crisis of confidence. Although the Government has
announced various reform packages addressing issues
such as housing, unemployment, financial support and
education, those are often perceived as unrealistic or
too little, too late.

Additionally, the Government's investigation into
the violence of early October is seen as incomplete,
although it was a positive step. Who is smashing
media outlets, gunning down peaceful protesters and
abducting civil activists? Who are those masked men
and unidentified snipers? I note that a number of arrest
warrants have been issued, but I would like to emphasize
that perpetrators must be brought to full account. There
can be no justification for the many killings and heavy
injuries among peaceful protesters. Yet that is precisely
what we have been documenting since 1 October. The
rules of engagement were reviewed by the Government
to minimize the use of lethal force, and indeed, more
restraint was observed at the start of the second wave of
demonstrations, in Baghdad in particular.

Yet the harsh reality is that the use of live fire has
not been abandoned; that non-lethal devices, such as
tear gas canisters, continue to be used improperly,
causing horrific injuries or death; and that unlawful
arrests and detentions continue to take place, as do
abductions, threats and intimidation. The recent events
in Nasiriyah and Najaf are a case in point. I therefore
wish to reiterate the importance of guaranteeing
fundamental rights - above all the right to life, but
also the right to peaceful assembly and freedom of
expression. Additionally, I wish to again stress the
critical importance of full accountability and justice
at all levels. Also, important to note is the shutdown
of media outlets, internet and social media, which
adds to the public perception that the authorities have
something to hide. Addressing hate speech does not
mean limiting or prohibiting freedom of speech.

Another grave concern is the encroachment of
power dynamics that is trying to hijack the peaceful
protests. Acts of violence that are politically motivated,
gang-driven or arising from external loyalties risk
placing Iraq on a dangerous trajectory, sowing chaos
and confusion, including the further loss of life and
the destruction of public and private property. That
gravely undermines the rightful demands of the Iraqi
people. It complicates the work of the security forces,
and it provides a cynical excuse for political inaction or,
worse, an excuse for all kinds of conspiracies to justify
violent crackdowns on peaceful demonstrations.

To be perfectly clear, the vast majority of protesters
are evidently peaceful - everyday men and women
seeking a better life. Let me emphasize that it is the
primary responsibility of the State to protect its
people. In other words, any and all forms of violence
are intolerable and must not distract from the rightful
demands for reform. That would compromise the State
even further and only harm an already gravely eroded
public trust, further narrowing the Government's ability
to reform. That ability, sadly, grows weaker every time
a peaceful protester is killed or injured.

The weight of Iraq's past and the immensity of
current issues would surely be challenging to any
Government's ability to act and to act fast. However,
the shortcomings are long-standing. The following are
a few examples.

First, the call for electoral reform reverberates
all over Iraq. Iraqis are calling for independent and
impartial electoral management and changes in
the electoral system to bring voters closer to their
candidates and make their elected representatives
duly accountable.

Secondly, with respect to pervasive corruption, we
have heard plenty of words and gestures, but have seen
fewer concrete outcomes. The political class will need
to lead by example, for instance by publicly disclosing
their assets and abolishing their so-called economic
offices. I cannot overstate that anti-corruption efforts
will be key to unlocking immense social, economic and
political potential. Without meaningful progress, we
risk treading water on nearly every other front. A related
key demand of the demonstrators is an environment
conducive to employment and growth. While that is
one of the best remedies against unrest and conflict,
we have seen precious little in terms of implementation.
Some three weeks ago, following consultations
with a wide range of Iraqis, including protesters
and authorities, we proposed a number of steps
as a way forward and further initiatives to foster
dialogue are ongoing or on their way. But if that
dialogue - that peaceful attempt - is to succeed, the
protesters' conditions are clear - there must be an end
to the bloodshed, abductions and unlawful arrests. Also,
it must be understood that without full accountability
and justice, it would be nearly impossible to convince
the people that political leaders are sincerely willing
to engage in substantial reform. While I acknowledge
that a collective protest movement does not necessarily
recognize central leadership, some structure and
coordination on the part of the peaceful protesters will
prove to be of great importance as well.

The Prime Minister's resignation was accepted by
Parliament last Sunday. Today, the Speaker is expected
to ask the President to designate a new Prime Minister.
The President will have 15 days to do so. In turn, the
Prime Minister-designate will have 30 days to form a
Government. While talks about the Prime Minister-
designate are ongoing among political leaders, I
would like to emphasize the urgency of the current
circumstances. Political leaders do not have the luxury
of time and must rise to the moment. Moreover, they
will have to come clean in public and advance real
solutions, instead of leaving it to a Prime Minister with
little or no support. I have always emphasized, and I
will continue to do so, that a Government cannot go it
alone. It is the collective responsibility of the political
class as a whole.

With permission, I will now briefly turn to
Baghdad-Erbil relations, which is another critical
file. As I have said in earlier briefings, relations are
surely on an upswing, and that is good news. But I
must repeat that, to date, this has not materialized in
the form of tangible breakthroughs on the ground. In
Sinjar, sadly, we continue to face major restrictions to
our humanitarian action. Erbil and Baghdad are duty-
bound to establish a single Administration and stable
security structures. Their ongoing failure to agree can
no longer be explained or tolerated.

Another concern is the situation in Duhok
governorate. Over 16,000 Syrian refugees have arrived
so far, and more continue to arrive on a daily basis.
Nine years into the Syrian conflict, we did not expect to
open new refugee camps in Iraq. Let us not forget that
they arejoining the quarter ofa million Syrians already

being hosted in the Kurdish region.
While the protests dominate our attention, we
should not forget the legacy of yesterday's fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. As we speak,
a new disaster is in the making. On many occasions, I
have stated that the situation in camps such as Al-Hol
is not sustainable. Transnational threats demand
collective action, but instead we are seeing a frankly
shocking lack of international long-term thinking.

I would now like to turn to the issue of missing
third-country Kuwaiti nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. Despite
the domestic crisis, I am pleased to report that, on
27 October, Iraq handed over approximately 200,000
books belonging to the National Library of Kuwait and
Kuwait University. I would also like to commend the
difficult work carried out by Kuwaiti forensic experts in
the ongoing identification process ofthe human remains
that were found earlier this year in the Samawah desert.
I truly hope that those efforts can soon be completed in
order to deliver some closure to relatives.

I would like to say a final word on the ongoing
demonstrations in Iraq. The country is as at a
crossroads. In my meeting with Grand Ayatollah Ali
Al-Sistani, he expressed concern that the relevant
actors might not be serious enough to implement any
meaningful reform. He added that the situation could
not continue as it was before the demonstrations,
which is very true. Meanwhile, the protesters appear
determined to persevere as long as their demands
remain unheeded. The situation cannot and will not
be resolved by buying time with band-aid solutions
and coercive measures - such an approach will only
further fuel public anger and distrust. Pursuing partisan
interests, muddling through or brutally cracking down
on peaceful protesters are not strategies at all. Nothing
is more damaging than a climate of anger and fear.

We must not let history repeat itself. Out of any
crisis, new and great opportunities can emerge. Iraq is
definitely not a lost cause - far from it. It has immense
potential. The challenge is to seize this opportunity and
to build a sovereign, stable, inclusive and prosperous
Iraq. Now is the time to act. The great hopes of so many
Iraqis call for bold and forward thinking.

