Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We applaud France for
convening this open debate during its presidency and
are grateful for its leadership in piloting resolution 2462
(2019), adopted today to combat terrorist financing.

Terrorism is a scourge that is tearing at the fabric of
societies across the globe. It is a menace that is restricted
to any given region. People now live in fear of terrorist
threats in countries across the world. Combating
terrorism is viewed by many States and their people as
one of the most fundamental security policy priorities
that requires global responsiveness. The Council's
response today, in some measure, answers a felt need.

Terrorists rely on resources to sustain themselves
and their activities across the world. Effective and
sustained efforts aimed at countering terrorist
financing is at the heart of the issue of addressing
terrorism. We therefore welcome this initiative to
bring together various existing norms and regulations
in a comprehensive manner. It is a milestone in global
efforts to set up a normative framework to criminalize
terrorist financing.

We specifically welcome the recognition in
resolution 2462 (2019) of the essential role of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in setting global
standards, especially in the context of preventing and
combating money laundering, terrorist financing and
proliferation financing. India appreciates the work
done by the FATF and the regional FATF-style bodies.

As the saying goes, the proof of the pudding is
in the eating; the utility of any Council resolution
will therefore be in its implementation. The Council,
Madam President, has made a start today under France's
leadership. We hope that it will follow through on the
various crucial provisions of today's resolution with
focus and perseverance towards its implementation.
In that context, let me give an example of precept not
being followed in practice.

First, many Council resolutions, including the
various sanctions measures under the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), where and asset freeze is a core part of
States' obligations, call for regular reporting under
those measures. A cursory look at the publicly available
information on the website would reveal that the
implementation reports on the sanctions measures have
not been updated for years - and in some cases for
more than a decade. Now is the time to reiterate the
need to address that shortcoming.
Secondly, while we welcome the resolution's
focus on ensuring full compliance with the measures
imposed by the Security Council, no effective action
is taken on instances of reported non-compliance with
the sanctions measures. The Council can - and needs
to - do a better job at overseeing the implementation
of its resolutions relating to terrorist financing. The
report of the 1267 Committee Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team dated 15 January (see S/2019/50) notes that Member States have reported to
the Monitoring Team on an ad hoc basis on the issue
and that a comprehensive review of frozen assets has
not been undertaken. The report recommends that the
Committee write to Member States in that regard. We
hope to see action on such recommendations.

Thirdly, we welcome the Council and its various
bodies taking note and rectifying such instances of
non-implementation so as to enhance awareness and
the effective implementation of the various Council
resolutions on counter-terrorism. We believe that work
could be strengthened with more cooperation between
the FATF and the various United Nations entities,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism. Bodies such
as the FATF have listed risks posed by Da'esh, Al-Qaida,
Jama'at-ud-Da'wah, the Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation,
Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed, the Haqqani
Network and persons affiliated with the Taliban.

Those are a few instances where more, not less,
focus is needed. Non-compliance with crucial sanctions
measures in the case of United Nations-proscribed
terrorists and entities places all of us Member States
at a high risk of facing challenges from terrorist
organizations that are well-funded and armed, despite
international measures. Terrorists are going to be ever
more creative in finding ways to violate the rulebook.
Furthermore, the unfortunate reality is that States that
are terrorist apologists will continue to provide alibis
to justify their actions, as well as their inaction, as was
done by a serial offender earlier today.

Nevertheless, we, the international community,
must remain determined. We need to continue evolving
our toolbox and follow our rulebook, instead of getting
distracted and straying from our path. Our toolbox,
consisting of the effective implementation of United
Nations measures, could assist in curtailing terrorist
activities. The global community is impatient for action.
Going forward, the United Nations collectively needs
to do more and do it much more effectively. For its part,
India will be a willing partner in this endeavour.

