Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the United Kingdom for convening
today's meeting. We also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for
his detailed briefing on the work with the parties to the
Yemeni conflict, including within the framework of the
latest consultations in Geneva. Russia supported and
contributed to achieving the initiative of the Special
Envoy and launching the negotiation process. We
believe that this is very much needed and is a unique
opportunity to end the bloody conflict.

We did not expect that it would be easy or perhaps
even possible to move the Yemeni conflict to the
political sphere. We believe that the process has been
launched and must now be built upon. We pin our hopes
on Mr. Griffiths convincing the parties that they need
to continue the political process in the framework of
shuttle diplomacy and to make them aware that a military
solution is not Viable and has no future. It is important
that he maintain open channels of communication with
all key players.

We consider that the support of his mediation
mission, along with the absence of attacks and missile
launches, will contribute to maintaining a calm situation
around Al-Hudaydah. Everyone must demonstrate
restraint and not try to resolve the situation by force.
Developing confidence-building measures, including
the release of prisoners and detainees is necessary. We
would like to add that it is important to unify the efforts
of all Yemenis in combating terrorism on the Arabian
peninsula, which has taken on a threatening scale.

We believe that the potential for collective
international support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy has not been fully utilized. In our view, what
is needed is an effective, balanced and focused format
of support for the efforts of the United Nations. It is
critical that the format operate on an integrated basis.
We would like to underline that finding solutions to the
Yemeni conflict will be an important contribution to
stability in the entire subregion.

We wish to remind the Council of our proposals
to launch - in the Persian Gulf and, in the long-run,
in the whole Middle East - a process of developing
a package of security- and confidence-building
measures. That kind of architecture, in which all key
countries of the region should participate, including
the Persian Gulf States and Iran, would contribute not
only to strengthening comprehensive and indivisible
security in that part of the world, but also resolving
long-standing and newer crisis situations, including the
Yemeni conflict.

Threats and confrontations should cede place to
dialogue to dialogue and cooperation. Russia will
continue, in consultation with all interested parties,
its efforts aimed at implementing the Russian concept
of security and cooperation in the Persian Gulf. We
believe that it is timely and necessary.

In conclusion, we call on all parties involved in the
Yemeni conflict to actively participate in the mediation
efforts of Mr. Griffiths. There is no military solution
to the Yemeni crisis. For our part, we will continue to
support the work of the Special Envoy, alongside all of
the parties to the Yemeni confrontation.

