Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan commends
the Kuwaiti presidency for convening this very timely
and critical open debate, and looks forward to greater
awareness and actions with regard to its results. We
personally thank Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, in his
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, for
his dedication and determination to streamline and to
reform the working methods of the Security Council.
We also thank Ian Martin for his substantive briefing.
We support its content and analysis.

It is timely to review the implementation of the
revised presidential note S/2017/507 to increase the
efficiency, transparency and effectiveness of the
Council. Kazakhstan was among the first elected
members to welcome and to test the implementation
of the provisions on transitional arrangements for the
new non-permanent members in response to the call
of the broader United Nations membership to uphold
the principles of transparency and inclusiveness in
the Security Council reforms, including its subsidiary
bodies, which are crucial to the Council's responsibility.
We believe that the proposals resulting from today's
deliberations should be reviewed in the Working Group
so as to update the note in the subsequent months.

While elected members serve for only a two-year
term, they have an important role to play and can
take responsibility for the way in which the Council
operates without remonstrating about the veto power.
The elected 10 must raise their influence and legitimacy
as representatives elected by the General Assembly as
a universal platform and use their varied composition
to ensure reforms. It is not always the case today that
the elected 10 face constrained capabilities in making
substantive proposals on Security Council documents
and in building consensus. That undermines the
efficiency of the Council.

During Kazakhstan's presidency, we strove for
more openness, inclusiveness and accountability
and held as many as 21 public meetings. We ensured
the adoption of press elements following almost
every consultation in January. In that regard, today
we highlight the importance of innovations in the
drafting process, as well as of streamlining the format
of meetings, inter alia, consultations among Council
members, penholdership and interaction with the wider
United Nations membership and other stakeholders.
We note that paragraph 81 of the new note 507
specifies that penholders or co-penholders exchange
information and engage in timely consultations with
all Council members with openness and flexibility.
For each draft resolution that is not a technical rollover
or for each presidential statement, the penholder or
co-penholders need to present and to discuss the
draft resolution with members in at least one round of
informal consultations or informal meetings. Limited
time frames for consultations on proposed resolutions
do not contribute to the substance, the quality or the
general effectiveness of the Security Council.

My country believes that one of the Council's
core capabilities to prevent conflict is closely related
to its working methods. While we recognize that
systematizing existing and new Council practices is
desirable, just documenting them may not result in
better performance. Indeed, many of the tasks that
the Council undertakes do not necessarily require
new rules and agreements but, more important, unity,
compromise, trust and confidence-building - and
therefore a change in the Council's culture and practices.
In fact, more opportunities are needed for engaging in
the drafting process. In general, penholdership is still
not as wide a process as expected and desired by many
and a greater role for the group of elected members
is required. We therefore fully support the provisions
in the new note 507 on co-penholdership for both
permanent and elected members of the Council.

Since joining the Council last year, Kazakhstan has
been pleased to witness and to be part of the positive
trends towards better coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Indeed, that synergy successfully produced early
elections for non-permanent members in June 2016 and
June 2017. That was a significant and important break
from the previous practice, as time is indeed a precious
commodity in order to prepare for a seat on the Council.
It helped to address not only some administrative
concerns but also key substantive issues, inter alia,
bridging the skill gaps. We acknowledge that that also
became possible because of the courses so generously
provided by many stakeholders, including Finland,
China, France, the United Kingdom and other Member
States, as well as the Security Council Affairs Division,
academia and non-governmental organizations.

We are also pleased to acknowledge a more
transparent process for appointing new Chairs of
Council subsidiary bodies, with the full involvement
of the current and newly elected non-permanent
members and the wider United Nations membership,
demonstrating transparency and inclusivity to all to
create a new culture. Moreover, we hope that the joint
consultations of subsidiary bodies will continue as a
regular practice of the Council.

In that spirit, we held many more open briefings
and debates, with efficient interactions among
members and updates from senior officials, rather than
informal closed consultations, thereby fulfilling our
obligations and commitments before the wider General
Assembly membership.

Finally, Kazakhstan remains committed to
enhancing and improving the functioning of the
Council as part of a larger institutional and structural
United Nations reform process.

