I would like to thank the German presidency for convening today's important video-teleconference on pandemics and security. I would also like to welcome the presence at this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany. We align ourselves with the statement submitted by the Republic of Korea on behalf of the Group of Friends of Solidarity for Global Health Security (see annex 54). Qatar believes today's discussion is a timely one, as it is taking place at a moment when the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is affecting the entire world ina way we have never seen before, affecting all three key United Nations pillars: peace and security, development and human rights. We are pleased that today's discussion is taking place as the Security Council strives to fulfil its responsibility by addressing the pandemic and its impact on international peace and security. This is not without precedent, as, in the past, the Security Council, has taken action when global health risks have undermined the stability of the affected countries and regions. An example of that history is resolution 1308 (2000), adopted unanimously on 17 June 2000 (see S/PV.4172), the first resolution to address the impact of HIV/AIDS on society and the first time the Security Council adopted a resolution on a health issue. Subsequently, in 2014, the Security Council adopted resolution 2177 (2014), making the determination that Ebola was a threat to world security. We are concerned about the impact of COVID-19 on the most vulnerable, including women, children and the millions of displaced persons in conflict zones and refugee camps around the world, where fresh water is scarce, sanitary facilities are lacking, malnutrition is rampant and the health-care infrastructure has been decimated by war and continuous violence. Robust global cooperation is essential. We must work together. There should be only one fight in the world today - the shared battle against COVID-19. Accordingly, common ground and effective solutions to current crises and tensions should be found in order to stop hostilities and facilitate greater access to humanitarian relief. We must not allow the pandemic to create incentives to escalate violence. Furthermore, ongoing conflict resolution efforts should not be delayed or postponed. Qatar strongly endorses the call for a global ceasefire that Secretary-General Antonio Guterres made in March and his appeal to stand united against the global threat of the COVID-19 pandemic. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, COVID-19 is a wake-up call for effective multilateral cooperation. Let there be no doubt that only by acting in solidarity and strengthening international cooperation can we overcome this threat to us all, enable the most vulnerable to respond and recover, and build back better. I am proud to note that Qatar has ramped up its support to humanitarian relief efforts. Just two days ago, we made a new pledge of $100 million in humanitarian assistance to Syria, in addition to a contribution of $10 million to the World Health Organization and $10 million to the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization. As Qatar assumes the Chair of Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Donor Support Group, the impact of the pandemic on existing humanitarian crises and its immediate impact on vulnerable populations in conflict-affected settings will be an ever-present issue.
