The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of April, I would like at
the very outset to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. Dumisani Kumalo, Permanent
Representative of South Africa, for the excellent work
he carried out and for his stewardship of the Council in
the month of March.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provision rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council deplores the violence
which occurred from 22 to 25 March in Kinshasa
between the Congolese security forces and the
security guards of Senator Jean-Pierre Bemba. It
expresses its grave concern at the loss of lives, in
particular of civilians, and urges all parties to
respect the sanctity of human life and the
principles of human rights. It also expresses its
2

regret at the destruction and pillaging, including
of some diplomatic missions, which took place
during the clashes.

"The Security Council encourages the
Congolese authorities and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC) to undertake the
necessary investigations into these events.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
legitimacy of the new democratically elected
institutions and the need for these institutions to
ensure the protection of the population. At the
same time, it underlines the importance of these
institutions operating with respect for the rule of
law, human rights and international humanitarian
law, and avoiding any unnecessary or
disproportionate use of force.

"The Security Council regrets the use of
violence, instead of dialogue, to resolve disputes,
and urges all Congolese stakeholders to pursue
negotiated solutions to their differences with
respect for the constitutional framework and the
law. It calls on the Government to respect the
space and role conferred on parties by the
Constitution with a view to ensuring their
effective participation in the national political
debate, and encourages all parties to remain
committed to the political process.

"The Security Council welcomes the
declaration of the Conference of Presidents of the
Congolese National Assembly of 26 March 2007,
in which all parliamentary groups reaffirmed their
commitment to supporting the democratic process
and recommended that all institutions of the
Republic work towards reconciliation, national
harmony and permanent dialogue between
political stakeholders.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the efforts of MONUC to re-establish
dialogue between the Government and opposition
parties and to contribute to the protection of the
civilian population.

"The Security Council takes note of the
Communique of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union of 24 March 2007 and of the
Communique of the Extra-Ordinary Summit of
the Southern African Development Community
07-29410
(SADC) Heads of State and Government held in
Dar-es-Salaam on 28 and 29 March 2007, which
reaffirms the sovereign right of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to have a single national
army and urges all armed groups to integrate into
the national army or to be demobilized.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of the international community's
continuing support for the peace consolidation
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
particularly with a view to carrying out urgently
07-29410
security sector reform, and the need to ensure
concerted action by international partners to this
end. It recognizes that such support must be
based on a shared commitment from the
Congolese authorities and all Congolese political
actors to national reconciliation and to the
strengthening of democratic institutions."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

