Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member States.

The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

First of all, allow me to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2015/942) on
Afghanistan, issued on 10 December. We are also very
grateful to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haysom for his briefing and commend him and
all the staff ofthe United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their commitment and very hard work
to bring Afghanistan onto the path to progress.

Afghanistan has made considerable progress in
the political, security, economic and development
areas over the past decade. The recently adopted
General Assembly resolution highlights many of those
advances, for which the Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghan people deserve much credit. But the
gains made are fragile and major challenges remain.

In our statement at the Security Council debate
on Afghanistan in September (see S/PV.7526), we
highlighted the role of institutions in Afghanistan and
of the new Self-reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework, which provides important benchmarks and
timelines for deliverables in key priority areas. That
will allow for stepping up the pace of reforms and
ensuring more effective implementation and lead to
greater aid effectiveness.

As the Secretary-General's report underlines,
continuous insecurity threatens the progress made in
stabilizing the country and remains a real concern. The
past months have seen a new spike in the exodus of
refugees and migrants from Afghanistan. It is all the
more urgent that the Government of Afghanistan, with
the support of the international community and all
regional stakeholders, provide for a secure and stable
environment. In that regard, we welcome the continued
regional presence of NATO's train-advice-assist
Resolute Support Mission. In that connection, I would
like to express our deep condolences to our NATO and
United States colleagues for the suicide attack that
cost three NATO soldiers their lives earlier to day in
Bagram.

It is crucial that the Afghan people can regain
confidence in the future. Implementing reforms to
create economic opportunities will be as important
as improving the State's capacity to deliver basic
services, to maintain human rights standards and to
agree on credible and timely reforms of the electoral
system. We underline the importance of an Afghan-
1ed and Afghan-owned political process of peace and
national reconciliation aimed at achieving a sustainable
resolution of the conflict and at building trust and
stability among all segments of Afghan society.
Insecurity and instability are also fuelled by
the illicit production and trafficking of narcotics,
which remain an important concern for the European
Union and have severe consequences on Afghanistan
itself: high consumption rates within the population,
the growth of the illicit economy, the corruption
of institutions and the financing of international
terrorism. The EU welcomes the recent adoption of
Afghanistan's national drug action plan and encourages
its swift and effective implementation. We encourage
the Government of Afghanistan to continue to pursue a
balanced and integrated approach, with the full support
of the international community and in cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other relevant regional frameworks, such as the Paris
Pact initiative.

The European Union remains committed to
Afghanistan and, as we have already announced, we
are honoured to co-host the next ministerial conference
in Brussels from 4 to 5 October 2016. Afghanistan
will need the ongoing commitment of the international
community to continue on the path to sustainability.
The ministerial conference will set out the framework
for the Government of Afghanistan and donors until
2020, thereby contributing to a stable and reliable
environment for Afghanistan to move progressively
towards self-reliance and acting as important catalyst
for further mobilizing much-needed political and
financial support from the wider region, as well as
inside Afghanistan, with the help of the international
partners. That exceptional level of international
support will need to be matched by an equally strong
commitment to reform and change by the Government
of Afghanistan. The consequences of disengagement,
as witnessed in other regions, are stark reminders of the
costs we otherwise face.

Respect for human rights, and in particular the
situation of women and girls, has advanced considerably
in the past decade. That deserves praise. But much
remains to be done, which demands continued efforts.
The EU welcomes the launching of Afghanistan's
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, for the period 2015-
2022. The EU fully supports the National Unity
Government in that endeavour and has put in place a
special support programme for its implementation. We
must protect the gains made by Afghan women since the
fall of the Taliban regime, as their active involvement
in rebuilding the State remains crucial. With a view
towards enhanced women's empowerment and full and
equal participation in all sectors of society, it is crucial
that women be actively involved in negotiations on the
future of their country.

It is also significant that the recent General Assembly
resolution recognizes the risks faced by human rights
defenders in Afghanistan. Those individuals, groups
and civil society organizations play a central role in
protecting and promoting the rights of others, often at
great personal risk. The resolution rightly condemns
violence against them.

The economic outlook for Afghanistan remains
mixed, after impressive progress over the past decade.
The sources for aggregate demand will be scarcer in
the future, and public investment and services will
remain an important driver of growth - and so will
the related international transfers. It is all the more
critical to further improve the business and investment
climate and to foster the development of intraregional
trade and infrastructure, which will provide benefits
for all countries in the region. We support all efforts
at maintaining and improving such regional relations.

There is no alternative to increased regional
cooperation in order to break out of the vicious circles
of fragility, poverty, violence and extremism - from
trade and energy cooperation, to protecting minorities,
fulfilling the protection of human rights as well as
combating jointly the militant groups that murder
indiscriminately with no respect for international
borders. All stakeholders in the region will need to
invest real political and financial capital to that end.
We applaud President Ghani's recent trip to Islamabad
on 9 December as an important step towards a closer
bilateral relationship between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. With regard to cooperation within the broader
region, the ministerial meeting of the Heart of Asia
Process in Islamabad on 9 December sent important
and encouraging signs of an improving dynamic in the
region, which deserve all our support and help in the
coming months. The European Union will be a reliable
partner on that path.

In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to supporting
Afghanistan towards long-term progress in the country.
From our side, we will continue to support the transition
process to promote the emergence ofa fully self-reliant,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous society for the
benefit of all Afghans.

