Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and your Kuwaiti colleagues for the invitation to
address the issue of missing persons in armed conflict.
We are grateful to the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), as well as to the
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
contributions to the discussion.

Over the past 20 years, the topic of the protection
of civilians has occupied a special place in the work of
the Council, as is evidenced by resolution 2474 (2019),
which we adopted today. The Russian delegation voted
in favour of the resolution, motivated by reasons of
humanity and in the hope that the resolution will help
families that have been separated by war to learn the
fate of their loved ones and perhaps even save some of
their lives.

We greatly appreciate the role of the ICRC in this
issue. We also believe that the International Commission
on Missing Persons is doing necessary and useful work,
especially with regard to providing assistance to States
concerned in identifying missing persons. However,
we take the generally accepted approach to the term
"missing persons in armed conflict" as applying not
only to civilians, but also to military personnel whose
fate remains unknown when a conflict ends. Sadly, the
objective reality is that people go missing as a result of
any war, and the reasons for that are many. War is an
evil in and of itself, and it would be an unacceptable
simplification to reduce the issue of missing persons in
armed conflict exclusively to a problem ofinternational
criminal responsibility.

At Security Council meetings held under the agenda
item "Protection of civilians in armed conflict" we
often hear a very important point. States already have
at their disposal all the international legal instruments
essential to alleviating the plight of civilians in times
of war. I am referring to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977. The issue
is having the political will to properly implement those
documents, and that is fully applicable to the situation
of missing persons in armed conflict.

