Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express our sincere congratulations
to you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, a presidency that will be
distinguished by your dynamism and perseverance, for
which you are well known. We also thank your
predecessor, Mr. Jean-David Levitte, Ambassador of
France, who guided the work of the Council in an
excellent manner. I also welcome the Prime Minister of
Somalia and the Representative of the Secretary-
General.

Yemen is linked to Somalia by the fact that we
share the same sea and have deep-rooted historical ties,
reflected in a network of cultural, commercial,
economic and political bonds. We live in a region
where we affect and are affected by what happens to
each of us.

The collapse of the central Government 10 years
ago led not only to fragmentation, factionalism, the
spread of anarchy and the erosion of the State
institutions in Somalia, but also to the creation of
instability in the region as a result of which the arms
trade seems to be flourishing. Furthermore, terrorist
organizations and groupings are growing in number, as
are smuggling and piracy operations on the seas. Drug
traffic has also spread, and the long Yemeni coast is
full of helpless people who risk their lives to reach the
safety of our shores. Amid this anarchy the brotherly
people of Somali are experiencing a deterioration in
their living standards, a lack of basic services and the
spread of poverty and disease. We are indeed grateful
to you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
on the deteriorating situation of Somalia at a time when
the world seems to have grown accustomed to the
collapse and indeed extinction of the Somali State.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the situation in Somalia, as well as the efforts
being made by the United Nations to restore peace and
stability and to meet the basic and humanitarian needs
of the Somali people.

The Arta process, which was hosted by Djibouti,
is a bright spot in a series of sad events in Somalia
represented by internal divisions, warring and violence
among the factions. The Arta process has raised the
flag of unity and peace. It has sought to bring together
the largest number of civil society representatives and
has emphasized dialogue as a way to restore peace and
national unity and to rehabilitate the State. Because it
represents an alternative to anarchy and war, it received
wide popular support. The international community
endorsed those steps. This was clearly evident in the
participation of President Abdikassim Salad Hassan in
the Millennium Summit and was a step towards
restoring Somalia's sovereignty.

Today we agree with the Secretary-General that it
is incumbent on us to pursue completion of the Arta
process, despite the obstacles to the peace process and
to the rebuilding of the State. We also wish to
encourage dialogue between the Transitional National
Government and Somali factions. In this regard, Yemen
stands ready to make every effort to facilitate that
dialogue, which must be supported by the neighbouring
countries and regional organizations, including the
League of Arab States and the Organization of African
Unity, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the European Union.

We look positively on the Secretary-General's
proposal to set up a Committee of Friends of Somalia
to emphasize ways and means to call attention to
Somalia's needs in the area of national reconciliation,
as well as to provide assistance in mobilizing funds for
reconstruction and development. We also support the
proposal to establish a peace-building office in
Somalia. We may also call for a fact-finding mission to
Somalia. We emphasize once again the role of the
United Nations, particularly the role of the Security
Council, in deploying all efforts to help Somalia
restore its sovereignty and national unity so that peace
and stability prevail in that sister country.

