The President: Today marks five years since the
tragic events of 11 September 2001, when 2,973
innocent people lost their lives in the cowardly terrorist
attacks on the World Trade Centre. Today we pay
tribute to those who perished and praise the families
they have left behind, who have been forced by tragic
fate to confront life without their loved ones. We pay
our respects to the people and the Government of the
United States of America, who solemnly honour their
heroes today.

I call upon the members of the Security Council
to observe a minute of silence in honour of the victims
of the 11 September attacks.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of September, I should
like to take the opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Nana Effah-Apenteng,
Permanent Representative of Ghana, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
August 2006. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Effah-Apenteng for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

Report of the Secretary-General on Darfur
(S/2006/591 and Add.1)


The President: Pursuant to the invitation
extended by the Council under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.

Pursuant to the invitations extended by the
Council under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Yahya
2

Mahmassani, Permanent Observer for the League of
Arab States to the United Nations, and His Excellency
Mr. Abdul Wahab, Permanent Observer for the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United
Nations, and Her Excellency Mrs. Alice Mungwa,
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Observer
Mission of the African Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/591 and Addendum 1, which contain
the report of the Secretary-General on Darfur. I wish
also to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2006/683, which contains the text of a
letter dated 21 August 2006 from the Charge d'affaires
ad interim of the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

It is my pleasure to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at
this meeting, following the pe'riple he has made since
last week's meeting. I invite him to take the floor.


