Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting to address the situation in the Republic of
Haiti. My delegation also wishes to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ambassador
Mariano Fernandez for the work done by the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
including the various United Nations agencies
currently operating there. The comprehensive report
that he has just given us described the progress made to
date as well as the major challenges remaining.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. We also
reaffirm our support for the people and Government of
Haiti in the areas of reconstruction, peacebuilding,
democracy, stability and the promotion of sustainable
development. Chile will continue to support the
medium- and long-term cooperation programmes under
way in Haiti. That exemplifies the continuity of the
commitment to the people of Haiti that our country
assumed in 2004.

For Chile, the fragility of the relationship
between the legislative and executive branches is a
cause for concern, in particular because of its negative
implications on governance and the socio-economic
development of the Haitian people. The formation of a
Government is a prerequisite for the country's stability
and for the development of Haiti's institutions and
economy. Similarly, the imminent convening of local,
municipal and parliamentary elections is another
prerequisite for the success of the democratic process
in Haiti.

We believe there is a need for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
for the international community to continue to promote
dialogue and political understanding among the Haitian
authorities in order to meet the needs and aspirations of
the people of Haiti. The remarks of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General have been
encouraging in that regard.

The Government of Chile recognizes and
commends the achievements in the area of
strengthening the justice system, as well as the
implications for the rule of law, as reflected by the
appointment of a new President of the Supreme Court.
We should also highlight the authorities' commitment
to establish a High Judicial Council in the near future.
Even so, much remains to be done and there is a need
for continued progress on ensuring equality before the
law and due process for all of the people of Haiti.

Chile notes that the report of the Secretary-
General indicates the security situation remains stable
but fragile. The role played by MINUSTAH in
maintaining stability and security is central. In that
regard, my Government believes that strengthening the
Haitian National Police must be a top priority and one
of MINUSTAH's major goals, and we recognize the
progress made and the challenges in this area. Chile
will continue to strengthen police cooperation with
Haiti through professional training, both at a basic
level and at higher levels. Such training is necessary to
ensure respect for human rights and the democratic
development of the country.

The Government of Chile is concerned about the
emergence in recent months of groups challenging
local authorities, as described in paragraph 8 of the
report of the Secretary-General. We believe that those
groups could become a source of instability affecting
the social and political process in Haiti. We urge the
Haitian authorities to make a strong appeal against
such informal mobilization and to investigate and
block its funding sources and support, in line, of
course, with the country's legal framework.
My Government wishes to highlight the role of
MINUSTAH's corps of engineers, through the so-
called quick-impact projects in priority areas identified

in September 2011, such as cholera mitigation, security
lighting and the repair of roads and other
infrastructure, including infrastructure needed in the
area of the rule of law. Those projects make a concrete
contribution to the welfare and security of the Haitian
population and should be strengthened. Security and
development are two complementary concepts that
cannot be addressed separately.

Among the quick-impact projects, we would like
to highlight the work of the joint corps of Chilean and
Ecuadoran engineers, who have improved the canal
system in Cite Soleil, including the thorough cleaning
of the central canal, and repaved the road encircling
Port-au-Prince, together with Korean military
engineers.

I must mention the allegations of sexual
misconduct involving some members of MINUSTAH.
Chile considers that unacceptable and believes that
troop-contributing countries must follow a zero-
tolerance policy on the subject. In an organization of
such prominent moral importance as the United
Nations, such conduct cannot be permitted in any
circumstances, and troop-contributing countries must
prevent it and punish the perpetrators.

As my Government has stated previously, Latin
America is committed to the future of Haiti, through
the implementation of coherent, sustainable strategies
to confront the challenges it faces. That is worth
underlining, because it means working together in a
coordinated way with representatives of other regions.
The Government of Chile believes it necessary to
continue cooperating in Haiti's institutional capacity-
building, on the basis of national ownership, so that
local communities themselves can gradually take on
the various responsibilities entailed in national
reconstruction.

Along with strengthening cooperation in building
policing capacity, we are also committed to improving
primary education, through two early childhood centres
where Chilean volunteers and Haitian educators work
to provide the best educational conditions, with equal
access, to develop skills, abilities and attitudes, to
support Haitian families.

Our country will continue supporting the efforts
of the Government and people of Haiti in peace and
security, development, the promotion and protection of
human rights and the establishment of the rule of law.
