Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The draft resolution before
us today is a pivotal one, which can have lasting impact on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region of Africa as a whole. Our deliberations during
January, which culminated in the historic participation in
the Council's meeting on 24 January by seven heads of
State or Government, emphasized only too well that there
are intractable problems in the region, problems that need
to be addressed in a comprehensive manner.

At that time my delegation expressed its support for
the recommendations in the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2000/30. It is in this context that
the Jamaican delegation believes that the adoption of this
draft resolution will be a step in the right direction. We
believe that while the draft resolution by no means meets
all of our wishes, it will send a positive signal to the
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and to the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that the
Security Council is committed to playing its part in
reinvigorating the peace process in that country.

We welcome the political will demonstrated by the
parties to the Lusaka Agreement, most recently at their
summit on 23 February. We are sure that they will
continue to demonstrate their determination to strictly
adhere to the Agreement and to implement it in all its
aspects.

We appreciate the fact that the draft resolution
fosters the objective of national reconciliation while
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours.
However, my delegation must express its deep concern at
reports of recent outbreaks of fighting and of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. We
must also express our alarm at the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and emphasize that those
responsible for the violations of international humanitarian
law must be brought to justice.

Jamaica supports the expansion of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC), as proposed in the draft
resolution, as a minimum. We hope that this will lead to
the eventual deployment of a peacekeeping mission. We
wish to emphasize that all parties must provide credible
security guarantees to enable MONUC to fulfil its
mandate and to ensure that life-saving humanitarian
assistance reaches the civilian population throughout the
country, to alleviate their unnecessary suffering.

My delegation is also deeply concerned at the
reports of the illegal exploitation of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These
activities, as has been clearly shown, have serious
consequences for the security conditions and the
continuation of hostilities in that country. The
international community must also stem the flow of
illegal arms into the areas of conflict, as this is further
exacerbating the situation.

The coordination of the activities of MONUC and
the Joint Military Commission (JMC) is a functional one
to which we fully subscribe. Given the crucial role
assigned to the JMC in the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, it must be provided with the resources to
support its operation.

My delegation wishes to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General, to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and to the staff, both military and civilian, of
MONUC, and we wish to express our support for their
efforts in seeking to bring peace to this troubled region.

 

Finally, it is our hope that this draft resolution, which
my delegation will support, will underline the commitment
of the international community to support an end to the
years of conflict and to provide a basis on which
sustainable peace can take root in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region.

