Archbishop Auza: My delegation wishes to thank
Japan's presidency for convening this annual open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.

Without a doubt, the Council deserves our
profound gratitude and appreciation for its efforts
to preserve nations and peoples from the scourge of
war and conflict in the course of its almost 71 years
of existence. Reform and adaptation to the times are,
however, always necessary to make the Council as
fit as possible for its purpose. States Members of the
United Nations and various sectors of civil society
have increasingly been calling for reform to render
the Council more transparent, more efficient, more
effective, more accountable and more representative.

There have been criticisms that national and
geopolitical interests override the Security Council's
primary function, which is to maintain international
peace and security. To quell criticisms and suspicions
of a self-serving Council, a key feature of a reformed
Council would be a commitment by all Members
States not to vote, while they serve as members of the
Council, against a credible draft resolution before the
Council on timely and decisive action to prevent or end
the commission of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. That would necessarily include a
commitment on the part of the Council's permanent
members to refrain from casting a veto in situations
where such crimes are involved.

In that context, the United Nations in general and the
Council in particular would acquire greater legitimacy
and authority if they could establish clear and effective
criteria for the application of the principle of the
responsibility to protect. In that regard, my delegation

believes that, in situations where evident crimes of
genocide, mass atrocities and war crimes are being
committed, the action of the international community
should not be interpreted as an unwarranted imposition
on or limitation of the sovereignty of States, provided
that the action being proposed respected the juridical
means established in the United Nations Charter and
other international legal instruments.

In order to maintain and further consolidate the
Council's authority, it would be opportune to seriously
consider the calls of Member States for a Council that
is more representative and that better reflects present-
day geopolitical realities. While appeals for a more
representative Council are not necessarily motivated
by selfless altruism, and while an enlarged Council
would not offer a guarantee of greater efficiency, a
more representative Security Council is among the
elements of convergence that the majority of the
Member States proposed during the informal meetings
of the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform held during the seventieth session of
the General Assembly. Dismissing or ignoring those
elements of convergence would not help the Council's
appeal, credibility or authority.

Another element that has constantly emerged from
consultations and debates on Security Council reform
is the call for greater transparency. That has been
getting stronger during the past months, not only in
the context of the larger question of reinvigorating the
work of the United Nations as it turns 71, but also in the
more immediate context of selecting the Organization's
next Secretary-General.

The call for greater transparency also includes the
need to continue to improve the means and methods of
dialogue between the Security Council and the General
Assembly and other United Nations bodies and partners.
It likewise suggests a reasonable increase in the number
of the Council's open debates, while recognizing the
great importance of closed consultations.

The need for greater transparency also extends
to the working methods and procedures of the
Council's subsidiary bodies, particularly the sanctions
committees, in order to ensure and strengthen the
protection of the fundamental rights of individuals and
the rule of law. In that regard, my delegation would
like to recall paragraph 109 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, on the necessity of ensuring a
fair and clear procedure for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists, for removing them and for
considering humanitarian exemptions.

The reform of the Security Council will require
great prudence, wisdom, magnanimity and resolve on
the part of all. At the end of the day, any meaningful
reform of the Security Council must be guided by its
fundamental mission, namely, to effectively ensure
international peace and security. When all is said and
done, and whatever shape and size it may eventually
take, a reformed Council must be better equipped
than ever to spare us and future generations from
the unspeakable horrors of genocide, mass atrocities,
war crimes and other grave violations of fundamental
human rights and of international humanitarian law.

