Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, perhaps it
is too late for me to respond to your appeal for brevity
at this time, but I shall try.

We thank the German presidency for its initiative
of holding this public meeting on the role of business
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peace-building. We welcome the statement by the
Secretary-General and the participation of Ms. Rasi,
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Mr. Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank, and
Mr. von Pierer, President and Chief Executive Officer
of Siemens, as well as Ambassador Kumalo in his
capacity as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
for African Countries emerging from conflict. The
Secretary-General's opening remarks have set the tone
for today's meeting, and the statements by the other
participants have provided very useful insights.

Although the maintenance of peace and security
is the primary responsibility of States, business, as the
Secretary-General has said, has a stake in peace and
can play an important supportive role in conflict
situations, particularly in post-conflict reconstruction.

In today's globalized world, transnational
corporations and international business transactions
play a major role in influencing economic and political
relations among States and non-State actors. World
business holds the greater share of the world's capital
and technologies - and even jobs. The net worth and
sales of major corporations are often larger than the
gross domestic product of small and even some
medium-sized developing countries. These
transnational corporations greatly influence the
economic, social and political destinies of States. The
extent of that influence increases in inverse proportion
to the size of a given State and in direct proportion to
the openness of a State's economic and trade regime
and particularly its dependence on raw materials and
agriculture for exports and growth. Thus, transnational
corporations and business have considerable potential
for good as well as for bad, especially in the
developing countries.

The developing countries that have registered the
strongest economic and trade growth in the past few
decades are those that benefited from large inflows of
foreign direct investment - mainly through
transnational corporations and international banking -
rather than through official development assistance,
which has so far been modest. But foreign direct
investment flows have been limited to only a few
dynamic developing countries. Last year, 70 per cent of
total foreign direct investment flows went to only 10
developing countries.

Unfortunately, the profit motive - the bottom
line of the balance sheet - which is understandably
the prime motivating factor for the strategic and
operating decisions of business, including transnational
business, is not always compatible with the national
economic, social and political objectives of the
countries concerned. Much of the decline in the terms
of trade and export earnings of commodity-producing
developing countries has been due to the constructed
control of prices by cartels and sometimes by large
transnational corporations. That has contributed
progressively, over the decades, to the pauperization of
many developing countries and the decline in their
social and economic conditions, intensifying the causes
of domestic social and political tensions that have
erupted into conflicts in various parts of the world. A
World Bank report has found that States that are highly
dependent on natural resources exports are at greater
risk of armed conflict than those that are resource poor.
That is an irony.

The rigid approach adopted with regard to the
issue of the mounting debt of the developing countries
has resulted in a consistent net export of financial
resources from the developing countries to the
developed countries. Last year, the net financial
transfers to the developing countries were a negative
$192 billion. Those countries' total debt servicing
amounted to more than $340 billion last year. Net
capital flows to the developing countries amounted to
only $74 billion.

There are, unfortunately, also certain direct
actions which contribute to the outbreak of conflicts.
The Secretary-General has mentioned private business,
which produces and provides the hardware for arms
used in most armed conflicts. These are the real
weapons of mass destruction. Worse still are those
unscrupulous businesses which resort to the
exploitation of natural resources in supporting militias,
factions and warlords in order to facilitate their profits
and protect their investments. Several United Nations
panels of experts have concluded that the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, particularly timber,
diamonds and other minerals, by warring factions has
sustained conflicts in many African countries.

The adoption by the General Assembly of various
resolutions on the role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
and the support for the Kimberley Process certification
scheme was significant not only in breaking the link
between the illicit transaction of diamonds in armed
conflicts, but also in intensifying the debate on the
need for business to adopt socially responsible policies
in conflict situations. A University of Michigan
Business School study on the role of business in
conflict situations has identified the following five
ways in which business can support peace in conflict
situations: first, by adopting corporate social
responsibility; secondly, by spurring economic
development; thirdly, by accepting accountability and
supporting the rule of law; fourthly, by building a sense
of being part of the community in which it works; and
fifthly, by engaging in track-two diplomacy.

Much debate has gone into the question of the
adequacy of voluntary codes of conduct, such as the
Kimberley Process certification scheme or the
Secretary-General's Global Compact initiative to
ensure corporate humanitarian responsibility. The
majority view is that such voluntary codes, though
noble, do not contribute strong incentives for
compliance to offset the financial incentives for non-
compliance and the lack of rigorous enforcement of
such codes. Pakistan shares the view that voluntary
codes adopted by business, though valuable, are often
not sufficient. We therefore support the view that the
activities of business could be governed by a more
effective framework that not only creates
responsibilities and rights, but that also ensures
corporate responsibility and accountability, including
respect for the legal rights not only of business, but
also of the citizens and communities that are involved.

Such a framework could be based on the
principles and purposes of the Charter and respect for
international humanitarian law. It could be developed
through the United Nations in the cooperative
Monterrey process. It could include the five areas
mentioned by the Michigan study. It could cover
corporate behaviour in every phase of a conflict. It
could ensure transparency in commercial transactions.
It could provide possibilities for redress. Lastly, it
could include a mechanism for monitoring, which
would be most valuable.

Mr. Wolfensohn earlier this morning said that the
cause of conflict is the lack of hope and that hope can
be given by business through the creation of jobs. In
our view, the best contribution that international
business can make to promoting peace and security is
by actively and consciously supporting balanced socio-
economic development in the developing countries.
International business could do so by taking some
specific actions, such as, first, adopting conscious
measures to direct foreign direct investment to a wider
spectrum of developing countries, especially the
poorest among them, through such means as
international investment guarantee schemes; secondly,
adopting a more supportive posture towards debt relief
for the poorest countries; thirdly, adjusting business
strategies to locate the processing of raw materials in
the producing countries; and fourthly, supporting
greater trade access for developing country exports,
especially through the elimination of tariff peaks and
tariff escalation, which are discriminatory, and through
reform in the system of agricultural subsidies and
support that is resorted to by major developed.

Finally, let me add another thought. The profits of
transnational corporations and of financial institutions
from international business amount to hundreds of
billions of dollars, with total sales of over $2 trillion a
year for the largest 50 corporations in the world. Is it
possible for these corporations and institutions to
consider allocating l per cent of their net profits to
development assistance for the poorest countries,
perhaps through an international fund managed jointly
through the United Nations and the World Bank? This
would be a tangible and direct contribution to
development and, indirectly, to conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.
Some corporations are already doing this. Can this
become the norm for all and thus create the jobs and
hope to which Mr. Wolfensohn referred?

In the words of the Secretary-General, we are not
asking corporations to do something different from
their normal business. We are asking them to do it
differently.

