Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Ethiopian
presidency and the Russian Mission for organizing this
important informative meeting.

We are grateful for the briefing by the Under-
Secretary-General of the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Office, Vladimir Voronkov, to whom we
wish the greatest success in the sensitive work assigned
to him. We are also grateful for the briefings by
Ambassador Aboulatta, in his capacity as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and Mr. David Scharia,
Officer-in-Charge of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.

The scenarios in which terrorism operates at the
local, regional and global levels are today one of the
greatest challenges facing the international community.
We therefore urgently call on the Security Council
and the general membership to redouble their efforts
against this scourge by improving coordination and
international cooperation, using all the means provided
for by the Charter of the United Nations and their
commitments under international law.

Within the framework of the joint international
counter-terrorism effort, it is necessary to reiterate that
terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group, and
that those characteristics should in no circumstances
be used to justify measures aimed at fighting or
preventing it.

Bolivia, as a State that promotes the culture of
peace and, first and foremost, protects and guarantees
human rights and respect for international law, is
fulfilling its international obligations in the fight
against terrorism. We have implemented the provisions
set out in resolution 1373 (2001). We have codified
terrorism and terrorist financing as serious crimes.
And we have in place a domestic agency to prevent,
detect, investigate and implement monitoring measures
to avert the carrying out of terrorist acts. Likewise,
Bolivia is always collaborating and coordinating with
other countries in exchanging financial intelligence
to conduct investigations into suspect economic flows
that could be linked to money laundering or terrorist
financing. We have a normative framework in place
that enables us to adopt measures such as preventive
freezing of funds and other assets of individual or legal
entities - identified in lists published by the United
Nations - who could be linked to terrorism or the
financing of terrorism.

In addition, through its 2013 law on the control
of fire arms, munitions, explosives and other related
materials, Bolivia has at its disposal a concrete legal
framework to regulate the use and bearing of firearms,
explosives and other related materials. We have thereby
set up the relevant legal mechanisms for preventing,
combating and punishing crimes related to illegal
trafficking in weapons, firearms and explosives.

Against that backdrop, we call on the international
community to promote the active role of States in
combating terrorism. As we heard yesterday in the
meeting on aviation security (see S/PV.8057), technical
and financial cooperation are crucial to ensure that all
States can work on technical mechanisms that will help
us to build capacity to improve on making our fight
against terrorism much more effective.

Given the threat posed by terrorism and violent
extremism to international peace and security, we
believe that we must look into what are the root causes
and its enabling forces around the world so as to make
the fight against the scourge more effective and avoid
us making the same mistakes again.

Let us be clear that the policies of regime change,
interventionism and interference in the internal affairs
of other States have been some of the key reasons that
have led to the vacuums in Governments, weaker law
and order and the absence of control of their borders.
These factors have facilitated the work of terrorist
groups and extremists who find space to impose their
Violent ideology and commit acts of destabilization,
including carrying out human rights violations that
could be tantamount to crimes against humanity.

Unfortunately, the Victims of the acts committed
by terrorist organizations are civilians, including the
most vulnerable among them. This is reflected in the
high rate of violence against women we have witnessed,
as well as through the countless reports that the Council
has received, which point to the fact that sexual violence
perpetrated by grouops such as Da'esh, Boko Haram
and Al Shabaab is not only persistent, but an organic
part of their ideology. Based on the Secretary General's
report (S/2017/249) on sexual violence in conflict
situations issued in April, the increase in the number of
women and female children subjected to sexual slavery,
as well as used as human shields and suicide bombers,
highlights their situation as expendable resources in the
terrorist system.

There is no denying that terrorism and armed
violence and instrinsically linked to the crime of
human trafficking and associated crimes. International
criminal groups and terrorist groups, which the Council
and all the countries of this Organization are fighting
against, earn money through human trafficking and
exploitation and they use the proceeds to finance their
terrorist activities. As a result, those resources are part
of the global financial system through money laundering
and tax havens. These resources tend to diminish or
eliminate checks, especially in terms of investment in
the tertiary sector, and they are used by the criminial
networks to legitimize their gains. Therefore, we believe
the international community must pool its efforts to
determine whether terrorist groups have access to the
international financial system via tax havens, including
taking steps to prevent it.

We believe that all the efforts of the Security
Council and the United Nations to eliminate terrorism
must be backed by all its Members, who must seek
out and bring the perpetrators to justice: they must be
investigated, prosecuted and punished to the fullest
extent. Finally, we express our strong support for a
transparent and balanced implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and we call
on all States to commit to fighting this scourge.

