Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
and six other Council members asked for this briefing
to be held for both functional and substantive reasons.
With regard to the functional reasons, in order to act, the
Council should have at its disposal all the information
it needs to understand the crises it considers, including
information on human rights. That is particularly the
case with Syria, where, as we all know, the human rights
dimension has been inextricably linked to the dynamics
of the conflict from the outset. There have been other
briefings by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
on situations on the Council's agenda. Syria should not
and cannot be an exception.

That brings me to the basic reason for our collective
request. Our last such briefing on Syria, by then-High
Commissioner Navi Pillay, was in 2014. Human rights
are a fundamental aspect of the crisis that the Council
has not dealt with since then, even though violations
of human rights are at the heart of the conflict and its
intensification, to the detriment of international peace
and security. The briefing we decided to call for will
therefore complement those that have been devoted
to the humanitarian, chemical and political situations
in Syria. If we do not have an understanding of the
human rights dimension of the conflict in Syria and the
potential solution to it, we are simply being unrealistic
and in denial. Who could understand it? The regime,
along with other parties, especially Da'esh, has violated
people's rights not just as a consequence of the fighting
but by using such violations as a chosen, deliberate
weapon and instrument of control over territories
and populations.

Lastly, human rights are inseparable from a
political settlement of the conflict. If the Council
wishes to commit in good faith to ensuring that the
same atrocities are not repeated, it must contribute to a
political solution based on a Syrian society that offers
inclusion for all its sectors, as well as institutions that
respect the fundamental rights and freedoms of all
Syrians. For all those reasons and others, France has
called for this meeting and urges all members of the
Council to express their willingness for it to be held.

