Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would to thank our colleagues from Austria,
France and Costa Rica who act as chairmen of the
subsidiary organs of the Security Council entrusted
with the fight against terrorism - namely, the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) - for their
detailed update on their activities and for the joint
briefing on cooperation among themselves.

The simultaneous presentation of these reports in
an open debate of the Security Council sends a positive
signal as to the coordination that already exists among
the three Committees and the importance attached to
the participation of the entire membership in this topic.
We have heard a report on a series of activities in
which the three Committees have coordinated their
efforts to find more efficient conditions to carry out the
Council's work in combating terrorism. Among these
efforts, what stands out are the start of the common
strategy to reach out to countries that are late in
reporting or that have not reported to the Committees,
and the idea of organizing seminars in different parts of
the world to facilitate the presentation of this
information.

Despite all of these efforts, Mexico believes that
it is still possible to achieve greater coordination. One
concrete measure is to strengthen the linkages with
regional and subregional organizations. In this regard, I
would like to point to a good model of cooperation,
namely, the relationship between the Committees of the
United Nations and the Inter-American Committee
Against Terrorism of the Organization of American
States. This type of interaction should be developed in
all parts of the world.

Mexico feels that measures taken by the
international community to combat terrorism, and most
particularly the activities promoted by the three
Committees, should not endanger protection of or
respect for human rights. The challenge of the
Committees' work is to achieve a balance between the
universal protection of human rights and the capacity
to respond to terrorism. Member States have at all
times and in all circumstances the obligation to adapt
any measure to the measures for the protection of
human rights based on the United Nations Charter and
international law. We must recall that that is one of the
pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
adopted by the General Assembly.

Turning now to the work of each of the
Committees, Mexico has a few specific comments to
make.

With regard to the work of the 1267 Committee, I
wish to emphasize that Mexico has been gratified by
the positive development of the Committee during the
past years. The Committee has made particular efforts
to bring to fruition resolutions 1526 (2004), 1617
(2005), 1730 (2006) and 1822 (2008), among others,
which has resulted in very important steps towards
greater transparency and legitimacy of that subsidiary
organ.

To the extent that the Committee's procedures, in
particular those that directly affect individuals and
legal entities throughout the world, are in keeping with
the standards of international human rights law and the
principles recognized by the great majority of nations
with regard to due process, the implementation of the
sanctions regime that began with resolution 1267
(1999) will be more successful. Effectiveness and
legitimacy go hand in hand in the international struggle
against terrorism. Resolution 1822 (2008) is not only
part of the framework of that process, but in fact takes
it a qualitative step forward because it introduces a
series of measures designed to improve the operation
of the key aspect of the sanctions regime - the
consolidated list.

Mexico agrees that the consolidated list should be
a dynamic instrument, not a static one. My delegation

was gratified to observe that efforts of the Committee
and of the Monitoring Team to update and review the
list achieved concrete results in less than one year. The
adoption of the Committee's guidelines at the end of
last year, the inclusion of narrative summaries and the
implementation of the review process show that we are
moving towards genuine compliance with resolution
1822 (2008).

Nevertheless, as aptly noted by the President,
much remains to be done if we are to finish the review
process by June 2010. The inclusion of more specific
identifiers as to persons and entities proposed for
incorporation, as well as the problem of people alleged
to have died yet who remain on the list, are some of the
examples of the remaining obstacles we must
overcome. The dynamic element mentioned earlier
refers both to updating the persons and entities that
represent a risk to international security and to the
suitability of maintaining certain names on the list.

As regards the work of the 1373 Committee, we
have heard that, basically due to the most recent
innovations put into practice, this Committee has
strengthened its capacity and improved the quality of
its work. Here we should pay tribute to Mr. Mike Smith
and his team for the excellent work carried out in
leading the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate.

It must be recognized that the assessment
exercise is a task of great magnitude, serving to
identify with great precision in what areas Member
States require better implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). For Mexico, the exercise should also serve to
identify the concrete needs of each country and, as
appropriate, to provide technical assistance and
strengthen national institutional capacity.

Mexico also wishes to highlight the visits carried
out by the Committee. The more flexible approach
adopted through the organization plan of the CTED for
certain visits that are shorter and more focused on
specific aspects has already produced concrete results.
We encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
continue with that type of visit in order to establish
direct contact with national authorities specifically
dedicated to combating terrorism. Establishing that
kind of dialogue is fundamental to achieving full
understanding of the challenges confronted by each
Member State of the Organization.

Turning to the 1540 Committee, my delegation
recognizes the merit of the workshops organized by the
Committee jointly with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs as well as with other
organizations in the system and with regional
organizations. We are also gratified by its work in
terms of assistance, and we hope that the requests by
some Member States will meet with a response from
the countries or organizations that are in a position to
provide such assistance. Mexico believes the
Committee should quickly follow up on those requests.

My delegation considers that the comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) will be an excellent opportunity to explore any
areas that remain to be addressed in its implementation
and will provide specific recommendations to rectify
them. My delegation is pleased to coordinate a working
group that will tackle that issue. In that vein, we
believe it is indispensable that, in addition to a general
assessment of the measures adopted, consideration of
the issue should lead to concrete recommendations to
increase the effectiveness of the Committee concerning
assistance, as that is an area particularly relevant to
most developing countries.

In conclusion, Mexico wishes to again thank the
speakers for presenting their reports and to reiterate its
commitment to continue supporting the activities of the
Security Council in its fight against terrorism through
its specialized Committees.

