Mr. Ward (Jamaica): I wish to join others in
welcoming the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello. I thank him for his comprehensive
briefing, which has yet again given us an insight into
the process currently under way in East Timor. I also
wish to take this opportunity to thank the Security
Council mission to East Timor and Indonesia, under the
outstanding leadership of Ambassador Martin Andjaba
of Namibia, for its invaluable work. Upon their return,
the members of the mission made clear to us the scope
and nature of the progress and challenges faced by
UNTAET. The findings of the mission increased our
understanding of the realities of the situation and have,
undoubtedly, better informed our discussions and
decisions.

My delegation continues to recognize the
numerous challenges faced by UNTAET as it seeks, in
collaboration with the people of East Timor, to prepare
East Timor for full self-governance and to take its
place in the international community as an independent
country, in accordance with resolution 1272 (1999).

Mr. Vieira de Mello's briefing today reinforces
the findings and conclusions of the Security Council
mission. My delegation has noted the progress which
has been made in a number of areas. We note in
particular that the mission was impressed by the
tremendous progress being made in implementing the
mandate given to UNTAET. We were pleased to hear
Mr. Vieira de Mello's statement on the reconstruction
of East Timor. We agree that the creation of the East
Timor defence force is an essential part of the
transition process. We recognize that without internal
and external security the efforts to develop East Timor
will indeed be in vain. We commend those
Governments that have committed themselves to this
effort, and we wish to emphasize that the future
security of East Timor must not be left to chance. We
support the idea that an international presence will be
necessary in East Timor after independence.

My delegation has been emphatic in the past in
stating that the involvement of the East Timorese in
charting their own future is an indispensable element in
the creation of a sustainable East Timor and in
reducing possible gaps when UNTAET's mandate fully
comes to an end. Mr. Vieira de Mello has indicated that
the Timorization of the transition process is well
advanced and that the handover of governance to the
East Timorese will be a process, not merely an event.

I would like briefly to address the refugee
situation. The long-planned return, organized by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration, of over 65 ex-Indonesian Armed Forces
reservists from East Timor (MILSAS) and their
families, which has now taken place, is a welcome
development. What now appears to be an early sign of
the development of a trend in the return of refugees
from West Timor must be encouraged. We hope that
this will receive priority attention. We also urge the
international humanitarian community to deal
expeditiously with the humanitarian situation in the
West Timor refugee camps.

Mr. Vieira de Mello has identified a number of
concerns with regard to the inability to establish a fully
functioning judicial system. We are cognizant of the
challenges and constraints, particularly the absence of
resources and the lack of adequate local capacity. This
hindrance to bringing to justice those responsible for
the gross human rights violations in East Timor in 1999
cannot be allowed to remain. We look forward to
UNTAET's review of the justice sector, and trust that a
solution to this pressing problem will be found without
further delay. The continued denial ofjustice can only
have a negative impact on the process of reconciliation.

The efforts of UNTAET in building local capacity
and preparing the East Timorese, as my delegation
stated earlier, are, indeed, critical. We have noted the
efforts in this regard. My delegation continues to
support all efforts to this end. The timetable and
mechanisms to take East Timor to full independence, as
outlined by Mr. Vieira de Mello, will, when
implemented, redound to the benefit of the East
Timorese people and augur well for their future.

A week ago, the Security Council engaged in a
very important debate on exit strategies for
peacekeeping operations. As UNTAET moves forward
in the transition process, we must ensure that the
institutional structures being put in place can and will
stand the test of time. Even though it is not possible to
predict the future, we can take the necessary measures
to ensure that the future of an independent East Timor
will be built on a solid foundation. In this regard, it is
of the utmost importance for all the relevant organs and
agencies of the United Nations to become fully
engaged in this process. We must not seek to avoid our
responsibilities. Our eventual withdrawal from East
Timor must stand as an example of the will of the
United Nations to get peacekeeping right. Jamaica fully
supports this endeavour.

