Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Ladsous,
as well as to the heads of the United Nations police
components in Liberia, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. We congratulate our Australian
colleagues on the consensus adoption of their proposed
draft resolution as resolution 2185 (2014).
We regard police components as an integral part
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. These components make their
contribution to implementing the unique mandate for
each mission, as determined by the specific situation
of the country in which they are deployed. Thanks to
regular reporting, in line with the relevant mandates,
to the Security Council on mission mandates, Member
States are well informed about the processes taking
place in the countries of deployment and in the
missions themselves. However, we hope that today's
discussion will help us to somewhat better understand
the difficulties facing police components in the field as
they carry out their tasks.

Modern United Nations police have wide-ranging
tasks before them, owing to the increasingly complex
and integrated nature of their mission's mandates.
They now have to not only observe situations and
report on breaches of public order in the areas of their
responsibilities, but also play an important auxiliary
role in the post-conflict reform of law-enforcement
institutions and in building and improving the national
capacities of host States.

We believe that police can achieve effective
and long-term results if they strictly abide by the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
closely cooperate with the host country, being guided
in that respect by the priorities that the countries have
identified and the principles of national ownership and
respect for national sovereignty.

It is important to avoid imposing external pressure
or one's own views of the core of reform processes.
Often it is the police who serve as link not only
between the population and the peacekeeping presence,
but also between the population and Governments.
When transformations are achieved at an early stage,
even minimal successes can build citizens' trust in the
authorities, create favourable conditions for a return
to normal life and establish the preconditions for
lasting peace and national reconciliation. Experience
has shown that it is vitally important also to take into
account the specific country situation when providing
assistance to States. Ignoring this and seeking to apply
universal approaches to reforming such an important
and sensitive part of society as law-enforcement bodies
will inevitably lead to the rejection of the formulas
being proposed.

Recently we have seen a significant intensification
of the potential for conflict in various parts of the
world, where, unfortunately, civilians are those most
affected. However, we do not share the interpretation
of peacekeeping that is being disseminated today, one
seen exclusively through the lens of the protection
of civilians and the provision of humanitarian
assistance. We believe that the primary responsibility
for implementing these tasks belongs to the States
themselves. Nor should we forget about traditional but
still-in-demand tasks such as observing compliance
with peace agreements and separating opposing sides.

We support the need for an ongoing dialogue
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries on all aspects of peacekeeping operations'
activities, including at the stage of planning and
developing mandates.

We must accord a special role to the General
Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, which is the main inter-State forum for
establishing guidelines for the Secretariat in the area of
peacekeeping. In that context, we welcome the holding
of a forthcoming briefing to the Special Committee by
the heads of police components.

In conclusion, for policing tasks to be carried out
effectively, especially given the additional complicating
factors of conflict, there must be predictable financing
and due equipment support and staffing. In that
context, as a police-contributing country, the Russian
Federation will continue to send officials to missions
with the relevant equipment and skills. We are also
ready to train police peacekeepers in keeping with
United Nations standards at our specialized higher
educational institutions.

