Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate China on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I wish you every success, Mr. President. I
would also like to thank the Chinese presidency for
preparing the concept note (S/2017/574, annex) on the
theme of today's debate, namely, enhancing African
capacities in the areas of peace and security. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Antonio Guterres and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Smail
Chergui, for their valuable briefings.

Ensuring peace and security is undoubtedly one of
the many challenges facing our world today. Peace is
a precondition for development. In turn, development
leads to prosperity. However, many African countries
are still stuck in a vicious cycle ofconflict and instability
due to political and security challenges, armed conflicts
and threats posed by terrorist networks, such as Boko
Haram the Lord's Resistance Army, Al-Shabaab
and others, as well as organized crime and piracy. In
addition, the African continent faces developmental
and social challenges due to unemployment, poverty
and hunger. Among other things, those challenges
pose obstacles to peace and security in Africa. In our
capacity as partners in the international community,
we must support and help Africa to solve its problems
and build its capacities for the promotion of peace
and security across the continent. We pay tribute to
the efforts of African leaders to address peace and
security issues across the continent, as well as for their
determination to find African solutions to African
problems and their persistence in establishing a
conflict-free African continent.

The African Union (AU) and its Peace and Security
Council are role models for regional organizations
with respect to maintaining peace and security in the
countries of the region. They also play a key role in
the development of the continent through Agenda 2063.
We call for enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, and the AU
in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which calls for contributions to maintaining
peace and security in the region and the world. We would
also like to pay tribute to the important role played by
the AU in leading a number of peace operations that
have become a very important means of responding to
conflicts and crises in Africa.

In that regard, I would like to mention resolution
2320 (2016), which reiterates the importance of the
partnership between the United Nations and the Peace
and Security Council. The partnership should be
based on bilateral consultations and joint strategies, as
necessary. It should also be based on the comparative
advantages of each organization. The partnership
should incorporate burden-sharing, consultative
decision-making, joint analysis, transparency and
accountability in order to take on the joint security
changes in Africa. We reaffirm the importance of the
Security Council reviewing the implementation of all
its resolutions, especially those related to Africa and
cooperation with the African Union.

Sustainable development plays a very important
role in establishing stability in all countries. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development has opened new
paths to peace through a holistic scheme that addresses
the root causes of conflicts and impediments to peace.
Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda calls for promoting
peaceful and inclusive societies and access to justice
for all. Kuwait is aware of the powerful nexus between
peace and development. In 1961, we established the
Kuwaiti Fund for Arab Economic Development, which
has extended more than 500 concessional credits to
more than 50 African countries, amounting to more
than $10 billion in credits to the sectors of agriculture,
energy, transportation, industry, water, communications
and so on.

In parallel to that developmental role, Kuwait
is also keen on fostering cooperation with Africa.
In November 2013, under the theme"Partners in
Development and Investment", Kuwait hosted the third
Arab-African Summit, which was attended by the
Presidents of 34 States, as well by delegations from
71 countries. Kuwait has worked on creating prospects
for Arab-African relations that are based on common
interests in sustainable development and that would
ensure the optimization of our natural resources as well
as realize the aspirations of the peoples of the Arab and
African regions. His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah also announced concessional credits
in the amount of $1 billion.

In this regard, allow me to highlight, during the
Chinese presidency of the Security Council, the fact
that the implementation of this Kuwaiti initiative
is being carried out in collaboration with the China-
Africa Development Fund as well as the World Bank
and its organizations.

The aforementioned Kuwaiti initiatives and
contributions are based on our belief in the importance
of operationalizing the concept oftrue partnership with
the African continent and our conviction of the robust
nexus between development and peace.

Finally, Kuwait, which will be a non-permanent
member ofthe Security Council in 2018-2019, will spare
no effort in continuing to support the African countries
and the African Union, and will work to enhance
African conflict-prevention and settlement capacities
and for the maintenance of peace and stability.

