Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
presiding over the Council for the month and to wish
you and your delegation every success in carrying out
the Council's affairs.

I also thank Mr. Tarek Mitri, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Libya, for his comprehensive
briefing, as well as Ambassador Gasana, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for his report.

For over 42 years, Libya suffered under a dictatorship
based on chaos, non-functioning institutions and
an entrenched one-man authority that demanded
unchallenged obedience. The situation led to complete
political apathy on the part of the Libyan people and
fostered a lack of interest among the majority in the
affairs of decision-making institutions, even after the
revolution. Unfortunately, some politicians and leaders
of armed groups have taken advantage of the situation
to appoint to high positions certain individuals who
lack the necessary credentials and experience. They
have also engaged in governmental procedures that
contravene good governance, thereby exacerbating
the problems inherited from the former regime and
deviating the 17 February revolution from its primary
purpose.

The Libyan people have lost all patience in the
past month, nearly three years after the revolution and
the end of the dictatorship. Despite available assets
and human resources, the Libyan people's aspirations
remain unfulfilled, except for the freedom of expression,
which has been heavily compromised in the past month
due to a campaign of threats, intimidation, blackmail,
abduction and assassination. Journalists and political
and legal activists have been subjected to that campaign
in the absence of security and military forces, and due
to the reluctance of judges to undertake their duties
because they fear for their lives.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has made great efforts over the past two
years to help the Libyan people overcome difficulties
and achieve the transition in an easy, seamless manner.
However, despite its tremendous role in organizing
and conducting elections, the support it has provided
to civil society organizations, and its demining and
elimination of war remnants, Libya has not achieved its
political aspirations. That is not due to any malfunction
of the Mission or its leaders, for whom we have much
respect and appreciation. Instead, it is due to the Libyan
political leaders' lack of will to seek assistance from the
Mission, as well as to the absence of Libyan institutions
that could receive and implement support in different
sectors.

The Libyan people are grateful for the support
they have received from the Security Council over the
past three years. They now seek more practical support
from Council members and from all friendly countries
to overcome the remaining months of the transitional
period in order to establish an elected Government in
accord with the permanent constitution that we hope
to adopt before the end of this year. Notwithstanding
the work done by UNSMIL pursuant to its mandate and
the excellent assistance it has provided and continues
to provide, especially in the fields I have mentioned,
we hope to achieve certain pressing priorities with the
practical assistance of the Security Council UNSMIL
to the Libyan authorities. Our priorities are as follows.

First, we encourage all Libyan institutions to create
an environment conducive to conducting parliamentary
elections on 25 June in an atmosphere of peace and
security.

Secondly, we wish to assist the new Parliament in
assuming and exercising its duties in an appropriate
manner that is in keeping with democratic practices
by adopting clear rules of procedures, ensuring the
separation of the legislative and executive powers, and
organizing workshops for the new parliamentarians on
parliaments and how they run.

Thirdly, we must help the new Parliament and
resulting Government to immediately reorganize the
Libyan army in accordance with international standards,
provide it with the proper arms, assume control over
all military camps and bases, disarm and dismantle
all armed groups, find work for the unemployed in the
various State institutions, according to their merits, and
criminalize the unauthorized carrying of weapons.

Fourthly, we must help local governance bodies
to establish local administrations that are efficient,
effective, transparent and accountable, and we must
urge the central Government to delegate broad local
powers to those bodies.

That is all that the Libyan people need from the
Security Council and their friends at this critical
juncture. All other difficulties can be readily
overcome, because there are no divisions or differences
among the masses of the Libyan people. They remain
as united today as they were during the 17 February
revolution. However, the grave division and ideological
polarization at the top of the hierarchical authority, the
lack of respect for the role of democracy and the rule of
law, the lack of experience and expertise in running the
State, and the absence of controls over the media paint
a portrait of Libya as a divided country governed by
tribes with different and diverging interests. That is a
false portrayal that does not reflect the reality. It gives
the wrong impression to those who follow the situation
in Libya, and that impression has been entrenched
because of the absence of leadership capable of gaining
widespread respect by rejecting biases in favour of
particular parties, the appropriate use of political
discourse, and transparency substantiated by facts and
figures.

Libyan army officers and soldiers, who number
more than 50,000, have not been receiving their salaries.
However, they are eager to reorganize themselves to
protect the gains of the 17 February revolution and to
achieve peace and security throughout Libya, despite
the attempts of some politicians and leaders of armed
groups to demonize all officers and personnel of the
Libyan army with the sole aim of preventing them from
returning to their work, and to ensure that the State has
no central armed power that can stop the Government
from being blackmailed and forced to squander public
funds in the form of remunerations for the armed
groups, the value of which exceeds what is spent on
the army and the police combined. Those who wish to
support Libya today should help it rebuild its army and
arm it as soon as possible. Those who wish to support
Libya must help it to reestablish the police presence in
its population centres. Those who wish to help Libya
should prevent any attempt to undermine the democratic

transition and take punitive measures against anyone
who would seek to obstruct that process.

