Mr. Onowu (Nigeria): We would also like to
thank Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Ms. Citaku for their statements. We also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Zannier, for his informative briefing on
the situation in Kosovo.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/562) and appreciate the progress made since
the last report. In particular, we note that the overall
security situation in Kosovo has remained calm,
although there are still pockets of violent incidents. We
are encouraged by the continued cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina on the problem of missing
persons. It is also positive that implementation of the
United Nations Strategic Framework for Kosovo is
under way.

We acknowledge the contribution of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in collaboration with regional and
international actors in facilitating the progress that has
been made in Kosovo. In particular, UNMIK's role in
the rule of law and coordination among the various
actors, as well as in facilitating dialogue among the
communities, continues to enjoy our strong support.
We also appreciate its role in fostering cordial relations
with all the major actors in the region.

The situation in northern Kosovo remains a cause
for concern. Increasing political tensions and recurring
incidents and attacks of a political nature have
continued to raise the perception of insecurity in
Kosovo and undermine efforts to promote the stability
and development of Kosovo and the region. The
Secretary-General's concerns about the absence of
significant progress in reconciliation between the
communities, as well as the consistently low number of
returns, are issues that deserve continued attention. In
this regard, we urge for greater efforts to be made to
help build confidence among the communities and lead
to the consolidation of peace, stability and
reconciliation in Kosovo and the region.

There is also a need to improve security
conditions and develop reintegration projects that will
encourage voluntary and safe returns. We are
particularly concerned about the lack of support to the
activities of UNMIK in the north. At this critical stage,
Kosovo more than ever needs the continued presence
of UNMIK in the territory. We are convinced that its
effective engagement with all the parties to promote
reconciliation and stability will bolster progress in
other areas of difficulty. We therefore call on all actors
to provide the necessary support to enable UNMIK to
fulfil its mandate.

We are strongly convinced of the importance of
dialogue in resolving the difficult issues relating to
Kosovo. In this regard, we urge the international
community to remain focused on Kosovo, especially
by promoting peace efforts aimed at reaching a
comprehensive and mutually acceptable solution to
issues in the territory and the region.

It is gratifying to note the efforts of the European
Union in facilitating a process of dialogue between the
parties. This is a major step forward. We urge the
parties to seize the possibilities that it offers. It is also
important, however, to ensure that any process involves
close consultation and coordination between all
relevant actors, and takes into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all the communities.

In conclusion, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team
for their unrelenting efforts in promoting peace and
stability in Kosovo and the region.

