Judge Joenson: I would like to begin by extending
my sincere congratulations to the representative of
France, which is presiding over the Security Council
in December, as well as the representatives of Chad,
Chile, Lithuania and Nigeria on their nations' election
to the Security Council for the term beginning in
January 2014. I wish them all the best for a successful
tour of duty.

I would also like to thank the representatives of
Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo
for their nations' service to the Security Council as
they near the completion of their terms, and express
the gratitude of the entire Tribunal to all Governments
represented on the Council for the continued support
they have provided as we draw closer to the completion
of our mandate and the closure of the Tribunal. In
particular, please allow me this opportunity to extend
my sincere gratitude to the representative of Guatemala.
His country's excellent leadership as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
for the past two years has led to continued excellent
communication and cooperation between the Tribunals

and the Working Group, which helps to ensure that the
Council and Tribunals remain aware of each others'
needs and concerns, which is especially crucial at this
time of transition and as we near closure.

It is as always an immense honour for me to
have this opportunity to address the members of the
Security Council and to provide them with an update
on the progress being made towards the completion of
our work. First and foremost, I would like to express
my sincere gratitude to the past and current judges and
staff members of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) for all of their hard work and the
dedication that they have shown, which have led us to
the stage we are at today, with only appeals remaining
following nearly two decades of judicial work.

As Council members are aware, it has been nearly
one year since the ICTR completed its work at the
trial level. As of today, the Tribunal has concluded
appellate proceedings in respect of 46 persons. The
Appeals Chamber will render one more judgement
on 16 December in the Ndahimana case, while four
other appeal judgements concerning eight persons will
be disposed of in 2014. This leaves only one appeals
case, Nyiramasuhuko et al. ("Butare"), which will be
completed in 2015.

While the Appeals Chamber has continually
devoted its best efforts towards the completion of
all appeals work by the end of 2014, the final appeal
judgement concerning six persons in the Butare case
is now projected to be completed not before the end
of July 2015. As explained more fully in my written
report submitted in May 2013 (see S/20l3/310), the
initial change in the briefing and projected schedule
for the completion of the appeal in the Butare case was
occasioned, in part, by the sheer complexity ofthe case,
coupled with an inability to meet expedited translation
goals with respect to the more than 1,400-page trial
judgement.

I have worked closely with the Presiding Judge on
the Butare case since May, when the projection was
pushed past the end of 2014, to see what could be done
to mitigate the delay. Unfortunately, during the past
six months amid these efforts, the Butare case also had
an unexpectedly large amount of pro-appeal work that
threatened to further delay the projected completion
date. I am happy to inform the Council today, however,
that our efforts to advance the completion date,
including the allocation of additional resources to the
Butare team in 2014, have at least had the effect of
preserving the projection of completion around the end
of July 2015, in spite of the pre-appeal litigation that
distracted from the core judgement work.

I would also like to note that I remain in close
contact with the Presiding Judge, who continues to
take all necessary measures to expedite the appeal
work in this case without compromising the rights of
the parties. In that respect, the Presiding Judge held
a status conference in May aimed at streamlining the
consideration of several motions and at facilitating
more efficient disposal of pre-appeal work. The
Appeals Chamber has taken further steps to follow-up
with the translation unit to accelerate the translation
of pre-appeal documents, and the Butare legal team in
Chambers now consists of staffmembers able to work in
both English and French, which facilitates preliminary
work on submissions from the parties without awaiting
translations.

I wish to underscore that every effort is being
made by the Tribunal to complete this case while fully
respecting the fundamental rights of the accused to due
process in accordance with international standards,
and I assure the Council that the Registrar and I will
continue to closely monitor the status of the Butare
case in order to forestall any further impediments to
its completion.

I must now take this opportunity to extend my
sincere gratitude to all of the judges and the support staff
of the Appeals Chamber, who have worked tirelessly
to complete the Tribunal's work under extremely tight
deadlines. I hope that the Member States will also join
me in recognizing their efforts.

On a related note and as detailed in my previous
report to the Council, Judge Andresia Vaz resigned
from her position as appeals Judge in May. In order
to mitigate any detrimental effect on the completion
of appeals work that would come with the loss of
such an esteemed judge, in accordance with article 12
bis of the Statue of the Tribunal I requested that the
Secretary-General appoint a replacement judge to
serve the remainder of Judge Vaz's term. I am therefore
grateful to the Secretary-General for his appointment
of Mr. Mandiaye Niang of Senegal as permanent judge
of the ICTR to replace Judge Vaz. I am confident that
the appointment of Mr. Niang, coupled with the recent
election of Mr. Koffi Afande as Permanent Judge of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), will play a crucial role in contributing to the
remaining work.

I would next like to take this opportunity to inform
the Council about a recent joint visit of the ICTR and
the Mechanism to Rwanda on 4 and 5 November. In
order to strengthen mutual assistance and cooperation
between both institutions and Rwanda, for the first
time the Presidents, Prosecutor and representatives of
the Registrars of the ICTR and the Mechanism met
with senior Government officials in Kigali. During
these meetings, discussions took place regarding issues
of mutual interest, and the ICTR delegation provided
updates on the problems that the Tribunal is facing in
terms of relocating acquitted and convicted released
persons who are still residing in Tanzania. The ICTR
delegation further outlined the progress being made
in terms of reparations for victims and survivors of
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, and on the very recent
commissioning of a draft project proposal to be carried
out by the International Organization for Migration.
That proposal will provide a meaningful way forward
that is in line with the position that the General
Assembly has taken in calling for assistance to victims
and survivors of the 1994 genocide.

Returning to the matter of relocation, I note that, as
the ICTR continues to make preparations for closure,
the issue of the relocation of acquitted and convicted
released persons in Tanzania remains one of the most
serious challenges to the successful completion of
the Tribunal's mandate. For the past five years, all
efforts made by the ICTR to achieve the relocation of
the remaining individuals have proved unsuccessful.
To date, seven acquitted and three convicted released
persons reside in a safe house in Arusha, despite the
fact that some of those persons were acquitted over a
decade ago.

Since the last report to the Council, and pursuant
to the framework of the strategic plan submitted to
the Security Council's Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, the Registrar and I met with
representatives of North American, European and
African countries between May and October 2013.
More specifically, I met with representatives of nine
European countries, while the Registrar met with
representatives from four African and two European
countries, to brief them on the serious challenges
facing the ICTR in terms of relocation and to appeal
for their assistance in accepting one or more acquitted
or released persons currently residing in Tanzania. The
Registrar and I continue to follow-up with the officials
of each country that we met with, as well as others,
in order to continue to explore all possible avenues
available to the Tribunal to find an equitable resolution
to the problem of relocation.

I firmly believe that failing to relocate the acquitted
and released persons residing in Tanzania represents a
serious challenge to the credibility of the enforcement
of international criminal justice. Therefore, recalling
resolution 2080 (2012), in which the Council reiterates
its call upon Members States that are in a position
to do so to cooperate with the Tribunal, I must once
again call upon the Council for urgent assistance and
increased cooperation from Member States to support
the Tribunal in its efforts to find host countries for the
seven acquitted persons and three convicted released
persons still residing in Tanzania.

I next turn to the transition to the Mechanism.
The monitoring of all ICTR cases referred to national
jurisdictions is now the responsibility ofthe Mechanism.
That currently includes two cases referred to France
and two cases referred to Rwanda. The Mechanism
will also be responsible for monitoring the six fugitive
cases transferred to Rwanda once those individuals are
arrested and proceedings commence. The Registrar and
I continue to oversee the administrative functions of the
monitoring of the Uwinkindi trial in Rwanda, and will
do so until the end of2013. The Mechanism has assumed
all responsibilities associated with the monitoring ofthe
Munyagishari case in Rwanda upon his transfer in July
and for the two cases referred to France, save for the fact
that the ICTR is providing interim monitors who are
now working closely with Mechanism staff as interim
monitors until arrangements with an organization are
finalized.

With respect to the archives, the Mechanism has
begun to assume responsibility for the management of
the archives for both Tribunals. Since the last report to
the Council, the ICTR has completed three temporary
archives facilities and handed them over to the
Mechanism, together with some of the ICTR records
that have already been prepared for management by the
Mechanism. The transfer to the Mechanism of judicial
records not in active use remains ongoing and is still
expected to be completed by the end of 2014. However,
records that are still in active use, including records
related to the Butare case, will remain the responsibility
of the ICTR and will be transferred only once they are
no longer in use. The Tribunal remains hopeful that the
preparation and transfer ofits records will be completed
prior to its closure.

I would next like to take this opportunity to
congratulate my friend and colleague President
Theodor Meron on his re-election as President of the
ICTY. I have come to work very closely with President
Meron in his role as President of the Mechanism and
I cannot stress enough how important it is that he and
Registrar Hocking have ensured such great cooperation
between the Mechanism and ICTY offices and the
ICTR, allowing for a very smooth transition so far. I
want to also thank the Registry, especially the archives
staff, for the important work they have completed to
date with distinction.

As the work of the ICTR concludes, it is worth
remembering that it was the Security Council that not
only established the ICTR to try those accused of being
most responsible for the planning and execution of the
genocide in Rwanda, but also provided the ICTR with
a broad mandate that included helping to contribute
to the process of peace and reconciliation in the Great
Lakes region by helping to bring to justice those most
responsible for the Rwandan genocide. While the legacy
of the ICTR will no doubt include its jurisprudential
contributions to the development of international
criminal law and international humanitarian law, it
remains important to also recall the efforts that the
Tribunal continues to make to foster genocide education
and remembrance through its outreach and capacity-
building initiatives.

Throughout its existence, the ICTR has instituted
training programmes, professional workshops,
visiting professionals programmes and partnerships
with institutions of higher learning across the globe.
The Tribunal created the Umusanzu Information and
Documentation Centre in Kigali and a capacity-building
task force. It also instituted programmes aimed at sharing
lessons learned with respect to the administration of a
court adjudicating international crimes and with respect
to running an international court in general. The Office
of the Prosecutor created a manual of best practices on
the tracking and arrest of fugitives from international
criminal justice and recently finalized a best-practices
manual on the investigation and prosecution of sexual
and gender-based violence. Those capacity-building
initiatives represent some of the concrete measures
that the Tribunal has taken to help to restore peace and
reconciliation in the region and ensure that present and
future generations are provided with the necessary
tools to continue the fight against impunity long after
the Tribunal closes its doors.
It remains my distinct honour to address the Council
once more on behalf of the Tribunal. I wish to express
our gratitude for the support members' Governments
have shown over the past 19 years. I truly believe that,
with continued assistance from Member States, the
Tribunal will close its doors with its mandate completed
and its legacy secured.

