Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam,
on your initiative to hold an open debate to discuss the
question of Haiti, in anticipation of the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General for the presentation of his report (S/2009/439)
on recent developments in the field and for his valuable
recommendations to Member States. I am also grateful
for the statements of Prime Minister Pierre-Louis,
Special Envoy William Clinton and Special
Representative Hedi Annabi.

It is my pleasure to inform the Council that, this
past July, Guatemala sent its eighth contingent of
military police to MINUSTAH, thereby renewing its
commitment to contributing to the Mission and to
supporting the Haitian Government. The deployment of
the contingent was accompanied by Mr. Rafael Espada,
Vice President of Guatemala, who had the honour of
meeting with President Rene Preval to convey our
message of solidarity and best wishes.

We welcome the holding of the senatorial
elections in Haiti in April and June, which provided an
opportunity to improve stability in Haiti in the future.
At the same time, we pay tribute to the international
community for continuing to support the strenuous,
coordinated and generous efforts towards long-term
cooperation, which involve far more than ending the
violence.

I would like to make the following observations
on the renewal of MINUSTAH's mandate. First, I
reiterate my country's support for the renewal of the
mandate for another year, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. Identifying the right moment to
draw down a peacekeeping operation is always
difficult. In the case of Haiti, on the basis of our own
observations and the contents of the report of the
Secretary-General, that time has clearly not yet arrived.
We wish to highlight the observation in the report
confirming that, if we are to avoid setbacks, the
maintenance of a substantial international military and
police presence on the ground, at a level similar to that
currently deployed, remains essential. We consider that
the military presence remains indispensable, as
demonstrated by the type of support that the Mission
provides in matters of security, emergencies and
disasters, civil unrest, elections, infrastructure and
border protection. Over the past year, the military
presence has proved to be best equipped and most able
to meet such needs.

Secondly, the political stabilization of Haiti
cannot be achieved through a military and police
presence alone. Coordination among donors, regional
organizations, agencies, programmes and civil society
to support the Government in establishing a secure and
stable environment is a crucial element if we are to
derive the maximum benefit from all work being
carried out in the field. In all those respects, we believe
that the Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti is an important body that has
helped to strengthen the link between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. It also
provides a practical forum through which the United
Nations and the international financial institutions have
broadened their cooperation on behalf of Haiti.

That brings me to my third point. Guatemala has
experienced first hand the socio-economic challenges
that violence and a lack of security pose to
development. Consolidating State institutions makes it
possible to promote sustainable development
processes. We encourage the prioritization of thorough
socio-economic reform and the strengthening of
institutions responsible for the administration of
justice.

Never before have we had so many tools and
opportunities to address the security and development
of Haiti jointly and in a complementary manner. We are
confident that significant progress will be made that
will speed up the transfer of functions and
responsibilities to Haitians themselves.

Finally, we note with some concern paragraph 82
of the report, which indicates the amounts owed to
countries contributing troops and police to
MINUSTAH. Guatemala recognizes that MINUSTAH
is working tirelessly to carry out its mandate of
consolidating stability in the country. However, that
will be possible only if the resources necessary to do so
are available. That requires up-to-date and timely
reimbursements for expenses and contingent-owned
equipment.

In short, the United Nations presence in Haiti has
made a crucial difference to the country. We are
confident that the day is approaching when that
presence will no longer be necessary and Haitians will
assume responsibility for their own future. For now,
however, we need to persist in our endeavour for the
good of the country and of the United Nations itself.

