Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to thank the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth, as well as Ms. Muganda and
Ms. Ramyar, for their informative briefings.

Belgium welcomes the importance attached to
the youth, peace and security agenda in the Council.
Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) underscore
the immense potential of young people in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. Let us work towards
maximizing that potential.

Estimates project that up to 600 million young
adults are living in fragile and conflict-affected States.
Those young people constitute not only the majority of
the population in those countries but also the majority
of their armed forces and security personnel. Young
women are often solely responsible for the economic
survival of their families. Yet, those young people
are all too often excluded from peace processes
or decision-making concerning the future of their
countries. Their political, social or economic exclusion
is a risk factor. Those varied forms of exclusion
can fuel a collective mistrust of the national and
international political institutions that are supposed to
serve and protect them. It is therefore crucial to create
an environment conducive to the participation and
inclusion of young adults in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding processes. Allow me to underscore four
points in that regard.

First, youth participation in formal and informal
peace and mediation processes can enhance their
legitimacy and sustainability. However, in order to
move from exclusion to genuine inclusion, we must
recognize young people as equal and powerful actors
who can make a positive contribution throughout
the peace process. That requires a change of norms,
practices and attitudes. That is not impossible; we have
recently seen significant youth participation in the peace
process in Colombia and witnessed the establishment of
a high advisory board for peace in Afghanistan, which
includes a youth committee.

Secondly, young people often constitute the
majority members of armed and military groups.
Their viewpoints and needs should be central to
processes of security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as in
community violence-reduction programmes and
actions to prevent violent extremism.

Thirdly, effective inclusion can be achieved only
by giving young men and women the dignity, protection
and quality of life to which they are entitled. In that
respect, Belgium remains firmly committed to the
promotion of human rights, which is a fundamental
condition for peace and development, attaching
particular importance to the rights of vulnerable groups.

Finally, we recognize the important role that new
information technologies can play. Two-thirds of Internet
users around the world are under 35 years old. Free of
territorial constraints, young people can now learn
from more varied reference models, as demonstrated
by the independent progress study on youth, peace
and security (see S/2018/86). While new information
technologies and social media may pose challenges,
those same technologies can go beyond the lines of
conflict and facilitate the civic participation of young
people. For example, civil society used social media to
engage young people in the High-level Revitalization
Forum on the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

Belgium will continue to advocate for the greater
integration of the youth, peace and security agenda
in the debates of the Council. It is important that the
Council be informed in a timely and comprehensive
manner of the specific situations under this agenda item.

