Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Spain for convening today's open
debate, which we realize is the result of great efforts by
our Organization at this time when we are celebrating
its seventieth anniversary.

As the President's concept note (S/2015/793, annex)
rightly states, although very significant progress has
been made in the working methods of the Security
Council, there is room for more improvement and for
better implementation, which will help to boost the
effectiveness of the Council's decisions and to provide
greater coordination with other organs of the United
Nations. As the representative of Angola noted earlier,
the Council's work lies at the heart of the work of the
Organization.

1 would like to discuss two points that Colombia
considers worthy of highlighting.

First, one of the issues that has a direct impact
on the work of the Security Council is naturally
related to the enormous challenge of bringing about
lasting peace in conflict areas or places that have just
emerged from conflict, and although the Peacebuilding
Commission - we havejust heard from its Chairperson,
the Permanent Representative of Sweden - the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Peacebuilding Support Office
and other operational peacebuilding entities play a key
role, the issue remains part of the Security Council's
responsibilities. As the report ofthe Secretary-General's
Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 Review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture states, it is
necessary to have a more comprehensive approach to
peace consolidation, one that avoids fragmentation and
a silo mentality in the roles of the General Assembly
and the Security Council and that takes into account
the fact that not only are military and field operations
part of the Council's responsibilities, but so are conflict
prevention, recovery and rebuilding operations in post-
conflict situations.

Secondly, with respect to the resolution on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
(General Assembly resolution 69/321), my country,
along with many others, played a very active role in the
negotiations on the draft. We believe its adoption stands
as great recognition of our work and an important step
towards greater transparency and more inclusiveness
in the selection and appointment of the Secretary-
General. Clear guidelines like the joint letter from the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council outlining and explaining the procedure,
continual sharing of information on the candidates,
and informal dialogues or meetings with candidates
are of enormous importance. All this will support
greater involvement of the membership, which I think
has begun. The resolution is a fundamental part of our
vision of working methods reform. Colombia calls for
its implementation without hesitation.

Another initiative that is very dear to my country,
which 48 Member States have joined, is the search for
suitable women candidates for the position of Secretary-
General. The historic role that a woman could play at
this new stage would be the beginning of great progress
in reform. Like these 48 nations, 1 am sure that we can
work together on this proposal, which hopefully can be
a great historic opportunity - as many here have said,
beginning with the President and many other members
of the Council, for whose support I am grateful - to
initiate those changes and bring together the visions that
civil society, academia and of course the Organization
itself have as we approach the important election of the
next Secretary- General of the United Nations.

