The President (spoke in French): I would now
like to make a statement in my national capacity as the
representative of Burkina F aso.

As is right, I would like to thank the two
Presidents and the two Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) for their reports on their activities during these
past six months and on the implementation of the
completion strategy for each Tribunal, in accordance
with resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

I would also like to thank Ambassador Mayr-
Harting of Austria for the information that he has
provided us on the work of the informal Working
Group on international tribunals.

We would like to congratulate the two Tribunals
for their efforts to implement their completion
strategies within an acceptable timeline, and we
encourage them to maintain that pace.

Despite the efforts to make progress with pending
cases, the situation of high-ranking fugitives, such as
Ratko Mladic', Goran HadZic' or Felicien Kabuga,
remains a source of concern. We urge the Offices of the
two Prosecutors to continue to make the necessary
efforts to arrest them. We call on all States, in
particular those in the regions concerned, to cooperate
with the Tribunals at the highest possible level to that
end. We congratulate Uganda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for their help in arresting two
fugitives in neighbouring countries.

On the issue of the deadline for completing their
work, we understand that factors beyond the Tribunals'
control have caused delays in their daily work. We
therefore note the necessity of the indicative deadline
of 2013 for the finalization of judicial activities.

In the meantime, it is important that the
initiatives to redeploy staff and reduce the size of the
Tribunals continue. In the same vein, we are pleased to
see that cases are successfully being transferred to
national jurisdictions by the ICTY, and we urge the
ICTR to continue to pay particular attention to the need
to transfer the cases of second- and intermediate-rank
accused to national jurisdictions, in particular that of
Rwanda. That is clearly an essential element of the
completion strategy of that Tribunal as approved by the
Security Council.

Although we understand the reasons behind
recourse to the dual employment of some judges who
have decided to return to their national administrations,
we encourage the Tribunals to limit such cases, which
should be exceptional. We urge them to pursue their
awareness-raising and capacity-building efforts and to
further enhance their cooperation ties with national
jurisdictions. Similarly, the protection of victims and
witnesses should be an ongoing priority for the
Tribunals, especially in light of the invaluable
contribution of witnesses to the administration of
justice.

With regard to the status of the ICTR ad litem
judges, most of whom have worked on a permanent
basis for five years or more, we believe that it would
only be fair for the Security Council to consider the
question of benefits for judges, to which they should be
entitled in light of their conditions of service.

Burkina Faso has followed with interest the
efforts of the Security Council Informal Working
Group in addressing residual matters under the
chairmanship of Austria, whom we congratulate for its
leadership and for having prepared the draft resolution
under discussion in the Working Group. We hope that
the draft will enable us to reach a satisfactory solution
to the significant concerns about the functions,
character and structure of the residual mechanism, as
well as the question of the archives of the Tribunals.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Sweden.

