Mr. Farhfidi (Afghanistan): Madam President,
the Afghan delegation would like to thank you for
convening this open debate on this subject, of which a
typical example is Afghanistan.

I will speak very briefly and only about the case
of Afghanistan.

Today marks an historical date in the recent
history of the country. Today, President Karzai signed
the new Constitution of Afghanistan, which was
adopted by the Constitutional Loya Jirga on 5 January,
2004. The constitutional Grand Assembly, which
convened in Kabul from 14 December to 4 January
2004, was comprised of all of Afghanistan's ethnic
groups and segments of society. This constitution
provides for the establishment of democratic structures
based on democratic principles and values.
Furthermore, additional provisions assure equal rights
among men and women, freedom of expression,
political pluralism, free and fair elections and the full
participation of women in the political, economic and
social spheres of the country. This major event marks
another step in the implementation of the agreement
brokered by the United Nations and signed in Bonn by
the Afghan parties on 5 December 2001.

The adoption of the new Afghan Constitution also
proved the capacity of Afghans to agree on major
issues related to national reconciliation. The current
circumstances in Afghanistan differ greatly from those
that existed during the inter-Afghan Bonn conference
of December 2001. By now, the issues of
reconstruction and rehabilitation, including
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, require
an international meeting in which donor countries and
donor institutions will decide on enhancing
international assistance to Afghanistan.

The fact-finding mission of the Security Council
to Afghanistan, so ably led by Ambassador Pleuger of
Germany in November 2003, played a vital role in
raising the United Nations awareness of the importance
of the sustained international assistance required by
Afghanistan.

One of the main characteristics of Afghanistan's
peacemaking process was the participation of all
Afghan political groups representing the major political
parties of Afghanistan. In this regard, the efforts of the
United Nations, as an impartial international body, in
brokering such a gathering and facilitating the drafting
of the blueprint in close consultation with Afghan
groups, represents yet another major achievement of
the United Nations. We should also emphasize here the
genuine and honest political will expressed by Afghan
political groups for the success of the reconciliation
process and the consolidation of peace and security in
Afghanistan.

Despite much progress since the signing of the
Bonn Agreement in December 2001, Afghanistan
continues to face many challenges. The pace of
reconstruction in the country is not satisfactory,
poverty and deprivation have pushed thousands of
farmers to cultivate the lucrative poppy crop and
desperate attempts by some remnants of the former
Taliban and Al Qaeda, aimed at destabilizing the
success of the Transitional Government, continue.

These challenges require a strong international
commitment to the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
Afghanistan. The provision of means and assistance to
the reconstruction process would have a marked effect
on stability and security in Afghanistan, thus
contributing highly to the successful holding of the
presidential and parliamentary elections, scheduled for
June 2004.

