Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to thank
Venezuela for initiating this open debate on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture. This is a
timely opportunity to discuss how to build peace in a
challenging global context. With conflicts dramatically
increasing in number and changing in nature, there is
an urgency to develop a more fit-for-purpose United
Nations response.

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like now to make a few remarks from my
national perspective.

Former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold
once said that the United Nations was created not to
lead humankind to heaven, but to save humanity from
hell. Indeed, the United Nations has saved millions
of lives from wars, poverty, diseases and starvation.
Today, its role is once again being dramatically tested
by the multiplication of threats posed to international
peace and security. In less than 10 years, the number
of major civil wars has almost tripled. More than
1.5 billion people live in countries affected by violent
conflicts. The nature of conflicts has changed as
well. We are witnessing the volatility of borders, the
disintegration of States, trafficking in natural resources
that finance terrorist groups and appalling violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law. In
many cases, the lack of solid institutions and fair and
transparent governance, and the presence of corruption
and the mismanagement of public funds, which cost
the global economy $2.6 trillion, have made States
vulnerable to terrorism and violent extremist groups.
Solving crises is costly, both financially and in terms
of human resources, and quite often the relapse of
countries into conflict is almost predictable.

More than ever, peacebuilding is intrinsically
linked to conflict-prevention. Preventing conflict is
considerably less expensive than responding to it after
the fact. It is also less divisive in the international
community, including in the Security Council, than
finding solutions after the outbreak of crisis. The United
Nations has at its disposal an impressive array of tools
to build peace. We see them in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in particular in Sustainable Development Goal
16, on peace, justice and strong institutions.

As last week we paid our respect to the late former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, let me quote
from his 1996 An Agenda for Democratization, which
emphasizes the links between peace, development
and democracy:

"Without democratic institutions to channel popular
pressures for development and reform, popular
unrest and instability will result. The reality is that
no State can long have the potential to pursue
a successful and sustainable development strategy,
if its citizens are prohibited from participating
actively and substantially in its political processes
and economic, social and cultural development."
(para. 25)

The reviews of peacebuilding and peace operations, the
report on mediation, the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and his Human
Rights Up Front initiative are part of that same vision.

Building peace requires an integrated and cross-
cutting approach, because its multidimensional nature
poses challenges of coherence. We believe, therefore,
that increased involvement on the part of the Security
Council in preventive actions could help generate
strategic planning for peacebuilding.

Romania has invested in preventive diplomacy,
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and mediation. Ever
since we became an official development assistance
donor country in 2007, we have devoted resources,
including at the United Nations level, to capacity-
building for public institutions, election assistance,
public order, the campaign against corruption, youth
and education. As a Security Council member in
2005, Romania promoted resolution 1631 (2005), on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We think that much added value will come
from further developing partnerships with regional
organizations as an important tool for building trust in
conflict prevention and in post-conflict reconstruction.
In that respect, we also think that increased Security
Council engagement with regional organizations,
consistent with Chapter VIII ofthe Charter ofthe United
Nations, will bring a more focused and integrated
perspective to peacebuilding.

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said at the launch
of his report for the coming World Humanitarian
Summit in Istanbul,

"We need to restore trust in our global order and
show those millions left behind in conflicts, in
chronic need and in constant fear, the solidarity
they deserve and expect from us."

I believe we can do that only through peace and
stability. It requires good governance, opportunities
for young people and fighting violent extremism.
Those are the main challenges to a sustainable
peacebuilding architecture.

