Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me
to join previous speakers in thanking High
Representative and European Union Special
Representative Mr. Schwarz-Schilling for his
concluding briefing on recent developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. At the same time, I would like to
welcome to the Council His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Spirie, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and to thank him for his insightful
remarks.

Slovakia aligns itself with the intervention to be
delivered later this morning by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Therefore, I shall limit myself to the following points.

First, I would like to express our continuing
support for the High Representative and European
Union Special Representative and for the ongoing
efforts of his Office to facilitate intercommunity trust
and confidence and to deepen responsibility, including
through the gradual strengthening of local ownership,
which is the guiding principle of European Union
policy towards the country in question.

Here, I would like to reiterate our opinion ~
expressed in November last year - that the current
constitutional setup does not make possible immediate
abandonment of the Bonn powers. We continue to
believe that the implementation of constitutional
reform is vital for further positive developments in that
respect. We believe that for constitutional reform to be
successful, it must be a process driven from beneath,
based on the same principle of strong local ownership
and intensive dialogue throughout the society of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same time, we
consider the role of the international community to be
indispensable, particularly in getting constitutional
reform back on track and keeping it in motion.

Secondly, I wish to join others, including the
High Representative, in expressing appreciation for the
formation of the new Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which has reiterated its dedication to
the path of Euro-Atlantic integration. Slovakia
welcomes the recent finalization of the text of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Together with other nations of the
EU, we are looking to the new authorities to meet all
conditions necessary for the conclusion and signature
of the Agreement as set out in the relevant conclusions
of the Council of the EU. I would like to reiterate
Slovakia's firm support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European and Euro-Atlantic perspective - or, as
Mr. Spirie called it, the "Brussels era" of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Thirdly, we also understand that there is a need to
move ahead with police reform, which, in our opinion,
is a part of the complex reform process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We see that this very complex issue
reflects the most precious peacetime achievement in
the country's post-conflict period: the personal security
of persons belonging to different entities. Therefore,
we continue to advocate a step-by-step approach,
which, in our view, should be accompanied by inter-
community dialogue at all levels.

Last but not least, I would like to warmly
welcome the solution adopted by the Council on the
issue of non-certification, which was reached as a
result of joint efforts by its members, together with the
Office of the High Representative and the United
Nations Secretariat. In particular, we acknowledge with
great appreciation that that solution not only preserves
the legacy of the International Police Task Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also confirms the EU'S
guiding principle of the policy of local ownership.

In conclusion, I would like to express the
gratitude of my delegation for all the work done by
High Representative Schwarz-Schilling, who
accompanied the country at a difficult stage in its
development and transition. We commend his work,
and we believe that one of the achievements under his
leadership was the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina
had the opportunity to shape its future in an authentic
way, while assuming ownership of the process and

having the guidance of the international community.
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling said that there will be many
challenges for his successor, Ambassador Lajcak. We
are confident that there will be a smooth transition
process, for which we thank all partners in advance.

