Mr. Koech (Kenya): I take this opportunity to
thank the Security Council for having decided to hold
this meeting in Africa, particularly in Nairobi. We
understand that this is only the fourth time that the
Security Council has met outside New York. That is
indeed a great honour for us as a country, and we
believe that it is in recognition of Kenya's commitment
and role as a peacemaker in the region.

On behalf of the ministers of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
responsible for the Somali peace process, I take this
opportunity to thank the Security Council for
dedicating this meeting to the critical issue of peace
and security in Somalia. The Council's decision to
include the issue of Somalia on its agenda in Nairobi is
a clear indication of the importance it attaches to the
maintenance of peace and security in Somalia and
further underscores the Council's commitment in the
Horn of Africa.

I would like to report to the Council that the
Somali National Reconciliation Conference, which was
launched two years ago, has successfully concluded
with the election of His Excellency The Honourable
Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed as President of the Federal
Transitional Government of the Republic of Somalia. I
would also like to inform the Council that the peace
process has achieved tremendous progress by
establishing an all-inclusive transitional federal
parliament and through the initial formation of a broad-
based Government that saw the election of a President
and the appointment of a Prime Minister.

The IGAD member States, with the support of the
IGAD Partners Forum, have successfully steered the
Somali peace process. Despite those achievements, we
face the very critical and delicate situation of
stabilizing the security situation inside Somalia before
the Federal Government can relocate. I would like to
ask the Security Council to assist in the establishment
of an appropriate mechanism to facilitate the relocation
of the Federal Government of Somalia.

I wish to recall that in their statements to the
Council yesterday President Yoweri Museveni,
Chairman of the tenth Summit of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
and President Mwai Kibaki, facilitator of the Somali
peace process, appealed for assistance to help with the
relocation of the Somali Government from Nairobi to
Somalia.

I wish also to recall that the IGAD Special
Summit on Somalia appealed to the Security Council to
take immediate action to deploy a peacekeeping
mission in Somalia, to assist in securing the new
Government and to help train security forces for
Somalia. We appeal to the Security Council to support
the initiative being taken by the African Union in
conjunction with IGAD, to deploy a peace restoration
and protection force in Somalia.

We call upon the Security Council and the entire
international community to give consideration to
imposing sanctions on any person or group engaging in
activities that could affect the gains made by the peace
process so far and that could affect the functioning of
the new Government inside Somalia. Finally, we
request the Security Council to mandate all IGAD
member States to remain engaged in the process of
reconciliation, peacekeeping and peace-building in
Somalia until the situation has stabilized.

To enable us to achieve a comprehensive and
lasting solution to the Somali situation and to
consolidate the gains made by the peace process, there
is an urgent need for the deployment of a restoration
and protection force in Somalia to undertake
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
It is our hope, as a region, that the Security
Council will come up with a resolution on Somalia that
will assure the development of appropriate mechanisms
for the creation of an environment conducive to the
establishment of stability and peace in Somalia, in
order to enable the new Government to relocate inside
Somalia.

