Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I would like to extend
to His Excellency the Prime Minister of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, a very cordial and warm greeting. The Prime
Minister's presence at this debate reflects the great
significance that the Government of Timor-Leste
attaches to the role that the United Nations has played
in his country.

I also take this opportunity to commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Atul Khare, and all the staff of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for their
commitment and excellent work in Timor-Leste.

Portugal concurs with the statement that the
representative of Germany just made on behalf of the
European Union. But in my national capacity, I would
like to say the following.

Portugal agrees with the Secretary-General's
analysis that the overall situation in Timor-Leste has
improved, although the security situation remains
volatile and the political climate fluid.
From our perspective, the continued commitment
of the international community and, in particular, of
this Council, remains critical to securing lasting peace
and democratic stability in Timor-Leste. We must
assure the Timorese people that the United Nations will
support them for as long as necessary. Next week, the
Security Council will have the opportunity to send that
message if the Council wishes to endorse the extension
of UNMIT's mandate for an additional period of 12
months, as recommended by the Secretary-General.

In the past months, the Timorese leadership has
undertaken commendable efforts towards national
dialogue and political reconciliation. Many challenges
remain to be faced as the country prepares itself for the
upcoming presidential and parliamentary elections.

As there cannot be true reconciliation without
justice and accountability for crimes, security and
justice are essential to ensure that the elections are held
in a peaceful and stable climate, so that the results are
democratically accepted by all political actors in
Timor-Leste. UNMIT's assistance and good offices
throughout the electoral process are needed and
encouraged. In that regard, allow me to refer to the
recommendations of the Independent Electoral
Certification Team.

The Portuguese Government also supports the
strengthening of UNMIT with an additional operational
police capacity of two operational platoons, consisting
of 72 elements, to address security challenges during
the electoral and immediate post-electoral periods. We
are ready and willing to contribute to that endeavour.

Healing the wounds of the past within Timorese
society is another challenge. Helping the Timorese
Government to restore people's confidence in the
judicial system and in the national defence and security
institutions and promoting human rights is of
fundamental importance. Outstanding grievances - in
particular within the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and the Falintil-Forcas Armadas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) - can be overcome by the
Timorese authorities with UNMIT's help and in close
collaboration with international partners. The signature
of a trilateral memorandum of understanding among
the Timorese Government, the United Nations and
Australia on the provision of assistance to Timor-
Leste- which establishes a Trilateral Cooperation
Forum - and the signature of a military technical
arrangement between the United Nations and Australia
are good examples of such collaboration. We hope that
they will achieve the desired results.

The situation of internally displaced persons and
their security in the areas of return are also of
particular concern. In our opinion, it is essential to
create the conditions for their return and for their
resettlement in their local communities.

Portugal has always maintained that the Timorese
should be the masters of their choices regarding their
collective future as a nation. Whereas there continues
to be a clear need for multilateral and bilateral
assistance and support, the international community
must be careful to provide them in a manner consistent
with the sovereign options and cultural identity of
Timor-Leste. As underlined in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2007/50), our common efforts can be
successful only if they enjoy full ownership and
acceptance on the part of the Timorese stakeholders.

Portugal will remain committed to the
consolidation of peace, democracy, full independence
and development in Timor-Leste. We are fully
confident that the Timorese people, through their
efforts and determination, will be able to unite in a
collective effort towards those goals.

