Mr. Pompeo (United States ofAmerica): On behalf
ofPresident Trump and the American people, I first want
to thank Foreign Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado
of the Dominican Republic, the current President of
the Security Council, for scheduling this meeting. My
former colleague, Ambassador Haley, lobbied for a year
to get the Council to address Venezuela, but her pleas
fell on deaf ears. This meeting is long overdue and
Council members all know why it is overdue.

Take Carlos Aquino, a 37-year-old construction
worker weeping over the tiny coffin of his deceased
infant son, who died of starvation. Such scenes of
misery are now the norm in Nicolas Maduro Moros's
Venezuela, where millions of children are suffering
from malnutrition and starvation thanks to a socialist
experiment that caused the economy to collapse. This
human misery is not a secret. Stories like this are well
documented by our press corps. We can read about
men like Carlos every day. People like him are why the
United States called for this meeting.

We are here because Maduro has reduced ordinary
Venezuelans, who once lived in prosperity, to rooting
through dumpsters to find something to eat. We are
here because scores of Venezuelan women - some of
them teenagers - have fled Maduro's madness to other
countries and, in desperation, turned to prostitution
to survive. We are here because of Maria Vielma,
a school psychologist who said, through tears, "We
have a Government that is dedicated to destroying,
not constructing". Another man - a farmer named
Vladimir Sequera, who never got more than a sixth
grade education - hoped that his stepdaughter Gabriela
could fulfil her dreams of being a lawyer. She now
says that their whole future has been taken away. That
future - for her and for all Venezuelans - did not
magically disappear on its own. The Maduro regime's
failed policies, oppression and corruption stole
that future.

The United States is helping to recover a brighter
future for Venezuela. We are here to urge all nations to
support the democratic aspirations of the Venezuelan
people as they try to free themselves from former
President Maduro's illegitimate mafia State. The
humanitarian situation demands action now; it demands
action today. Today, 9 out of 10 citizens live in poverty.
Millions lack access to drinking water and food. Three
out of four hospitals have been abandoned. Three
million Venezuelans have been forced to flee their
homeland, thereby flooding the region and threatening
international peace and security. Maduro's prisons are
full of political prisoners, unjustly behind bars, and
the graveyards hold dissidents and protesters who have
been killed by that regime.

I want to talk to the Council about just one of
them - a member of the City Council of Caracas named
Fernando Alban Salazar. Just four months ago, he came
here to this city to meet with the world's representatives,
who gather here every year during the general debate
of the General Assembly. He came here to speak about
the failures of the Maduro regime and about his hopes
for a more democratic and more prosperous future for
his country. After that, he went home to the country
that he loved. Maduro's secret police arrested him at the
airport as soon as he landed. He died in their custody
three days later and the pathetic explanations for this
death have convinced absolutely no one.

The time is now to support the Venezuelan people,
recognize the new democratic Government led by
interim President Guaido and end this nightmare.
There are no excuses. The United States stands with
the Venezuelan people. So far, many other nations have
chosen to do the same and they, too, have recognized
the legitimate Government of interim President
Guaido. The United States stands proudly with him as
we stand together in support of Venezuela. He knew the
Venezuelan people did not have a moment to spare.

Now it is time for every other nation to pick a side.
There can be no more delays and no more games. Either
a nation stands with the forces of freedom or it is in
league with Maduro and his mayhem. Some countries
have publicly taken former President Maduro's side;
China, Russia, Syria and Iran arejust four ofthem. Just
this morning, we tried to find a way for the Council
to speak with one voice in support of the Venezuelan
people and the democratic ideals through a presidential
statement of the Council. But our Russian and Chinese
colleagues refused to let this move forward. It is not
a surprise that those who rule without democracy in
their own countries are trying to prop up Maduro while
he is in dire straits. Nor are these countries supporting
international norms, as they cynically claim. China
and Russia are propping up a failed regime in the
hopes of recovering billions of dollars in ill-considered
investments and assistance made over the years. This
money was never intended to help the Venezuelan
people; it lined the pockets of the Maduro regime, its
cronies and its benefactors.

But no regime has done more to sustain the
nightmarish condition of the Venezuelan people than
the regime in Havana. For years, Cuban security
and intelligence thugs, invited into Venezuela by
Maduro himself and those around him, have sustained
this illegitimate rule. They have trained Maduro's
security and intelligence henchmen in Cuba's own
worst practices. Cuba's Ministry of the Interior even
provides former President Maduro's personal security.
Members of this body often use their microphones here
to condemn foreign interference in internal affairs. Let
us be crystal clear. The foreign Power that is meddling
in Venezuela today is Cuba. Cuba has directly made
matters worse. The United States and its partners are
the true friends of the Venezuelan people.

On Wednesday, the Venezuelan people chose to
take their country back on the anniversary of the day
that the dictator Marco Perez Jimenez was forced out
of power back in 1958. We call for Venezuelans to now
work together to peacefully restore the constitutional
Government and return the country to a secure,
democratic and prosperous path. As we read reports
of peaceful Venezuelan protesters being killed or
wounded, we also repeat our insistence that Venezuelan
security services show restraint.

I want to be 100 per cent clear. President Trump
and I fully expect that our diplomats will continue to
receive the protections provided for under the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations. Venezuela
must not test the United States resolve to protect its
own people.

We hope that the international community will
support the people of Venezuela and the transitional
Government led by Juan Guaido. On 23 January, Guaido
declared himself interim President of Venezuela, in
accordance with Venezuela's own Constitution. He
made that declaration with the full support of the
National Assembly and the Venezuelan people. Our
nations must stand up for the rule of law and support
the leader whom the Venezuelan people have affirmed
as their legitimate interim President. It is our hope that
free and fair elections happen as soon as possible.

Back in 1961, President Kennedy spoke in Caracas.
He declared, "We will be partners in building a better
life for our people". America's ambition has not changed
since that day. We stand with the Venezuelan people
as they seek to build a better life for themselves. We
cannot ignore the suffering or tyranny taking place in
that proud nation, and neither should other countries
that care about freedom and prosperity. Today, we call
on all members of the Security Council to support
Venezuela's democratic transition and interim President
Guaido's role in it.

