Mr. Shiweva (Namibia): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. We appreciate the opportunity to participate in
this open debate on peace consolidation in West Africa
and commend you and your delegation for this
important initiative. We also thank you for the
thoughtful concept paper (S/2006/610, annex) that
forms the basis of the Council's deliberations today.

Namibia believes that peace and stability in West
Africa are fundamental to achieving sustainable
development, not only in that subregion but also in
Africa as a whole. It is in that context that Namibia
continues to participate in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in that subregion, by
contributing troops as well as military and civilian
police observers.

We note with satisfaction the steady progress that
has been made in Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and
Liberia, and we commend the role played by the
United Nations, the African Union (AU), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
international community in ensuring peace and security
and laying the foundations for democracy and the rule
of law. Functional Governments and democratic
institutions have been established; improved health and
education systems in these countries have also been put
in place.

However, serious attention should be paid to the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants and
the reintegration of displaced persons and refugees.
Cooperation within and among the countries of the
region is required for a successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process. This
should be done in a balanced, comprehensive and
transparent manner. Peacebuilding efforts must focus
on security, the rule of law and the provision of basic
services and social and economic infrastructure.

We are happy to note that the newly created
Peacebuilding Commission has agreed to focus its
work on the situations in Sierra Leone and in Burundi.
Its performance will be tested and judged upon the
results of the consideration of those situations. It
should, therefore, prove its ability and effectiveness in
that daunting challenge before it.
06-46124

With regard to Cote d'Ivoire, we are pleased to
note that the Pretoria Agreement on the peace process
in that country continues to be respected and adhered
to by the parties in their implementation of their
agreements. We are encouraged by the efforts of the
United Nations, ECOWAS and the African Union in
bringing about a lasting solution to the problems in
Cote d'Ivoire. We applaud the mediation role of
President Mbeki of South Africa on behalf of the
African Union and encourage continuous consultations
with the Secretary-General and the Security Council.

However, we have doubts about the peacekeeping
efforts in that country, particularly the command
relations of the United Nations peacekeeping force on
one hand and the international force on the other, to
which the Government of Cote d'Ivoire has referred on
several occasions. Furthermore, we are concerned
about the fact that the elections in Cote d'Ivoire
continue to be postponed. We are, however, hopeful
that pre-election tasks such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, voter identification
and registration, the designation of polling stations and
polling officers and other related assignments will be
completed in good time for peaceful and democratic
elections to take place.

It must be emphasized that reconciliation is the
key to sustainable peace. Reconciliation is a two-way
process that should aim at forging a spirit of
forgiveness rather than vengeance or retaliation.
However, a distinct line has to be drawn between
reconciliation and the search for justice. While we
recognize that crimes committed during a conflict
should be accounted for, we are also cognizant of the
need for an independent, competent judicial system and
an open trial process to be put in place, not to punish
those who committed crimes, but to rehabilitate them
and to correct the mistakes that were made. In this
connection, my delegation fully supports the role and
authority of the International Criminal Court, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. We further support
their full utilization and funding.

As in any other conflict, the majority of those in
West Africa who have suffered due to armed conflict
are women and children. In that connection, we
strongly believe that a post-conflict peacebuilding
strategy and programmes should be designed for
women, children and girls, especially in the areas of
education and employment creation.

While we fully agree that Africa should take the
lead in finding solutions to Africa's problems, we wish
to reiterate that the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, should not abdicate its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. In that
regard, we call for the strengthening of the relationship
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in promoting durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa.

Democratically elected Governments should be
supported and strengthened. Furthermore, the DDR of
former combatants should be completed within
established time frames and all former combatants
should be placed in the socio-economic mainstream of
society. We are hopeful, in this regard, that the
Peacebuilding Commission will fill the gap by exerting
and coordinating peacebuilding efforts in countries
emerging from conflict.

We urge the United Nations agencies dealing with
Africa to assist the AU and subregional organizations
in promoting good governance, democracy, respect for
human rights and the rule of law. Enhancing the
capacity of the AU in conflict prevention, management
and resolution is of paramount importance.

Finally, my delegation would like to underscore
that greater investment should be made in conflict
prevention, as we believe that conflict prevention is
cost-effective, in terms of both saving lives and
financial resources. Let us, therefore, strive to establish
an early warning system that will enable us to detect
the signs of conflict and address them head-on before
the real conflict occurs.

