Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation joins
others in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and High Representative Ambassador
Lajeak to the Security Council. We thank them both for
their reports before the Council.

As stated on previous occasions, South Africa
fully supports the High Representative and his Office,
as well as the policy of progressively handing over all
executive responsibilities to the Bosnian leadership. In
that regard, South Africa was pleased to note the
finalization of the long-outstanding police reform laws
that enabled Bosnia to sign the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union.
However, developments since then have not been so
positive. We are disappointed about the little progress
made in the implementation of the reform agenda.

The increasing nationalistic rhetoric in Bosnia is
of concern. Such rhetoric not only undermines the
functioning of the State and the progress made in
reforms, it also challenges the very foundations of that
State as established by the Dayton Peace Agreement
and the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are also concerned about the reports by the
High Representative about the rhetoric and actions
against his Office aimed at preventing him from
executing his duties. South Africa calls on all cultures
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to desist from such
negative actions, to break the political deadlock and to
return to the reform process. In our opinion, Bosnia can
only make progress towards its goal of integration into
the European Union if all parties engage in direct and
open dialogue, with the purpose of reaching
compromises in order to build consensus.

My delegation therefore welcomes the joint
statement of 8 November 2008 adopted by the leaders
of the three major political parties as a welcome step
towards reinstating interethnic dialogue. However, we
would like to repeat that peace processes encompass
more than dialogue. We therefore agree with the
assessment of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council that the signatories should
immediately tackle the reform agenda, encourage other
stakeholders to join the consensus and work to put all
those proposals into concrete form.

