Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): I would like to thank
you, Sir, and the members of the Council for this
opportunity to address the Council on the important
issue of children and armed conflict. Ireland also aligns
itself with the statement made earlier by the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.

Ireland welcomes Mexico's initiative in
organizing today's open debate of the Council. We
strongly support all endeavours made at the United
Nations and at the regional and national levels which
seek to address in an effective manner the situation of
children in armed conflict.

Ireland commends ongoing efforts to ensure that
this important issue remains firmly on the agenda of
the Security Council. We support the implementation
of the monitoring and reporting mechanisms on
children and armed conflict established under Security
Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005) - as
well as the significant work being carried out by the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

Ireland warmly welcomes the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/15 8) and the
recommendations therein. In particular, we commend
the significant progress made in mainstreaming the
issue of children in armed conflict in United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions. The deployment
of child protection advisers in a number of
peacekeeping operations is a positive step and helps to
enhance the monitoring of the situation, improve
dialogue with parties to conflict and ensure systematic
training on child rights and protection.

Ireland is the current Chair of the Human
Security Network and notes that the harmful and
widespread impact of armed conflict on children has
been one of the priority issues for the Network since its
establishment. As part of our chairmanship, Ireland has
chosen to focus on the theme of gender-based violence.
The prevalence of gender-based violence during times
of conflict, in areas where the rule of law is frequently
absent and impunity is widespread, remains a grave
concern. Successive resolutions of the Security Council
have also recognized those egregious abuses. Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) highlights the human
rights of girls and their right to protection from gender-
based violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse. Resolution 1820 (2008) attacks the
targeting of girls through the use of sexual violence
and demands that all parties to armed conflict take
appropriate measures to protect women and girls from
sexual violence.

The Secretary-General's report expressly
acknowledges that Security Council resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1820 (2008) are "mutually reinforcing" and
that steps should be taken to streamline documentation
and sharing of information on rape and sexual
violence.

In that regard, the initiation of consultations
between the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict and
relevant United Nations agencies and departments, in
order to devise a strategy to strengthen data collection
and reporting, is, we believe, a positive development.
Ireland welcomes the attention given in the Secretary-
General's report to rape and other grave sexual
violence against children in armed conflict.

The report reaffirms that rape and other forms of
sexual violence are grave crimes and, under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, constitute a

war crime or a crime against humanity if committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack against a
civilian population. In particular, Ireland supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation, set out in the
report, that the Council expand the criteria for
violations that would trigger the listing of a party in the
annexes attached to such reports. By the same token,
we support the recommendation to include, henceforth,
express reference to those parties that commit rape and
other grave sexual violence against children, as well as
intentional killing and maiming of children.

Ireland continues to support the valuable efforts
of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and her Office. She has done great
work by raising awareness, engaging with parties to
conflict through field visits and ensuring that this issue
is kept high on the international agenda.

Ireland further commends ongoing efforts on this
crucial topic made by UNICEF, other United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, along with
non-governmental organizations, regional organizations
and national authorities.

In conclusion, my country is committed to
working closely with the United Nations system, as
well as with all other relevant organizations, to ensure
that steps are taken and progress is achieved towards
improving the deplorable situation faced by children in
armed conflicts around the world.

