Mr. Turky Saed (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): The
Government of Iraq has submitted to the Security
Council its report pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution
1905 (2009) (see 8/2010/153). The Secretariat has
distributed copies of the report to Council members.
The resolution stipulates that the report should address
three elements: establishment of an action plan and
timeline for transition from the Development Fund for
Iraq to an alternative system; settlement of debts and
claims inherited from the previous regime; and an
assessment of the progress made in strengthening
financial and administrative oversight of the Fund.

The Iraqi Government has set up an action plan
and timeline for the transition from the Development
Fund for Iraq to alternative arrangements, with a view
to ensuring the transition, by 31 December 2010, to a
successor mechanism that includes external audit
10-30443
arrangements and that enables Iraq to honour its
commitments as stipulated in paragraph 21 of
resolution 1483 (2003). The main elements of this
action plan involve maintaining the same mechanisms
currently adopted for the Development Fund for Iraq
by using bank accounts opened at the Federal Reserve
Bank in New York to ensure central deposit of the
proceeds from the sale of oil, petroleum products and
natural gas, as an alternative to the Oil Proceeds
Receipts Account, while continuing the automatic
deposit of compensation, as provided for in
paragraph 21 of the resolution just mentioned and in
subsequent other relevant resolutions. The Ministry of
Finance has exclusive authority over the account for
the deposit of oil and gas proceeds once the
compensation percentage has been deducted.

The Committee of Financial Experts will take
over from the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board with respect to supervising the flow of cash to
the special account, in accordance with the rules of
procedure already approved by the Iraqi Council of
Ministers. These rules cover, inter alia, the
Committee's power to appoint an international auditing
institution to audit the account and carry out follow-up
work; to approve the results of the audits and the final
spreadsheets for the account, for each financial period;
to follow up on comments in the oversight reports; and
to publish all relevant data, the Committee's meeting
records and follow-up reports on its website for access
by all Governments.

The Iraqi Government's report includes an annex
setting out the timeline for the successor mechanism in
the run-up to its formation and the start of its work.

Iraq is undoubtedly concerned that, should the
Fund be closed on 31 January 2011, immunity for Iraqi
funds deposited abroad might be lifted.

The Government report analyses the action plan
for the settlement of debts and claims of the previous
regime in 2010. The total outstanding debt was $129
billion, of which we have settled $89.222 billion;
$39 billion remains, including $26 billion to the
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf.
The Paris Club agreement was the most important debt
settlement agreement, through which we have settled
more than $51 billion in debt. There were 55 creditor
States outside the Paris Club, and we have succeeded
in reaching settlements with them under conditions
similar to those agreed on with the Paris Club, apart
10-30443
from 13 States, including those of the Gulf
Cooperation Council. Efforts are under way to reach
similar settlements with them.

Concerning commercial creditors, settlements
have been concluded with 576 creditors, in the amount
of $20.9 billion. This process continues with other
creditors. Iraq expresses its appreciation to the
remaining creditors whose debts, totalling $629 million,
have yet to be settled.

The Iraqi Government has reaffirmed its
commitment to settle all debts and claims from the
previous regime and to continue to address the issue
until it is completely resolved. We hope that the
international community will continue its assistance
until the Iraqi Government has completed its efforts in
that regard.

Concerning follow-up to the international
auditing companies' reports by the Committee of
Financial Experts, and the contacts with the
compensation office in Geneva - given the Iraqi
Government's constant commitment to international
resolutions and given that the Committee has noted a
genuine interest in resolving these cases - the
Committee believes that it is high time for the Security
Council, given its legal and moral authority and the
active role played by its members, to help press the
relevant parties to reconsider the remaining
compensation imposed on Iraq. Because Iraq's
economic infrastructure has been completely
destroyed, it would be fair to at least consider applying
the Paris Club settlement principle adopted by the
international community to remaining compensation.

The Iraqi people have suffered enormously, but
they have nonetheless been involved in taking
decisions about their future. The Committee trusts that
international resolutions will be fair and will not
obstruct a review of past resolutions on these matters.

Without the support of the international
community, it would not have been possible to make
the reimbursements that we have made. To resolve the
problem fully, that support should continue in the
future. The Committee of Financial Experts, in
particular following the adoption of resolution 1905
(2009), has monitored these Iraqi Government efforts.
Given that the amounts owed by Iraq are exorbitant,
representing more than half its annual budget, and
given that 2010 has been a year that has seen
legislative elections on the basis of which consultations
3
on the formation of a Government are likely to drag on
for months, we consider that ensuring continued
immunity, though an international resolution, could be
a step forward by the Security Council towards
resolving this problem.

In order to objectively evaluate progress in State
oversight, the Iraqi Government has established a set of
quantifiable goals. Attaining these could result in
significant development of the administrative and
financial audit system. Details may be found in the
Government's report.

Let me note also that with regard to the
measurement and metering system for the production,
distribution and export of crude oil, the Board's
discussions have underscored that all oil exports have
been registered in the Oil Proceeds Receipts Account
since the end of the barter system of oil for electricity
in 2007 and for the export of oil products in the second
half of 2009. Furthermore, in setting up the system of
auditors, we hope to adapt our criteria to our work on
the ground. We hope to have this done by 2011. We
have established all-ministry specialized committees to
address the tasks necessary to providing a detailed
audit. The committees are pursuing these efforts.

In the report to be presented by 1 July 2010,
pursuant to the provisions of resolution 1905 (2009),
the Committee of Financial Experts will seek to
provide the Security Council with information on the
system's success rate.

