Mr. Petritsch: I would like to take this
opportunity first to remind members ofthe Council and
others who have spoken here that it is my mandate
under annex 10 of the Dayton Peace Agreement to
coordinate all the civilian agencies engaged in peace
implementation. That means, necessarily, that I have to
deal with a wide range of issues and topics that have
been covered here today in statements by members of
the Security Council and by others.

Let me stress above all that I welcome and very
much appreciate the fact that the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was able to take the floor
here. I deeply believe that we will be successful in the
end only if we really secure cooperation with
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and if we
really work to push the idea of ownership. Ownership,
of course, also means that local authorities should,
more and more, take responsibility for what they are
doing. This in turn means that we need to be open to
criticism and to suggestions on the part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to come up with the best result
possible. We are not there to demonstrate that the
international community knows best; we are there to
find a solution for the people, for the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that respect, I very much
appreciate what has been said to that effect here in the
Security Council.

Let me express my appreciation for the highly
cogent and relevant remarks that have been made here
and for the positions that have been expressed, and my
satisfaction at them. Basically, there is strong support
for the three priority areas adopted last May at Brussels
by the Foreign Ministers of the Peace Implementation
Council. I would like to comment on the three priority
areas and on some ofthe individual specific issues that
were raised here by delegations.

Let me start out with the issue of State
institutions, because the issue of those institutions and
of strengthening them is intimately tied to the powers
invested in the High Representative, the so-called Bonn
powers. Without the imposition of the State border
service earlier this year, I believe we would now be in
a highly difficult and critical situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina because of the recent surge in illegal
transmigration through Bosnia and Herzegovina into
other parts of Europe. The fact that the State border
service - which unfortunately had to be imposed - is
in place with the strong support of the United Nations
is important in terms of fighting illegal migration and
transmigration.

Another example, of course, is the passport.
Apart from the reasons that were given here by me and
by Security Council members, there are other
implications of the passport, including economic
implications: without valid, internationally recognized
passports, businesspeople from Bosnia and
Herzegovina would have difficulties in travelling and
in establishing businesses. So in many ways it was a
necessity - not just a political necessity, not just in
terms of State-building, but also in the economic
sense - that the international community and I as the
High Representative came up with an early decision on
this.

When we talk about State institutions, I believe
that the Council of Ministers is central. We now have
six ministries in place; this means that the central
Government in Sarajevo is already reminiscent of a
modern Government: it has six ministries and covers
most of the relevant topics. Therefore, my efforts after
the elections will be directed at strengthening the
Council of Ministers as much as possible, to turn it into
the central institution that it was supposed to be
according to Dayton.

Turning to the decisions of the Constitutional
Court, let me say that I very much appreciate the
efficiency and the professionalism demonstrated by the
Court. Its landmark decisions will be of the greatest
importance and will have positive consequences for the
overall state-building process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They are non-negotiable, as was pointed
out by Ambassador Greenstock, and this needs to be
underlined and understood by the local entity
governments.

We will see to it that the Constitutional Court's
decisions are implemented and become part of the
entity constitutions. Also important is the need to
continue to depoliticize judicial issues. We need to go
on and do what would be necessary in any other state,
which is necessary also in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We will solicit the support of the Council of
Europe- of which Bosnia and Herzegovina will
hopefully be a member very soon- and that of the
Council of Europe's Venice Commission, which has
already in the past helped us to find the right solutions
to some of the more sticky issues. I am quite confident
that with this help we will be successful in
implementing the Constitutional Court's decisions.

Let me turn to some other issues. Economic
reform is the engine of change in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and there are indeed differences between
the two entities when it comes to the state of the
economy. There are clear reasons for this. The first two
years in the Republika Srpska were basically lost in
terms of the peace implementation process because of
the obstructionism of politicians such as Mr. Krisnic,
who is now in The Hague. This has changed, but
nonetheless the Republika Srpska is lagging behind for
these and other reasons. But I must also say that when
it comes to the privatization process, some of the
successes are actually more visible in the Republika
Srpska than in the Federation.

So, in short, there is a mixed record when it
comes to economic reform, but the primary concern
will remain the privatization process and the
restructuring of the major utilities in all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to provide for a single economic
space for the country. I also see this as the one and only
way to fight corruption, to strengthen the institutions
and the independent judiciary, and to create a level
playing field for a competitive, market-oriented
economy.

The next point is the return of refugees, which, as
the Council is probably aware, is at the core of the
Dayton Accords. I should say also that it is not
something that is confined by the Dayton Accords. It is
true that there are quite a few ethnic features in the
Dayton Accord, as was pointed out by the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which at the
time were necessary and which need to be successively
brought down to a realistic level.

But the Dayton Accords do not place any
restrictions on us in terms of refugee returns, and
therefore we are pushing very hard to achieve the
necessary results in that area. Given current figures,
together with the very comprehensive property
legislation plan that is now being implemented, I am
quite confident that this year and next will see the
return issue become a self-sustaining one, so that the
local authorities, which are primarily charged with this
question, will be able fully to take over once again the
issue of ownership and bring it to a happy ending.

Of course - and this is a paradoxical situation -
because of the great success in returns this year, we do
not have enough flexible funds where there is a lack of
alternative accommodations. Of course, we also need
to recognize that results are regionally quite diverse -
in some parts things are working out excellently, while
in others things are still not up to par.

In the end, let me say that we now see fresh
winds of change in the whole region. Yugoslavia and
Croatia provide for a better environment that is more
conducive to peace implementation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Within 10 months, the three main actors
in the Yugoslav drama have stepped down in one way
or another. I would like also to stress here the dignified
way in which Mr. Izetbegovic, of his own free will,
stepped down and thus provided space, room and
opportunity for progress in the overall peace
implementation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I should like to take this opportunity to thank the
United Nations agencies that are working together with
us in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I should like also to
thank the Security Council for its continued support,
and the representatives assembled here for their
respective contributions and, above all, for the support
I can feel from the statements they made here.

