Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nikolay Mladenov for
his briefing and his commitment day in and day out, and
to renew France's support for him. I would also like to
commend Bolivia's initiative in inviting Mr. Hagai El-
Ad, Executive Director of the Israeli non-governmental
organization B'Tselem, who has been doing remarkable
work under difficult conditions. It is an ongoing policy
of France to support opening the work of the Security
Council to the voices of civil society, which must

be heard in the context of addressing the crises on
our agenda.
Turning to the situation on the ground, every
passing day confirms the tragic threefold observation
that we regularly make before the Council. First, the
false status quo before us masks a daily deterioration of
the situation that is linked in particular to the settlement
policy. Secondly, that situation has the potential to
degenerate into open crisis at any moment, as we have
been seeing in Gaza for months, and it also produces
its daily share of violence, including an incident that
recently claimed the lives of two Israelis and that we
condemned. Thirdly, when the prospects for peace
on the ground diminish, they do the same in people's
minds and conversations, feeding into a particularly
dangerous vicious cycle. Last month was the twenty-
fifth anniversary of the Oslo Accords, and according to
opinion surveys, almost three quarters of Palestinians
now believe that their situation has worsened since the
Accords were signed. Today, only a small percentage of
Palestinians and Israelis still believe in the possibility
of a two-State solution. Generation by generation,
Palestinians and Israelis are losing hope for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict, which opens the door to
the worst possibility, the despair that is our common
enemy. That is why it is so important for the Israeli
and Palestinian authorities to preserve a pluralistic
and open space within their respective societies. The
democratic future of those societies depends on that
and on the possibility of dialogue between them.

Any negotiations must take place within the
framework that I have just outlined, which is based
on international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980),
on Jerusalem.

Today, I would like to underscore two points, both
dictated by the urgency of what we are seeing on the
ground - the situation in Gaza, where we are once
again on the edge of a cliff, and the Israeli settlement
policy, which, through the case of Khan Al-Ahmar,
threatens to irreversibly undermine the possibility of a
two-State solution.

First, with regard to the situation in Gaza, for the
second time since the beginning of the summer the
Gaza Strip is on the verge ofa new conflict, something
it has experienced three times in the past decade. In
that context, France calls on all actors to exercise
restraint. The rockets that were launched during the
night of Tuesday and Wednesday from Gaza to Israel,
one of which hit a house in Beersheba, fortunately
without causing any casualties, are an extremely
worrying development. I want to say it again with the
greatest clarity: France condemns the indiscriminate
firing on Israeli territory, regardless of the perpetrators,
just as it condemns the use of incendiary devices and
the construction by Hamas of offensive tunnels, of
which a new one was dismantled again over the past
few days by Israeli forces.

Already in mid-August, the worst had been avoided
thanks to the efforts of Egypt and the steps taken by
the Special Coordinator. However, we know that if the
current situation continues, a large-scale escalation
cannot be definitively avoided, and if there is one, the
people of Gaza will once again pay the price. We must
therefore do everything we can to prevent it. It is up
to the Council to speak with a strong voice to prevent
an escalation by breaking a silence that is becoming
increasingly deafening and incomprehensible to the
world every day.

Those peaks in tension are arising in the context
of humanitarian collapse and political impasse in the
Gaza Strip. For more than six months, there has been a
series of acts of violence in Gaza against the backdrop
of a humanitarian crisis of unprecedented severity. The
toll of recurring demonstrations along the separation
barrier is appalling: more than 150 Palestinians have
been killed since 30 March in rallies fuelled by the
despair of the population. France has condemned the
disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force and
calls on Israel to respect the right of Palestinians to
demonstrate peacefully, on the one hand, and to live
up to its obligations to protect civilians in the context
of international humanitarian law, on the other hand.
We have also denounced the exploitation of the
demonstrations by Hamas and other armed groups and
their use in attempts to cross the separation barrier, as
seems to have been the case during last Friday's rallies.

To restore hope among the people of Gaza in the short
term, we must respond to the humanitarian emergency.
The efforts of the Special Coordinator and all United
Nations agencies to rapidly improve the humanitarian
situation contribute significantly to this response. All
actors must coordinate their efforts in this regard.
Ultimately, only a lifting ofthe blockade, together with
the necessary security guarantees for Israel, can meet
the needs ofthe people. At the same time, the role ofthe
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains essential,
particularly in Gaza, where two thirds of the population
are refugees. International drives have raised an
additional $120 million for UNRWA at the margins
of the General Assembly and must continue to do so.
France has played its part and intends to continue to do
so by doubling its contribution to the Agency for 2019.
The stakes are high both for the populations concerned
and for regional stability. Tensions since the start of the
school year, in particular in Gaza and Lebanon, attest
to that.

Finally, there can be no sustainable humanitarian
response to the crisis in Gaza without a political
solution, including the full return of the Palestinian
Authority to the territory. Gaza is not a landless
territory, and it cannot be dissociated from the question
of the Palestinian State in the context of the two-State
solution. We call on all parties to pursue dialogue in the
context ongypt's ongoing efforts, which we commend,
to relaunch the inter-Palestinian reconciliation process
within the framework of the agreement reached in
Cairo a year ago.

The gravity of the situation in Gaza should not
make us forget the severity of the situation in the West
Bank and Jerusalem, where the critical advances in
settlements are creating an irreversible situation before
our very eyes. We are close to the point of no return,
and if we are not careful, the two-State solution may
disappear before us, like a mirage in the desert. France's
position is clear and unchanging: the settlements are
illegal under international law and counterproductive
because they destroy trust between the parties and
stoke tensions on the ground. They are accompanied
by worrisome developments in violence, including by
certain radical settlers. We have called for all light to
be shed on the death of a Palestinian woman last week
close to Nablus, which we condemned.

Today, I will focus on the case of Khan Al-Ahmar,
which has long been identified by the entire international
community as a red line. On 12 September, the Israeli
Government decided that it would demolish the
village. This decision could be implemented at any
time. Together with its main partners, France has
expressed its profound concern about this matter and
solemnly calls on the Israeli authorities not to proceed
with the demolition. The demolition of this Bedouin
village, which would result in the forced displacement
of its inhabitants, would contravene international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as well as Council resolutions. I note that
several of the structures that are directly targeted,
including one school, have received European funding.
In addition to its humanitarian consequences, that
demolition would have potentially irreversible political
effects. It would pave the way for the settlement of
the so-called E-l area, which, as everyone knows, is
of strategic importance for the two-State solution.
It would separate the north and south of the West
Bank and isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the
Palestinian territories. By destroying the continuity
of the Palestinian territories, it would make the two-
State solution impossible and would instead favour a
strategy of de facto annexation of the West Bank by
Israel, which would be taking on a heavy responsibility
in terms of the history of both peoples.

France is a friend to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians. It has no other interest than peace in the
region and ensuring the possibility for the populations
concerned to live in safety and dignity. As we all know,
the destinies of the Israelis and the Palestinians are
intertwined; neither of the two peoples will achieve
their national aspirations in a sustainable way at the
expense of the other.

As I have said, there is no solution other than
a two-State solution, but there can be no two-State
solution without an agreement between the parties on
Jerusalem, and there can by no possible agreement on
Jerusalem outside internationally agreed parameters.
These parameters are not options or a menu that we can
pick and choose from; rather they are the cornerstone of
any peace process and any future negotiation. Moving
away from this framework would fuel tensions and
violence because of the symbolic, historic and religious
dimensions of Jerusalem, both for the Palestinians and
for the Israelis. It would also provide a space for all
radicals in the region, who want to see this political
conflict become a religious conflict, to rush into.
Given that risk, we have a collective responsibility in
the Council to act within the parameters that we have
defined together and which are recalled in resolution
2334 (2016), which was adopted almost two years ago.
France will spare no effort in that regard.

