Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Mr. President, I have
prepared quite a long statement addressing various
aspects of our work under your leadership this month.
But, conscious of the time constraints, I will try to
brief, and will touch on only a few of the most
important issues.

It has in fact been a remarkable month in many
respects. It has been remarkable, first and foremost, in
terms of the impact of our decisions on the future work
of the entire Organization. It has been remarkable also
in terms of the efficiency and professionalism
demonstrated by you, Sir, and by your excellent team
in managing the heavy schedule of meetings and
consultations, combined with a mission to Kosovo, and
in steering our work towards effective results. You
have achieved practically everything that we had
expected from your presidency, and we commend you
for your perseverance and resoluteness.

Among the decisions with which the Bangladeshi
presidency will be associated is, first and foremost, the
Council's recommendation to the General Assembly
regarding the reappointment of the Secretary-General.
It was an easy decision for all of us: the candidature of
Mr. Kofi Annan can hardly be challenged, after all. Yet
your boldness in taking that decision forward, Sir,
deserves our praise and support. Let me take this
opportunity to convey Ukraine's warmest
congratulations to Mr. Kofi Annan on his appointment
as Secretary-General for a second term.

We would also like to thank the Bangladeshi
presidency for taking the initiative to hold an important
debate on conflict prevention. The significant number
of participants in that debate testifies to the keen
interest in that meeting on the part of States Members of
the United Nations. We are grateful also for the
submission of the draft resolution that followed the
debate, which provides a very good basis for further
work.

The adoption of resolution 1353 (2001), on the
basis of the four months of activity of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations in examining ways
to strengthen cooperation among the Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat, should be
seen as yet another achievement of the Security
Council in June. We commend Ambassador Ward of
Jamaica for his leadership, and all the members of the
Working Group for their efforts in preparing the draft
resolution.

Let me say a couple of words on the issue of the
communication of Council decisions. Although it took
quite a long time - more than a year, in fact - your
determination, Sir, has been rewarded with a note
issued today regarding the communication of the
Council's decisions. We consider this a clear
demonstration of your country's commitment to
improving the working methods and transparency of
the Council.

Finally, Sir, I welcome the initiative to hold wrap-
up meetings. My country has always favoured the idea
of holding a wrap-up meeting at the end of a
presidency, and your initiative in holding an open
wrap-up meeting deserves our full support. We hope
that this will be continued in the future.

Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French) I have
so many scruples with regard to taking the floor at such
a late hour that I have voluntarily reduced my
statement to three minutes.

First of all, I would like to extend to you, as well
as to your delegation, all the congratulations of the
Tunisian delegation on the outstanding way in which
you were able to guide the work of the Council during
this month, a month rich in activity and marked by the
consideration of a great number of important subjects
with telling results. You just summarized all of the
items which the Council considered this month, be they
African, Saharan or Balkan. An enormous effort was
made by all delegations, who sometimes went on site,
so there is not need to reiterate.

I merely would like to limit this intervention to
two points. The first is that the Council gave its
attention throughout the last few weeks to the question
of the oil-for-food programme and the Kuwaiti
property. The Iraq question in the same way was the
subject of a very important Security Council debate, in
which we were able to take full account of the interest
Member States of our Organization take in this subject.
It came at a time after the earlier debate which the
Council held in March 2000, also, incidently, under
your presidence, Sir, on the humanitarian question in
Iraq. The debate, which the Council has just held, will
promote dialogue and transparency in dealing with
issues before the Council, in addition to the intensive
consultations carried out by the Council on the
proposals before it. Our major object remains that of
putting an end to the sufferings of the Iraqi people by
doing away with and lifting as soon as possible the
sanctions against Iraq.

The second point is that the debate on the
prevention of conflicts, which took place when the
important report to the Secretary-General on this issue
was presented, inspired genuine interest on the part of
Member States. The subject of the prevention of
conflicts lies at the heart of the responsibilities of our
Organization. It should receive sustained attention from
the international community in order to give it its
proper role in the areas of peace and development in
the light of its link to peace-building, as was
emphasized by the Council in its presidential
statement, adopted, as you will recall, in February
under the presidency of Tunisia. It is better to prevent
than to have to intervene later when it is too expensive
on both the humanitarian and financial levels.

The month of June was also an important
occasion for my country to become a co-sponsor of the
Council's resolution recommending to the General
Assembly the reappointment of Mr. Kofi Annan as
Secretary-General of our Organization. On behalf of
my country and my delegation, we would like to
reiterate to him our full support and wish him all
success at a time when our world, which is undergoing
such great changes, needs the United Nations so badly.

Finally, allow me to voice our best wishes to our
colleague and brother, Ambassador Neewoor.

