Ms. Veneman: I am very pleased to join the

Council today as it turns its attention once again to the

situation of children affected by armed conflict.

UNICEF welcomes the Security Council's ongoing

concern with grave violations against children in
situations of armed conflict.

I commend my colleague, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy, for her
work in helping to draw global attention to the impact
on children in situations of armed conflict.

It is fitting that we gather today on the sixth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict.
States which have not done so should be urged to sign,
ratify and fully implement the Optional Protocol.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/757)
helps highlight the harsh reality of what children
undergo in countries affected by armed conflict.
Children continue to suffer from the horrors of war.
Children often cope with trauma, violence and the loss
of family, homes and community, and many have been
killed or maimed even long after conflict has come to
an end. As highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report, children are all too often victims of
indiscriminate weapons, such as cluster munitions.
Children must be protected from the effects of these
and other indiscriminate weapons.

Children also suffer from the indirect impact of
war through resurgence in preventable diseases such as
malaria, measles, diarrhoea and respiratory infections.
Recent data show that conflict and post-conflict
countries have some of the highest rates of under-5
mortality. Conflict and strife often break down public
health services and contribute to food insecurity,
population displacement and continued insecurity.
Rehabilitation of key services and infrastructure
requires security and political stability.

An essential part of re-establishing normalcy for
children affected by conflict is to ensure that they have
access to schools. When entire communities are in a
state of upheaval, schools can provide a safe haven and
a sense of normalcy. It is therefore vital that their
sanctity be protected. In Afghanistan, as noted in the
report, schools have been deliberately targeted in the
ongoing hostilities. The misuse or occupation of
schools, or attacks against them, are some of the worst

violations against children in situations of armed
conflict. They are also a violation of one of the most
basic principles of the laws of war: that civilian sites
must be protected.

UNICEF has a long history of advocating, and
assisting in, the release and reintegration of children
used by armed forces and groups. We know from
experience that it is possible to reintegrate these
children, especially when they are provided with
assistance and the skills they need to become positive
and productive members of society. Yet reintegration is
a difficult and long-term process requiring patience and
long-term commitment.

Throughout the past several years, UNICEF
country offices have worked with States and non-State
actors that have recruited and used children, in order to
bring an end to this abhorrent practice. The report of
the Secretary-General references UNICEF's
engagement in the Central African Republic, Cote
d'Ivoire and the Sudan.

The 2007 Paris commitments help to reinforce
international consensus on the unlawful recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict. These
commitments also reiterate measures that States can
take to protect children involved in hostilities and help
reintegrate them into their families and communities.
States should be urged to endorse the Paris
commitments.

As mentioned by my colleague Ms. Coomaraswamy,
girls and women in conflict situations are extremely
vulnerable because of sexual violence perpetrated by
armed forces and groups and, at times, even by the
very people entrusted with providing their protection.
Sexual violence is so often used as a weapon of war;
there must be greater focus and attention on this issue.
Allow me to share one story, as told by a 14-year-old
girl in Liberia. She said:

"The attackers tied me up and raped me because I
was fighting. About five of them did the same
thing to me until one of their commanders who
knew my father came and stopped them, but also
took me to make me his wife. I accepted him
because of fear".

We need to put an end to the abuse, the rapes and the
sexual violence.
UNICEF welcomes the efforts of the Security
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed

08-2361]
Conflict. In a relatively short period of time, the
monitoring and reporting mechanism has produced
positive results for children on the ground by focusing
on grave violations in six categories, as stated earlier
by my colleague.

More must be done to better monitor, prevent and
respond to these violations. It is critical that the best
interests of the child be the guiding principle of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, rising above all
other considerations.

The purpose of the mechanism is to monitor,
report and respond to the situation of child victims of
conflict in order to reduce the occurrence of grave
violations against children, enhance the accountability
of perpetrators and prevent further grave violations in
situations of armed conflict.

Children continue to bear the brunt of conflict,
but they also demonstrate resilience and capacity to
overcome the violence around them. Their energy and
strong desire to end conflict can be a catalyst for
peacebuilding within their own communities. We have
heard some of those young voices in a compilation of
stories and recommendations from conflict zones, titled
"Will you listen?". The compilation was launched last
year on 17 October as a supplement to the 10-year
Graca Machel strategic review, which was submitted to
the General Assembly. Many of those children and
youth spoke of the important role they play in
providing change and of the need to act swiftly. As a
young woman from Colombia said, "We are the future
and people should be aware of that. Right now, we are
inheriting a very unstable world".

Let us keep those words in mind as we move
forward with a shared sense of urgency in helping to
build a better and safer world for our children.

