Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for the
opportunity to participate in it. I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste. His comprehensive briefing demonstrates
how active the Government has been in addressing the
many challenges faced by the country, with many
positive results.

I also thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, for his briefing today and commend him for his
outstanding work. Let me take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Mr. Khare for his leadership and engagement
with Timor-Leste and its people. When he concludes
his term at the end of this year, he will leave behind a
legacy of an extraordinary contribution that is reflected
in the many accomplishments of Timor-Leste in
consolidating peace and making progress towards
social and economic development. I wish him all the
best in his future endeavours.

As Timor-Leste and its many friends celebrate the
tenth anniversary of the popular consultation, it gives
us great pleasure to see that the country is moving
forward and slowly but steadily building and
strengthening the institutions proper to a modern
democratic State. The Timorese can be proud of what
they have achieved so far and remain confident in their
future.

Such a positive trend is evident in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/504). It
describes a significant improvement in the overall
situation in the first nine months of 2009.

Of special relevance is the fact that the security
situation remained calm and that the consequences of
past instability are being addressed. The continued
resumption of policing responsibilities by the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste is particularly positive.
We support the gradual and phased approach taken in
this regard, based on criteria agreed mutually between
the Timorese Government and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). It is
encouraging that, despite shortcomings, this process
has not been accompanied by an increase in crime or
disorder. Quite to the contrary, the average number of
incidents reported each week has actually decreased.

The closure of all camps for internally displaced
persons is a significant development from both the
humanitarian and political perspectives. It signals
progress. In order to firmly turn a sad page in the
history of the country and avoid potential
destabilization, attention should be given to aspects
related to the return of internally displaced persons, in
particular housing, land and property rights and income
generation.

It is encouraging to note the continued
engagement of the political parties in the democratic
debate. The holding of peaceful local elections on
9 October, for which we commend the Government of
Timor-Leste, is yet another step towards consolidating
democracy. Democratic stability is key to ensuring
prosperity, State-building and effective popular
representation. We therefore congratulate political
leaders and encourage them to continue to participate
in the democratic process as the only way to
successfully address the challenges facing the country.

Strong economic and social development is
essential to consolidating these achievements. The
progress made in meeting the targets of the
international compact for Timor-Leste, the vigorous
increase in non-oil gross domestic product in 2008, and
the strong growth expected for 2009 and 2010 are
excellent news. In the long term, consolidating the
economy and reducing poverty will require significant
investments in the productive non-oil sectors, as
indicated by the Secretary-General.

It will also be necessary to increase and improve
social investment. The measures taken by the Timorese
Government to further improve basic education, health,
nutrition and child protection and to stimulate rural
development are commendable and should be
supported. They are essential to the country's
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

Brazil has contributed to such endeavours
through bilateral cooperation in areas as diverse as
education, agriculture and culture, in addition to
justice, security, democratic governance and defence.
We intend to further strengthen our cooperation, which
will continue to be focused on helping to build much-
needed capacity.

Timor-Leste's progress in a number of areas is
certainly due to the determination of its Government
and people. It is also a result of the unwavering
commitment of the international community. This is
the time for all of us to maintain this commitment,
given that progress and stability are still fragile, as

09-573 62
noted in the report. Recent security gains should not
mislead us. UNMIT remains a vital actor on the ground
and will remain so until such gains are firmly
consolidated. Brazil is convinced that, with our
collective support, the Timorese Government will keep
working intensely and effectively to that end.

