Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien; and Mr. Muhannad
Hadi of the World Food Programme (WFP) for their
comprehensive briefings today. The situation on the
ground is dire.

I will focus first on the humanitarian situation
in Yemen, which Mr. O'Brien and Mr. Hadi vividly
described for us. Civilians are the tragic victims of
the failure to end the fighting and reach a political
agreement. Japan commends the United Nations and
all humanitarian workers in Yemen for their tireless
efforts under extremely difficult circumstances.

We heard from Under-Secretary-General O'Brien
today that 80 per cent of Yemenis are in need of basic
humanitarian aid, which underlines the seriousness of
this crisis. We also heard that the number may increase

further. Japan, together with other international
partners, is providing support to help meet these basic
needs. We have announced our renewed commitment
to financially supporting the United Nations and other
international bodies in scaling up operations in Yemen.
Food security, health and education are priority areas.

Collapsing public services and the deteriorating
economy have only further worsened the devastating
humanitarian situation. We were told by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and WFP
today about the serious humanitarian problems caused
by the destruction of the social infrastructure. We are
also concerned by the recent developments surrounding
the Central Bank and its relocation from Sana'a to
Aden. Japan calls upon the Government of Yemen to
avoid taking measures that may affect the activities of
commercial banks and stresses the importance of the
Central Bank serving the interests of all Yemenis.

A halt to military activities is essential if we are
to achieve fundamental solutions to the humanitarian
and economic crises in Yemen. One and a half years
have already passed since the intensified fighting
began. The Yemeni people are deeply suffering and
exhausted from the continuous air strikes, shelling
and fighting on the ground. All military activities,
including attacks beyond the Yemeni territories, must
be halted immediately.

Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed informed us today
that he presented the Yemeni Government and the
Houthi-General People's Congress delegation with
a Yemen road map to address security and political
arrangements. This may lead the way to the practical
implementation of the three fundamental components
for peace and stability in Yemen, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference and resolution 2216
(2015). Japan welcomes the Special Envoy's work on
the road map.

It is unclear, however, Whether this document is
being seriously considered by the Yemeni parties.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed told us that President Mansour
Hadi has rejected the road map. In the statement issued
yesterday, the Houthi-General People's Congress
complained that the road map does not contain essential
elements for the solution. Although uncertainties
remain, it is time for the parties to take their seats at the
negotiating table and to immediately resume face-to-
face consultations. The parties should undertake good-

faith negotiations under the mediation of the United
Nations to reach an agreement.

Now that Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed has presented
the road map, there may be a chance to advance the
political process. What then should the Council's
next step be? I believe that the answer is to send a
strong, unified message to the parties. First, we, the
Security Council, must call on the parties to resume
negotiations immediately, to respect the cessation of
hostilities and to allow and facilitate unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access. The group of 18 and
some States Members of the United Nations have
influence on the parties, but the Council must also
play a proactive role. Equally importantly, we must
ensure that the negotiations bear fruit. While adopting
a resolution is our basic and traditional measure for
ensuring implementation, one potential route is for the
President of the Security Council to present our unified
message at the beginning of the negotiations when
they commence.

We are now at a critical juncture for Yemen's
future and I would like to request Special Envoy Ould
Cheikh Ahmed to redouble his efforts. We strongly
encourage convening a new round of negotiations. In
addition, the Special Envoy's direct communication
with key stakeholders, including President Hadi,
Abdul-Malik Al-Houthi and Ali Abdullah Saleh, is
crucial to push the political process forward. I would
appreciate hearing from Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed
about the results of meetings with these figures at our
next briefing. Japan will continue to support Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed's efforts.

