Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I wish you every success, Sir, and I am very
pleased to offer you our full support. Allow me also
to express our appreciation to Equatorial Guinea for
its successful presidency last month. Allow me to turn
to Minister Miroslav Lajeak and welcome him to the
Security Council. We appreciate his comprehensive
briefing and are thankful for his setting out the
strategic priorities for the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The Minister can
count on our full support for his well-balanced and
realistic priorities throughout. We should all stand with
efforts to support effective multilateralism.

Preserving the security order based on international
law remains a core task for the OSCE. The compliance
of all participating States with the Helsinki Final
Act and subsequent agreements is a precondition for
stability and peace in our region. Regrettably, those
universal rules are now being challenged by one
permanent member of the Security Council, whose sole
responsibility is to protect and preserve those rules.

Five years ago, the Russian Federation violated
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine,
starting with the illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, which
we have not and will not recognize. Since then, the
Russian aggression against Ukraine has remained
the most important topic on the OSCE'S agenda, and
resolving the conflict continues to be an indispensable
step towards re-establishing European security. We
appreciate Mr. Lajeak's decision to visit Ukraine,
including the Donbas region, for the first time in his
capacity as OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.

I want to emphasize that Russia's unjustifiable
use of military force against Ukrainian vessels, which
resulted in its unilateral control over the Kerch Strait,
has not been not forgotten. The international calls for
the release of the 24 Ukrainian prisoners of war have
been ignored by the Kremlin ever since. Russia's
impediments to the passage of ships through the
Kerch Strait have already caused major socioeconomic
damage to Ukraine.

Poland strongly supports the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and insists that the
safety of its monitors and assets be ensured. It should
have unhindered access to every conflict-affected area
in Ukraine. Steps must also be taken to strengthen the
monitoring of the Ukrainian-Russian border and ensure
an additional international presence in the conflict zone.

We want to once again commend Mr. Lajeak's
initiative in visiting Georgia and Moldova, two
other countries affected by protracted conflicts.
We fully support the efforts of the OSCE Minsk
Group and its search for a fair and lasting political
settlement to the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. We
attach great importance to the work of Ambassador
Andrzej Kasprzyk and his team, which is a valuable
contribution to reducing tensions and implementing
confidence-building measures on the ground. We have
noted the fact that the Transnistrian conflict remains
high on the OSCE's agenda. It remains essential to reach
a comprehensive, peaceful and sustainable settlement
of this conflict, based on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Moldova.

With regard to the conflict in Georgia, we call on
Russia to implement the European Union-brokered
six-point ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008 that
ended the conflicts in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia region nearly 10 years ago. Russia
should withdraw its military forces from the Georgian
breakaway regions with a View to creating the conditions
for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

The security situation in the OSCE area is a
cause of growing concern. Military uncertainty is
being used as a political tool. Large-scale, no-notice
military manoeuvres along international borders and
military incidents undermine trust and create tensions
in the OSCE area of operations. That is why it is
urgent that we reduce any possible risk of a further
escalation of tensions by refraining from threatening
military action. We should remain committed to the
full implementation, in letter and in spirit, of existing
commitments on the political and military front. The
successful modernization of the Vienna Document
would be a positive step towards rebuilding trust
and confidence.

Poland opposes any attempts to weaken the
relevance of the OSCE's human dimension, and we
want to reiterate our strong support for the work of the
OSCE's autonomous institutions, particularly the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, located
in Warsaw. Let me express our full support for the
promotion of democratic standards and for safeguarding
human rights and fundamental freedoms, which are
indelible components of comprehensive security, the
concept on which the OSCE is founded. In particular,
we would like to highlight the role of the Human
Dimension Implementation Meetings organized yearly
in Warsaw, which represent the biggest conference in
Europe dedicated to human rights and the promotion of
democratic values. We truly hope that they will be used
to further strengthen human rights protection across
the OSCE area and to enhance multilateral cooperation
in the field of human rights.

Tomorrow we celebrate International Women's
Day, which gives me an excellent opportunity to pay
tribute to all women engaged in OSCE activities. We
hope that the OSCE will strive to maintain the current
momentum for further implementing programmes on
increasing the participation of women in the political
and public arenas, combating violence against women
and implementing resolution 1325 (2000), emphasizing
the involvement of women in conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict rehabilitation.

