Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing today's open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his incisive briefing earlier in the day, and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, for their briefings.

The right to life is one of the fundamental rights
enshrined in the constitutions ofa vast number ofUnited
Nations Member States, including my own. It is, in
fact, the foundation of any social order. Unfortunately,
situations of armed conflict continue to wreak havoc
and put the lives ofinnocent civilians at risk.

At the same time, the instances where civilians
are at greatest risk today do not involve States, but
non-State actors and belligerents who are not necessarily
combatants under international humanitarian law. That
makes the task of the international community, and the

Council in particular, so much more difficult as it needs
to act within established principles of international law.

Civilians have always suffered the most in
conflicts. Notwithstanding the development of
international humanitarian law and Security Council
mandates, civilians continue to suffer even today.
Even more unfortunate is the fact that civilians, or
non-belligerents, suffer a disproportionate share of the
casualties, as compared to belligerents. It is they who
bear the brunt of violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Protecting civilians encompasses tasks that are
both preventive and remedial. The conduct of warring
factions towards civilians, challenges of impunity,
weak or absent State authority, the political will of
the international community and a lack of the means
necessary to reverse the spiral of violence together
make the task that much more difficult.

India, a partner of United Nations peacekeeping
from its very inception, has contributed through ideas
and resources to global efforts towards protecting
civilians. Our soldiers have been at the forefront in
translating Security Council mandates into action
in challenging circumstances. Our troops and police
personnel have always upheld these mandates and
protected civilians. Our peacekeeping experience
brings to the table a quantum of experience in actually
protecting civilians in peacekeeping missions that is
unique in its relevance, variety and depth.

United Nations peacekeepers have been playing
a key role in protecting civilians from the scourge
of war, but we must not lose sight of the fact that the
protection of civilians is first and foremost a national
responsibility and requires institutions and conditions
in which the institutions can function. Peacekeepers,
in spite of their best efforts, cannot possibly protect
everyone from everything. To do that, it is necessary
to strengthen the capacities of States and their national
institutions to enable them to fulfil their responsibility
to protect their populations.

Since 1999, the Security Council has provided for the
protection of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping
missions. However, merely adding words and sentences
to the mandates will not enable peacekeepers to fulfil
protection mandates. Protecting populations is a
resource-intensive enterprise. It requires sufficient
personnel, proper equipment and suitable capacities.
The political will of the international community and
its ability to provide adequate resources are critical to
the success of missions in fulfilling their protection
mandates.

Civilians are protected best in an ecosystem of
peace where all its elements work and contribute in
tandem. The Security Council's efforts should therefore
address the multiple dimensions of conflicts in a
comprehensive and proportionate manner.

In the protection of civilians, we need to respect
the fundamentals of the Charter of the United Nations
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member
States. We must also be clear that the United Nations
has a mandate to intervene only in situations where
there is a threat to international peace and security.

We also firmly believe in the accountability of
those who elaborate mandates; their responsibility does
not end with the generation of mandates. They should
be held accountable if unachievable mandates have
been generated for political expediency or if adequate
resources are not made available. It is equally important
that the principles ofprotecting civilians be applied in a
uniform manner by all parties to the conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
Council's responsibility to protect civilians does not
end with a military or police response. Civilians require
the humanitarian wherewithal for survival. In that
process, multiple stakeholders should be involved, not
just the military. In dealing with a conflict situation,
the engagement of all warring factions in a nationally-
owned and inclusive political process is of paramount
importance. Such an inclusive approach to national
reconciliation, anchored in State sovereignty, is the
only way to move forward to ensure the protection
of civilians in an effective, pragmatic and enduring
manner.

