Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa welcomes
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, back to the Council and thanks him
for his comprehensive briefing.

The report which the High Representative has
provided us presents a mixed bag of progress (see S/2012/813). The country has remained stable, with no
serious security incidents. The holding oflocal elections
in a peaceful manner is also welcome. However, as
has already been indicated by various delegations, the
cohesiveness and unity of the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have been severely challenged by
the disagreements between the political parties. That
has had negative implications for the fulfilment of the
5+2 agenda established by the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC) Steering Board.

We had hoped that the new coalition Government
formed in June would make progress in moving the
country forward to allow it to complete the 5-1-2 agenda
and assume full sovereignty and authority over its
affairs. We note the progress made in the implementation
of the Brcko Final Award and the subsequent decision
to suspend the supervision of the Brcko district. As
stated by the High Representative in his report, that
step constitutes an important step towards fulfilling the
objectives set by the PIC Steering Board, which have
also been endorsed in its communique of 23 May. It
is important that all concerned parties work within the
framework of the Final Arbitral Award to resolve that
matter.

The issues of defence and State property, which
are necessary elements in fulfilling the outstanding
objectives of the 5+2 agenda, require continued
focus and attention. The implementation of existing
agreements, as well as the landmark decisions of
the Constitutional Court of 13 July relating to those
matters, are thus crucial.

It is our View that peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are dependent on all parties' respect for
the rule of law and the legal instruments that underpin
the political structures in the country. We reiterate that
the political leadership and the international presence
should remain focused on recognizing the balance
contained in the Dayton Agreement and the subsequent
political structures, and exert every effort to ensure
that this balance is respected and maintained. In that
regard, we are concerned about provocative, divisive
and nationalistic rhetoric that could serve to undermine
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State.

We should not forget that the Dayton Peace
Agreement is a temporary arrangement that has to
be replaced by a permanent constitution in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. All parties should commit to
constitutional reform, the purpose of which is to
establish stronger representative State structures. No
considerable progress can be made in establishing
lasting peace and stability without constructive dialogue
between the many ethnic groups and entities, as well as
between the various Bosnian structures and the High
Representative. Only through political dialogue would
it be possible to resolve outstanding issues such as the
reform of the Constitution.

Reconciliation should be the ultimate aim of a
continueddialogue.Anessentialaspectforreconciliation
is the commitment of all parties to fighting impunity
by bringing those accused of committing war crimes
to justice.

My delegation noted the reduction of the European
Union Force-Operation Althea presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We support the extension of its mandate
and the resolution currently being negotiated, and
specifically its focus on capacity-building, training
and retaining the capability to contribute to the
Government's deterrence capacity.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to again
encourage all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
recommit themselves to the full implementation of their
obligations under the peace accords and agreements.
Political will and national ownership are essential
in moving the process forward to a long-term peace,
stability and reconciliation.

