Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to
join with the Security Council at this important
moment as it debates the first annual report
(S/2007/458) of the Peacebuilding Commission.

The first year of the Commission's operation has,
in many respects, been a challenging one. As
Ambassador Takasu of Japan, the recently elected
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, said earlier in
this meeting, the Peacebuilding Commission has had a
full agenda, centred on the first two countries to be
considered by that newly established body, namely,
Burundi and Sierra Leone. Allow me, in my capacity as
Chair of the country-specific meetings on Sierra
Leone, to focus in particular on the work that has been
undertaken within that context, and to add some
remarks of a more general nature.

I have just returned from a mission to Sierra
Leone, regarding which I intend to give members of
the Peacebuilding Commission a full briefing later this
week. I shall gladly brief the Council in detail at a later
stage, if its members so wish. Allow me to highlight
only a few aspects.
My mission was intended to secure the continued
commitment of the newly elected Government of
Sierra Leone with regard to the country-specific work
that has been undertaken in the Peacebuilding
Commission. That has to do in particular with the four
priorities for peacebuilding that were identified at the
end of 2006, which have guided our work since. They
are: justice and security sector reform; good
governance and the consolidation of democracy; the
empowerment and employment of young people; and
capacity building. In that context, I should also note
the recognized relevance of gender equality and human
rights as cross-cutting issues in terms of building and
sustaining peace in Sierra Leone, as well as the
continued need for urgent improvement of the
infrastructure in Sierra Leone, in particular for the
supply of energy. The newly elected President of Sierra
Leone, Ernest Koroma, has endorsed those priorities,
which were also reflected in his acceptance speech
delivered to Parliament on 5 October 2007.

I have equally sought and secured the new
Government's commitment to the finalization of the
draft framework for cooperation that was drafted in the
course of 2007. The framework, which is to guide the
relationship between the Peacebuilding Commission
and Sierra Leone, is intended as a means to obtain
engagements by all actors - the Government as well
as the members of the Commission and other relevant
parties - under the four priority areas that I have
mentioned. In cooperation with the Sierra Leone
Government, which is leading the process, we intend to
finalize the framework by the end of this year.

The pace of progress made within the
Peacebuilding Commission in its first year in relation
to Sierra Leone was greatly determined by the
presidential and parliamentary elections in the country,
which took place over the past two months. Following
a request by the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission monitored the Sierra Leone election
process and issued a declaration that was subsequently
transmitted to this Council.

The elections that have taken place in Sierra
Leone, which have been generally peaceful and have
seen a high voter turn-out, can be labelled as a
landmark in the democratic process in the country.
That holds true for the preparation of the elections, the
elections themselves, and the ongoing transition
process. They have proved that the people of Sierra
Leone are investing their hopes in a democratic future
in which all segments of the population can make their
voices heard.

While that is a highly important achievement in a
country that was left ravaged by war some five years
ago, crucial challenges to sustainable peace remain in
the areas that I have mentioned. Moreover, the
expectations of the people of Sierra Leone are high.
Both continue to justify the active involvement of the
Peacebuilding Commission, together with the Sierra
Leone Government - notably, also in view of the local
elections next year, which will require strengthened
local institutions. The Peacebuilding Commission will
also continue to have a critical role in strengthening the
dialogue between the Government of Sierra Leone and
the international community.

The Peacebuilding Commission has had to develop
its work programme without pre-established models. It
was given and has taken the opportunity to define its
activities in relation to the countries on its agenda in
function of their needs and of the practical possibilities
for engagement. That has led to the practice of holding
regular meetings of the Commission in its country-
specific formats that have proved highly effective. The
regular use of video-link technology has enabled a close,
real-time dialogue between the Peacebuilding
Commission in New York and all actors in-country: the
Government, non-governmental organizations, civil
society and the local donor community.

More importantly, the working procedures of the
Peacebuilding Commission have led to a process that
was and is fully owned by the Government of Sierra
Leone and that has benefited from the informed inputs
of many actors, notably civil society representatives
and non-governmental organizations. In that context, I
would also like to mention the important contributions
of the Peacebuilding Support Office and the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone to our work.

At present, we have before us a draft cooperation
framework that, once further refined, will provide a
strong basis for concrete commitment by all based on
mutual accountability and with a mechanism for their
regular monitoring and review. I am confident that by
proceeding on the current track, the Peacebuilding
Commission will be able to make a significant
contribution to peacebuilding in Sierra Leone.

