Mr. Wolff (United States of America): We are
confronted today by a most unusual situation. The
Council has been asked to meet by a Council member
to react to a situation of its own making.
Libya, a country that does not have relations with
Israel, which cannot even acknowledge its existence in
the letter it sent to the Council that brought the issue
under consideration to our attention, and which has an
openly hostile attitude towards Israel, took the
remarkable step of attempting to send one of its vessels
to waters patrolled by Israel off Gaza in an attempt to
land at a port which is not open to international
maritime trade.

Given the current heightened international
sensitivity to unpredictable and uncoordinated
maritime activity, what country around this table would
not have reacted as the Israeli Navy did in this case?
The way Libya went about this was dangerous and
irresponsible. To the best of my knowledge, the
Charter, unfortunately, has no provision to deal with
the folly of States.

This is not a meeting about the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. However, if the objective of the
Libyan action had been seriously to provide assistance
to the people of Gaza, there are several ways to do so
that do not involve such provocative, confrontational
acts, and that would certainly have had a greater
chance of allowing that assistance to get through. The
manner which Libya chose seems almost designed to
guarantee that the assistance would not be delivered.

Now, there are several viable alternatives used by
every other State interested in providing assistance.
First, Member States can directly approach the
Palestinian Authority, the legitimate Government of the
Palestinian people, and inquire about how best to
deliver their proposed assistance. The Council of
Ministers of the League of Arab States, for its part,
issued a 26 November statement calling on Arab
countries to send humanitarian assistance to the Gaza
Strip and assigned specific responsibility to the Arab
League's secretariat to coordinate with the Egyptian
and Jordanian authorities to ensure the entry of that
assistance to Gaza.

Why did the Libyan authorities not coordinate
this in that manner? We are specifically aware, for
example, of a shipment of Jordanian assistance that
was successfully transferred through the Kerem
Shalom crossing into Gaza on 27 November.

Secondly, Member States seeking to provide
assistance to the people of Gaza can work through the
existing institutions and programmes of the United
Nations that have the mandate and the capacity to

provide humanitarian assistance in Gaza. These United
Nations institutions include the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the World Food Programme.
One is, therefore, left with the impression that
provocation - and perhaps even propaganda - was
the intended objective of the Libyan vessel's activity.

The real lesson here is the need to avoid the
repetition of such irresponsible action in how
assistance is delivered. Under the circumstances, with
the terrorist group Hamas controlling Gaza and
perpetrating repeated violence and acts of terrorism
against Israel, it is fortunate this incident of Libya's
making did not escalate.

Our understanding from media accounts
emerging from Tripoli is that, after Israeli vessels
turned the Libyan vessel back on Monday, the Libyan
vessel tried once again to enter the port on Tuesday
without Israel's consent. Under these circumstances,
Israel was justified in escorting the Libyan vessel
beyond the territorial sea and into international waters.

It cannot be said that Israel's actions constituted
piracy under the Law of the Sea Convention. Piracy
has a very specific meaning under international law,
including that the act has to have been by a private ship
for private ends. It is absurd to assert that Israel
committed an act of piracy. Indeed, the Israeli Navy
simply approached the vessel, flagged by a hostile
State, and instructed it to turn around and not continue
into Gazan waters. It then ensured that it did not return
to its original course. The Israeli Navy fired no shots
and did not insist on boarding the Libyan vessel.

Mechanisms are clearly in place, as I have
mentioned, for the transfer of humanitarian assistance
to Gaza by Member States that truly want to do so.
These non -provocative and non -confrontational
mechanisms should be the ones used. Direct delivery
by sea is neither appropriate nor responsible under the
circumstances.

The United Nations recently issued a
consolidated appeal for the West Bank and Gaza for
$462 million to help the people of Gaza, and we would
encourage all Member States to respond generously.

Finally, let us not forget the underlying reason
this humanitarian crisis exists. The legitimate
Palestinian Government's authority was usurped in the
7

Gaza Strip by the terrorist organization Hamas. Its
instigation of violence through the construction of
surreptitious tunnels from Gaza into Israeli territory of
the type used to kidnap and kill Israeli soldiers and its
indiscriminate rocket attacks on southern Israel and on
the established humanitarian aid crossing points all
continue. The Palestinian representative's lengthy
prepared remarks would have enjoyed more credibility
if he would have been able simply to repeat his
leadership's own known views on this.

Once this situation, created by Hamas, is
addressed, we are confident the humanitarian suffering
resulting directly from Hamas's illegal acts will also be
remedied.

