Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Let me, first of all,
join my colleagues in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. I would like to thank you for
organizing today's debate, and to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Paul Heinbecker of
Canada for his initiative.

By holding this meeting the Security Council is
promoting the principles of transparency and is clearly
indicating its readiness to hear the opinions of non-
members of the Council as it considers one of the most
important issues on its agenda. This meeting also
demonstrates how indispensable issues of international
justice are for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

As a State signatory of the Rome Statute that
intends to become a party to the Statute shortly, my
country strongly supports the principles and values
contained therein. As one of the biggest contributors of
troops to the United Nations, Ukraine regrets that the
Security Council is divided over a problem that could
undermine its credibility, call into question the
legitimacy of its decisions and challenge the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
activities. Ukraine is therefore deeply concerned about
the current impasse in the Council.

I do not intend to elaborate on the legal aspects of
the matter; these are the prerogative of other bodies.
Instead, let me emphasize that under the present
circumstances a decision of the Security Council will
definitively affect the future development of
international law and influence the practice of United
Nations peacekeeping. We believe it should be worked
out with outmost care and caution.

My delegation understands the concerns of the
United States. We hope that those concerns will be
addressed pragmatically. Moreover, we call upon every
member of the Security Council to make every possible
effort to find a generally acceptable solution which:
first, should not weaken United Nations peacekeeping;
secondly, should not harm the integrity of the Rome
Statute; thirdly, should not create a precedent of
interference by the Security Council with the sovereign
rights of the Member States in the treaty-making
process; and fourthly, should not create a conflict
between the powers of the Security Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter and the legal obligations
entered into by Member States in compliance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter.

As a contributor to international peacekeeping
efforts in the Balkans, Ukraine views a premature
termination of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina as leading to
serious repercussions. We deeply regret that, having
achieved significant practical results, the Mission faces
the possibility of an abrupt ending. This unfortunate
scenario will, in our view, harm the positive trends in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the spheres of the re-
establishment of the rule of law, police reform, border
control and the fight against terrorism and illegal
migration.

Ukraine fully supports steps taken by the
European Union to avoid a vacuum in international
efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My country is
determined to contribute to those activities in the
framework of the new European Union Police Mission
in Bosnia and, if necessary, to speed up the relevant
preparatory processes. However, we continue to look
forward to a satisfactory outcome of the current
situation, which will ensure a smooth transition from
UNMIBH to the European Union Mission, preserve the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping activities
and maintain the United States engagement.

