Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you today as
President of the Security Council, Sir. We would like to
thank the Equatorial Guinea presidency, both in terms
of its performance of its functions throughout this
month and for organizing today's meeting on a subject
whose significance for the work ofthe Security Council
is difficult to overestimate. And we are grateful to our
briefers, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Lamamra
and Mr. Gounden, for the information and assessments
they have provided.

The African Union's Agenda 2063, adopted six
years ago, is predicated on achieving peace on the
African continent by that date. It is encouraging to
see that Africa's leaders have not stopped at that
unquestionably noble but long-term goal but have
rather committed to making every possible effort to put
an end to armed conflicts in Africa as early as 2020.
Needless to say, there is a whole tangle of complex
problems causing long-term instability in Africa and
hampering the achievement of that ambitious task.
Resolution 2457 (2019), adopted on the initiative of
Equatorial Guinea, focuses on many of them. We
believe that the right thing to do in our meeting today
will be to put the emphasis on discussing the efforts
of African countries themselves to solve the problems
they are facing in the area of peace and security and the
ways that the international community may be able to
help them to do that.

Despite the fact that African issues continue to
occupy the greater part ofthe Security Council's agenda,
we should not fail to note the significant progress that
has been made in resolving various crises, particularly
during the past year. Important peace agreements have
been reached in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. Thanks to bold steps on the part of the leaders
of Ethiopia, Eritrea and Somalia, the situation in the
Horn of Africa has improved, and a number of African
countries, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Nigeria, have held generally peaceful and
democratic elections.

However, the situation in many African countries
remains difficult. We are particularly concerned about
hotbeds of tension in Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger,
the Central African Republic, Somalia, the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Lake Chad
basin region. In that regard, we welcome the activities of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Multinational Joint Task Force in fighting Boko Haram.
It will be crucial to continue to build on efforts to halt
the increasing terrorist activity in Africa. Terrorists are
returning to countries in the region from Syria, Iraq
and Afghanistan, and Libya, which became a haven for
terrorists of all stripes after the intervention in 2011, is
increasingly becoming a base for their activities. We
support the African Union's desire to raise its profile
in the settlement of the situation in Libya, including
by organizing a joint international conference with the
United Nations on reconciliation there.

We note the operationalization of the African
Standby Force within the framework of the establishment
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
The African Union is currently mobilizing efforts to

prevent conflict, including by utilizing the potential
of subregional organizations and the good offices of
prominent African leaders. We greatly appreciate the
mediation efforts of Mr. Lamamra, African Union High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa, and
hope to see productive work coming out of the recently
established African Union Centre for Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development.

We believe that adequate assistance on the part of
the international community is essential to ending the
conflicts in Africa. That support should be provided
on the basis of strict compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations and respect for the principle of
non-interference in the affairs of sovereign States.
However, Africans themselves must take the leading
role in resolving crises, in accordance with the principle
of African solutions to African problems. We want to
point out that Russian assistance in ensuring security
and stability in Africa has always been provided
with the approval of national Governments and on
a basis of regional and continental peace initiatives.
With the aim of enabling African States to form their
own anti-crisis forces, we will continue our bilateral
training programmes for military and law-enforcement
personnel, as well as our instruction for African
peacekeepers at specialist Russian institutions.

We welcome the mutual willingness of the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission
to expand the cooperation between the two organizations
on peace and security, including by holding an annual
high-level conference and increasing the number of j oint
missions to conflict zones. We consider the Security
Council's focused attention to African initiatives to
ensure sustainable financing of African peacekeeping
operations under the auspices of the African Union to
bejustified. We note the progress made in replenishing
the African Union Peace Fund, which affirms the
determination of African leaders to take on their share
of support to peacekeeping missions' budgets.

As many speakers have said today, ensuring stability
in Africa is closely linked to resolving the most important
socioeconomic issues facing the continent. Issues
related to overcoming lagging industrial development,
building modern infrastructure and creating new jobs,
including for young people, are especially urgent. It will

be essential to minimize the negative consequences of
problems related to refugees and internally displaced
persons, uncontrolled migration, famine, poverty
and epidemics. All of this demands increasing the
efficiency of public administration and training highly
qualified personnel in various fields. In that regard,
Russia intends to continue contributing to training
specialists from African countries by providing State
scholarships for education in Russian institutions in
medicine, education, advanced technologies, transport,
geology and other areas.

