Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General and
appreciate his strong statement.

Uruguay voted in favour of and co-sponsored
resolution 2321 (2016). We welcome its unanimous
adoption, as we believe that it will be a very useful tool
of deterrence in the current situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. In that context, Uruguay
reiterates its firm condemnation of the nuclear tests,
the launch of missiles and the continued provocation of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which only
escalate tension on the Korean peninsula, constitute a
clear Violation of international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, and represent a very serious threat
to international peace and security.

Uruguay is committed to nuclear disarmament
and the non-proliferation regime and reiterates its
commitment to and support for the strengthening of
multilateralism, universal and complete disarmament
and the strengthening of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a cornerstone
of the disarmament and non-proliferation regime.
In that framework, Uruguay urges the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to completely, verifiably and
irreversibly abandon its existing nuclear programme
and to put an end to related activities, including launches
of ballistic missiles and other activities that can only
be seen as acts of provocation. Similarly, we urge the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to return to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and to the safeguards regime
of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

Despite the measures taken in March by the
Security Council with the adoption of 2270 (2016),
which imposed new, more severe sanctions against
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, we meet
today to adopt new, significant measures due to the fact
that the regime of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea continues to defy and ignore all of the positions
of this Council by pursuing its nuclear and ballistic
missile programme with actions that constitute clear
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that respect, we reiterate that Uruguay considers the
implementation of sanctions to be a tool of the Council
that can be used to achieve a specific end. They should
be used not to punish a State, but rather to achieve a
political objective.

Uruguay stresses the urgent need to continue to work
towards a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Our
country continues to support all initiatives aimed at
dialogue, which is why we believe that we must step
up our efforts to revive the Six-Party Talks for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Failing that,
the Security Council would find itselfin the position of
having to continue adopting resolutions and imposing
sanctions. We also stress the need for all States to
resolutely honour their obligations under the resolution
adopted today, as the Security Council's actions cannot
be effective in any other way.

We would like to point out that Uruguay supports
the resolution in the conviction that the implementation
ofthese new sanctions will not directly harm the civilian
population, whose human rights and humanitarian
concerns are critical.
