Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I join other
Council members in thanking the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2009/135) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide, for his
important updated briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan. I also welcome Ambassador Tanin to the
Council.

More than seven years since the overthrow of the
Taliban regime, a new Afghanistan has emerged.
Thanks to the convergence of the committed, generous
efforts from the international community and the
resilience of the Afghan people, certain progress has
been made in a number of areas, promising possible
subsequent positive results in coordinating security
activities, tightening poppy production control,
increasing agricultural output, implementing the Mine
Action Programme and cooperating with the outside
world, first of all with neighbouring countries.

However, we remain deeply concerned about the
continued deterioration of peace and security and the
acutely difficulties faced by the population of
Afghanistan, as most notably reflected by the fact that
2008 was the most violent year since 2001, with more
casualties and suffering inflicted upon the Afghan
people, especially women and children. That is in
addition to the many other challenges described in the
Secretary-General's report.

We therefore share the view that there can be no
purely military solution to these challenges. Instead, an
integrated approach and a comprehensive vision are
required, involving several key factors. In that
connection, we share many points raised by the
Secretary-General in his report and by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in his briefing,
and we wish to emphasize that, in social and economic
terms, it is essential to ensure the effective
implementation, under the ownership of the Afghan
people, of the Afghanistan Compact, the National Drug
Control Strategy and, especially, the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy, which identifies
agriculture, energy and infrastructure as priority areas.
Moreover, improving social welfare, including health
care and education services, should continue to be
among the main priorities of the Government of
Afghanistan. In that process, it is important that the
Afghan authorities and people are provided with the
necessary assistance to enhance their capacity and
proactive participation both in decision-making and in
implementing projects and programmes thereby
helping increase aid effectiveness.

In the political field, reconciliation, while not an
end in itself, needs to be part of an inclusive political
process in Afghanistan. We call on the leaders of
Afghanistan to place peace and the political stability of
their country at the centre of all calculations, overcome
divisions, renounce violence and advance dialogue and
cooperation in the common interests of the country.

As this year is a critical test for Afghanistan,
especially with the presidential elections scheduled for
August, we welcome all efforts by the international
community to further support the country. We
commend the upcoming special conferences on
Afghanistan to be convened in Moscow and The
Hague. We take special note of the recently
strengthened regional cooperation in support of
Afghanistan's economic, political and security
improvement - especially the resumption of such
regional initiatives as the Peace Jirga process - for we
are convinced that the challenges in Afghanistan,
interrelated and interconnected in nature as they are,
demand a greater role and contribution on the part of
regional partners in the quest for a comprehensive and
sustainable solution.

We reaffirm our support for the leading role of
the United Nations in coordinating international
civilian activities in Afghanistan. After their timely
allocation of additional financial, human and security
resources to UNAMA for 2009, the General Assembly
and its member States are looking to the Mission to
make further progress on the ground. We support
UNAMA in providing technical assistance, at the
request of the Afghan authorities, for the pivotal
upcoming elections and for continuing its coordination
with other international donors, agencies and
organizations to make the most of the available
resources. At the same time, UNAMA should continue
to intensify its cooperation with the Government of
Afghanistan, as well as with relevant organizations and
stakeholders, to fulfil its mandate.

So that UNAMA can carry out its duties in the
current situation, we endorse the extension of its
present mandate for another 12 months. We also
welcome all measures and steps being taken to avoid
casualties among civilians, who are the ultimate
beneficiaries of the peace process.

It is high time for the Afghan people to bear
responsibility for their own future. We expect that, with
renewed regional and international support, the coming
presidential elections will be conducted in a free, fair
and secure environment, thus paving the way for the
restoration of peace and security, which the country so
deserves. We sincerely wish the people and the
Government of Afghanistan every success in that
process, to which Viet Nam, for its part, stands ready to
contribute positively and constructively.

