Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too wish to thank Mr. Egeland for his
briefing, which as usual was very thorough, on the
results of his last trip to Sudan and northern Uganda,
and for his ongoing steps, together with his team, to
manage humanitarian cooperation and to promote
normalization of the humanitarian situation in those
very complex regions. Of course, we would expect that
the humanitarian activity of the United Nations, both in
those regions and overall in the African continent, will
continue. We support that activity, because it is a very
important element in promoting normalization of the
situation and a political settlement.

There is no doubt whatsoever that the main
reason for the unfortunate humanitarian situation is the
fact that the conflicts are still unresolved. Mutual
influence is the connection, for there is no doubt that
progress towards a political settlement would have a
positive impact in managing the humanitarian
situation, whether in the Sudan, in northern Uganda or
in other crisis areas.

With respect to the Sudan, I do not wish to pre-
empt the Council's discussion later today. We are
awaiting with great interest the statement by the
Secretary-General on the results of the very important
meeting on Darfur that took place in Addis Ababa. I
just wish to say here that the agreements achieved there
need to be strengthened and to be implemented
appropriately, with the United Nations playing a very
active role and with interaction with the African Union.

I do not wish to repeat what was said with respect
to the characteristics of the humanitarian situation;
there is no doubt that it remains very complicated.
Without doubt the Government of the Sudan and all
other parties must fully comply with their obligations
in ensuring necessary access for humanitarian
organizations and the safety of their personnel; they
must cooperate with the humanitarian staff. There is no
doubt about that.

It is also very important to ensure strict
compliance by all parties with the ceasefire agreement.
Unfortunately, we have seen a continuation of
hostilities, and certainly that situation does not
facilitate any advance on the political track. We would
expect that any momentum provided by the agreement
in principle in Addis Ababa will be further
strengthened and will have a positive effect on the
work of international humanitarian agencies in Darfur
and on the humanitarian situation overall.

With respect to northern Uganda, I wish to
support my colleagues in the Council in noting the
need to continue the peace process with the successful
mediation of the Government of Southern Sudan. Of
course, all those humanitarian tasks that remain in this
context, which are being resolved with useful
cooperation by the United Nations, must be dealt with,
and relevant efforts must continue.

We were pleased to hear that Mr. Kony has made
the appropriate pledges that due attention will be paid
to humanitarian issues, most of all with regard to
returning to the United Nations all non-combatants
being held by the Lord's Resistance Army. This is very
important, and we hope that this matter will be
resolved.

Once again I wish to say we deeply appreciate the
work done by United Nations humanitarian staff and
by Mr. Egeland personally. We take it that progress in
all the areas indicated will be strengthened. The
Council will of course continue to give all those
matters the necessary attention.

