Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, for his briefing. We commend the efforts of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and all the humanitarian agencies that have managed to
deliver the humanitarian aid so needed by the people.

We hope that those efforts can be duplicated in the
besieged and difficult-to-access areas in order to reach
as many civilians in need as possible. Bolivia believes
that it is important to take all the measures necessary to
ensure the reconstruction of Raqqa and other cities in
Syria. We call on the relevant parties to spare no effort
to ensure the safe and dignified return of the families
that were forced to leave their homes for humanitarian
and security reasons.

According to the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/243), since October 2017, 86,000
civilians returned to the city of Raqqa, 20,600 of whom
returned in February alone. We regret that 130 civilians
died and 658 were seriously injured in accidents caused
by remnants of anti-personnel mines and explosive
remnants of war. We reiterate the urgency of demining
efforts, beginning with the clearance of explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices, as
a fundamental step for the safe return of the civilian
population. Furthermore, such work is essential for the
restoration of basic infrastructure and services to meet
immediate humanitarian needs and facilitate long-term
reconstruction. In that regard, we believe that the efforts
of the United Nations Mine Action Service are key.

We regret that violence continues in the main
cities of Syria, but it is even more reprehensible that
as a result of those clashes civilian infrastructure,
such as hospitals, schools and residential areas, has
been affected. We also regret that obstacles remain to
the full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), and
we call on all parties involved to make every effort to
achieve its effective implementation throughout the
Syrian territory, in order to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian aid and services in a safe, sustained and
unhindered manner, in addition to the realization of
medical evacuations of seriously ill and injured persons.

We remind the parties to the conflict once again
that they must allow unconditional access for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, and guarantee
and safeguard its security and integrity, especially in
besieged and difficult-to-access areas. We reiterate once
more our highest recognition of the work undertaken
by humanitarian agencies, and we call for respect for
international law and international humanitarian law in
the discharge of their dangerous duties on the ground.

In conclusion, we reject any attempt
at fragmentation or sectarianism in Syria,
and we believe that the Syrian people must freely
decide its future and political leadership within the
framework of its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We reiterate that the only way to resolve the conflict is
through a political process that is inclusive, negotiated,
coordinated and led by and for the Syrian people, which
will enable the achievement of sustainable peace in
their territory, without pressure or interference.
