Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me to
present our sincere condolences and solidarity to the
people of Turkey after the terrible earthquake that
struck their country, and to Saudi Arabia on the passing
of the Crown Prince.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his very useful briefing, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their contributions to today's debate.

Momentous events are still taking place in the
wider Arab world, with a direct impact on the Middle
East and on the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people. While the Yemeni and Syrian peoples continue
their courageous struggle against despotic regimes,

Tunisia held its first free elections in decades and the
Libyan authorities announced the liberation of their
country. Gilad Shalit has been freed and reunited with
his family after many years in unjustifiable detention
and isolation. Palestinian prisoners have also been
released. President Abbas has submitted a request for
Palestine to be admitted as a full Member of the United
Nations. The Quartet has put forward a statement that
clearly and constructively lays the ground for the
resumption of negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians, and the parties will be meeting with its
representatives in a couple of days in Jerusalem. The
Quartet has also called upon the parties to refrain from
provocative actions in order for those negotiations to
be effective.

Let me address some of those issues, beginning
with Gilad Shalit. Portugal sincerely hopes that his
release and the related liberation of Palestinian
prisoners will not only lead to positive developments in
the security, humanitarian and economic situations in
Gaza and the cessation of all attacks on Israeli civilians
from the Strip, but that it will also contribute to easing
tensions between neighbours and translate into
concrete progress in the stalled Middle East peace
process. Shalit's liberation took leadership,
determination and a sense of compromise; these are the
same values that will be necessary for Israelis and
Palestinians during the important weeks ahead in order
to ensure the successful resumption of credible
negotiations between them.

Let us be clear. Only such negotiations on all core
issues between Israelis and Palestinians, pursued in
good faith, will allow for a peaceful and
comprehensive resolution of their conflict, based on
the two-State solution, mutual security and respect for
each country's needs. That comprehensive solution has
been made even more urgent by the historical events
taking place across the Arab world. Those events
continue to underscore that the status quo is
unsustainable and that there is no time to squander if
we wish to ensure that the changes in the region will
indeed bring about peace and prosperity for all.

As will be said later on by the observer of the
European Union in his statement, which we naturally
endorse, it is necessary to heed and support the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the region,
including those of the Palestinians for statehood. That
is, for Portugal, a matter of coherence and consistency.

Statehood is an inalienable and legitimate right of
the Palestinian people. There is a strong international
consensus that the Palestinian Authority is capable of
running a State. Portugal commends the Palestinian
leadership and people on this achievement, but
recognizes that the Palestinian people will be able to
fully explore their potential only in the framework of
an independent and sovereign State. That can be
achieved only with direct and meaningful negotiations
with their Israeli neighbours.

Portugal will continue to examine the Palestinian
application for full membership in the United Nations
in a responsible way, as is our duty as a member of the
Security Council. At the same time, we continue to
strongly urge both parties to give diplomacy a chance
and to work diligently towards a final and
comprehensive settlement of their conflict under the
terms and timelines outlined in the Quartet declaration
of 24 September and on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map, the agreements previously reached between
the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We also recall the Quartet's appeal to the parties
to refrain from any provocative actions and to fully
respect their respective obligations under the Road
Map. The disturbing announcement of thousands of
new housing units and settlements in Gilo, Pisgat
Ze'ev and Givat Hamatos and the decision to entrench
West Bank outposts are not only illegal but run counter
to Israel's declared commitment to a negotiated
solution to a final status issues, including borders and
Jerusalem, as the Under-Secretary-General emphasized
in his briefing.
We are equally troubled by the upsurge in
violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinian civilians.
We also condemn the recent attacks against Israel
Defense Forces personnel. We remain particularly
concerned with the increase in demolitions of
Palestinian homes and infrastructure. We call on the
Government to fulfil its obligations under international
law to protect Palestinian civilians and property in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

Israelis and Palestinians have a unique
opportunity to resume direct and meaningful
negotiations and to finally settle all outstanding issues,
paving the way for two independent States living in
peace and security and fully integrated in their region.
Let them not forfeit that opportunity.

The situation in Syria has continued to deteriorate
since the last discussion in the Council on 4 October
(see S/PV.6627). The risk of the ongoing violence and
political crisis escalating into a fully-fledged civil war
with severe implications for the region increases by the
day. Thus, we believe that it is extremely urgent that
the Security Council send a strong, clear and united
message to Syria. The authorities' violent repression
against its population must cease immediately and
those responsible for human rights violations must be
held accountable. We welcome the active engagement
by the Arab League and urge President Al-Assad to
respond in a positive and timely manner to that appeal.

Portugal remains fully committed to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Syria. Therefore, we once again call
for an inclusive, credible and Syrian-led political
process aimed at effectively addressing the legitimate
aspirations of Syria's population.

