Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We extend
our thanks to Mr. Feltman for his briefing on the
situation in Ukraine.

Jordan expresses its deep concern about the
escalation of the crisis in Ukraine and the developing
situation. Jordan reaffirms the need for respect for
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and to
refrain from any provocative action that could threaten
peace and security. Such conduct will only complicate
matters in eastern Ukraine and negatively impact
international efforts towards peace. We call upon all
parties to refrain from using military means and to
cooperate in forging a peaceful solution based on the
Charter of the United Nations, the rules of international
law and all the efforts made in recent months, including
agreements signed between the two parties.

Access for humanitarian assistance is urgently
needed to enable the delivery of assistance by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
humanitarian relief organizations. Such assistance
must not be politicized. It must remain a humanitarian
task to help those in need.

We also reiterate the need to translate the outcome
of the Belarus summit into real progress in peace talks
and the release of all hostages. In that regard, we call
upon both parties, Russian and Ukrainian, to continue
talking and consulting. Hopefully, that will lead to
peace between the two parties. We also hope that peace
can be linked to political and economic interests for the
good of the peoples of both parties. Such cooperation
would enable the increased risks that threaten the
security of Russia and Ukraine and all of the region to
be eliminated.

Jordan calls upon the United Nations and all of the
parties to take steps in the correct direction to bolster

political dialogue between Russian and Ukraine, and
to build on the efforts made to protect the security
and stability of Ukraine, including establishing
mechanisms that would protect civilians and make
sure that assistance reaches those who need it. Jordan
believes that real peace between the two parties would
require political will on the part of all parties, as well
as goodwill and a realization that provocation, military
or otherwise, will not lead to peace, but only to more
escalation and a worsening of the situation.

