Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): In
Cote d'Ivoire, the mission emphasized the Security
Council's support for the Ouagadougou agreement,
which is the result of the parties' ownership of the
peace process. The mission urged its interlocutors to
ensure full implementation of the agreement,
particularly by achieving the goals leading to the
holding of free, fair and transparent elections.

In that respect, the mission stressed the need for
effective follow-up to the Ouagadougou agreement.
Likewise, it called on the parties to abide by the
established timetable as closely as possible and, at the
same time, to protect the integrity of the process. The
mission reaffirmed its firm commitment to ensuring the
credibility of the electoral process in Cote d'Ivoire.

In addition, the mission expressed its serious
concern at the persistence of the humanitarian and
socio-economic crisis in C6te d'Ivoire and stressed the
need to undertake efforts in the humanitarian, socio-
economic and human rights areas, particularly with
regard to children, women, displaced persons and other
groups affected by the crisis.

At the conclusion of its report (S/2007/421), the
mission made the following recommendations: that the
Security Council continue to support the full
implementation of the Ouagadougou political

agreement and the role of the Facilitator; that the
Security Council, taking full account of the advice of
the Facilitator, follow up on the recent
recommendations of the Secretary-General on updating
and improving the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire in order to support the
implementation of the Ouagadougou agreement; that
the Secretary-General appoint a new Special
Representative and head of UNOCI; and that the
Security Council carefully examine the request for a
partial lifting of the arms embargo regime - and that
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), should it be necessary, carefully examine this
matter in order to contribute to the peace process and
to the peaceful implementation of the Ouagadougou
agreement.

By adopting this morning's draft resolution, the
Security Council has dealt with the first two
recommendations. Still outstanding are the
appointment of a new Special Representative and the
possible consideration of a partial lifting of the
embargo.

