Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): I greatly welcome
the initiative of the French presidency in calling this
ministerial meeting. I would like to thank His
Excellency the Secretary-General for his address and to
express my personal thanks to Sir Jeremy Greenstock
for all his work while chairing the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. I would also like to thank members of the
Council for the continuing, if I may say so, the very
well-placed confidence which they have shown in him
throughout his period of office.

The cold war was dangerous and at times
frightening, but it had some certainties and ground
rules. Today's terrorists, however, respect no rules and
no one's life - not others' lives, not even their own.
They respect no values and no religion. They are
criminals cloaked in a cause - psychopathic killers
who define themselves by the terror which they inflict
on others.

Some call this international terrorism. That does
not make it distant from our own lives, but immediate
in each of our nations, down our street or the next. At
least 13 of the 15 countries represented here in the
Security Council have seen the killing of their innocent
citizens by terrorists. In the United Kingdom, we have
just lost a brave police officer, killed in the course of a
terrorist-related arrest - three children now without a
dad, a devoted wife with no husband.

We have to unite as never before in the face of
this threat and act, I suggest, in five key ways.

First, we must ensure that the duties imposed by
the United Nations counter-terrorism law - Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) - are vigorously
enforced in every Member State. We have to expose
the laggards and confront every danger effectively. As
Sir Jeremy Greenstock has just laid out, the momentum
from the Counter-Terrorism Committee has to be
sustained.

As a former Interior Minister, allow me to say
this. The key challenge is not to set up new institutions
or figureheads, but to ensure that existing law-
enforcement arrangements work better.

Secondly, we have to expose the connection
between the terrorists who respect no rules and the
States which respect no rules either. It is the leaders of
rogue States who set the example, brutalize their
people, celebrate violence, provide a haven for
terrorists to operate, and - worse than that - through
their chemical, biological and nuclear weapons,
provide a tempting arsenal for terrorists to use.

The world must be in no doubt: if terrorists can,
they will. If they can get their hands on nerve gases,
killer viruses or nuclear bombs, they will use them.

Thirdly, action to stop rogue States' proliferation
is as urgent as action to stop terrorism. Wherever we
can, we should use diplomatic means to get
proliferators to comply, as we are with North Korea,
patiently. But there has to come a moment when our
patience must run out, and we are now near that point
with Iraq.

Well before Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) was adopted, on 8 November last year, Saddam
Hussein was already in breach, not of one or two, but
of 23 mandatory obligations in nine separate Security
Council resolutions stretching back over 12 years. The
moment of choice for Saddam Hussain is close. He
must either resolve this crisis peacefully, by active
compliance with his Security Council obligations and
full cooperation with inspectors, or face the serious
consequences - the use of force - which the Council
warned would follow when it adopted resolution 1441
(2002).

Fourthly, we have absolutely and emphatically to
reject the lie that the action of the international
community in fighting terrorism and rogue States is
anti-Muslim. It is not. It is pro-Muslim, as well as pro-
Christian, pro-Buddhist, pro-Jew, pro-Hindu, pro-
Sikh - pro-humanity.

Down the ages, tyrants and terrorists alike have
sought justification for their ends by claiming that they
have God on their side. Today is no different. Let us
remember this: Al Qaeda and the Taliban murdered
thousands of Muslims in Afghanistan well before 11
September.

Let us also remember that almost every one of the
hundreds of thousands of people killed by Saddam
Hussain have been Muslim, and that, in contrast, in the
four international conflicts of the past 12 years - the
Gulf, Bosnia, Kosovo and Afghanistan - it happens to
have been innocent Muslims who have been saved by
international military action.

Fifthly, we must, of course, work relentlessly to
eliminate the environment in which terrorism breeds.
This can be done by firm security action and a political
agenda. In Northern Ireland and in Sri Lanka, we see
the hope which can be built after decades of killing and
hatred.

We must not give up in other theatres, least of all
in the Israel-Palestine conflict. Only the terrorists will
rejoice if grief at the endless killings gives way to total
despair. There, a two-State solution is the only just
response, as the Council has determined. Such an
outcome would be a vindication of the founding ideal
of the United Nations that reconciliation is possible
between all nations and all faiths.

People of my generation will recognize that at
times, over the past 50 years, the ideals of the United
Nations have seemed sometimes beyond reach. The
vile hostility of the cold war stood in stark contrast to
the noble principles of the United Nations Charter. Yet
the ideal of the United Nations survives. It prevailed
through the era of super-Power confrontation, and, with
our collective effort, it will prevail over the twin
threats of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction
which haunt the world today.

