Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Ijoin other
colleagues in expressing our condolences and sympathy
to the authorities and the people of the United Republic
of Tanzania for the tragic deaths of the 14 Tanzanian
Blue Helmets who were killed while carrying out their
duties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Senegal welcomes the Council's unanimous
adoption today ofresolution 2391 (2017) on the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force. We would like
to thank France, which showed perseverance, openness
and skill as the penholder. The resolution undoubtedly
represents another significant source of support for the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, whose establishment the Security
Council already welcomed in resolution 2359 (2017).
For it must be said again and again that the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force has courageously taken it upon itself the
task of resolutely tackling a regional manifestation of
the global problem of terrorism and violent extremism.
We have seen that the G-5 Sahel's commitment has

facilitated other initiatives on behalf of and together
with the Sahel. The financing mechanism proposed
in resolution 2391 (2017) is a decisive step in the right
direction. Through our colleagues the Permanent
Representatives of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania,
the Niger and Chad, who are here today, I would like
to humbly offer Senegal's gratitude for the courageous
commitment of the Governments of the brotherly
countries that are the G-5 Sahel's neighbours in helping
to tackle the numerous scourges afflicting the Sahel
region, such as terrorism, transnational organized crime
and trafficking in all its forms, including in human
beings - a commitment they decided to go ahead with
irrespective of the human, material and financial costs.
The Joint Force's first operation, Hawbi,
conducted in the central sector, was a demonstration
of the G-5 Sahel's determination and of the new
level of effectiveness that the Force has reached in
its operationalization. The international community
should therefore help the Force to reach full capacity on
both the political and morale fronts, particularly since
it is working and coordinating closely with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. The countries of the Sahel-Saharan
region are linked by a common destiny to those of
the G-5 Sahel, with which they share extensive land
and sea borders. Senegal would like to thank all who
have already shown their support. We call for our
bilateral and multilateral partners to show further
active generosity and solidarity through the mechanism
provided for in resolution 2391 (2017), and especially
by showing major and generous support at the donor
conferences to beheld in Paris and Brussels next week.

