Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
timely debate. Poland aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to add a few observations from my
national perspective.

Let me start by referring to the recent report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
that document, the Secretary-General very accurately
stresses that:
"Terrorism cannot be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Demonizing specific religions, ethnicities and
cultures is contrary to human rights, feeds into
violent extremist narratives and encourages
xenophobia, which can cause irreparable damage
to efforts to prevent violent extremism and counter
terrorism" (A/70/826, para. 43).

There is neither a political nor a religious justification
for terrorism. All terrorist acts must be condemned,
and all perpetrators should be held accountable.

Since the adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy 10 years ago, the world has
become more interrelated in terms of communications,
trade and economy. There has been a corresponding
increase in the dilemmas relating to the changing global
security environment. In today's world, no clear line
can be drawn between zones of war and zones ofpeace.
Instead, there are conflicts where traditional divisions
between internal and external, defence and homeland
security, civil and military affairs are out of date.

The reality of rising terrorist threats is often
misshaped by distorted narratives and ideologies,
as rightly identified in the Egyptian presidency's
concept paper (S/2016/416, annex). Religiously inspired
terrorist groups constitute one of the gravest threats
to international peace and security. Many of them
use false interpretations of Islam, for instance, to
justify their activities, attract supporters and recruit
fighters, especially from among youth. It is our joint
responsibility to take up the fight for the hearts
and minds of those who are most vulnerable to such
indoctrination. We should present an inspiring, positive
alternative for those who are looking for a purpose in
life. We should not leave a political, economic, social
or spiritual vacuum that can be filled by extremists,
and can result in, inter alia, the recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters.

In that regard, let me stress that predominantly
Muslim countries have a special capability and
responsibility to propagate a real, peaceful interpretation
of Islam. The international community must support
those efforts. We all need to do everything we can so as
not to allow one kind of radicalization trigger another
that is equally dangerous, namely, Islamophobia. For
that reason, deradicalization is our common aim.

During the past decades, several legal anti-terrorist
instruments have been elaborated within the United
Nations system. Their full implementation, including
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
is an indispensable factor in combating terrorist
narratives. It should be highlighted that the incitement
to commit acts of terrorism is treated in some legal
orders, including Poland, as an ancillary offence that
can be punished, just as can the perpetration of a
terrorist act.

We need to reach local communities to build positive
examples for the most vulnerable. The Hedayah Centre
in Abu Dhabi, working within the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum and the Radicalization Awareness
Network, are good examples of such a responsible and
proactive stance.

As underlined in the concept note prepared by
the Egyptian presidency, countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorist groups is not a one-person
task. We should engage all possible stakeholders,
Governments, religious leaders, non-governmental
organizations and the educational sector in that task.
The international community has a duty to support the
world of Islam in that endeavour. That is a role for the
United Nations and for regional organizations. Poland
is ready to support the United Nations in that respect.

