Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): First of
all, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to pay tribute to the Permanent Representative
of Kenya for his excellent work during his presidency last
month.

Today's meeting of the Security Council has been
called to consider yet another instance of the old
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption I)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

ambitious and expansionist policy of the Israeli regime in
the sensitive region of the Middle East. The notorious
policy of building settlements in the occupied territories has
been part of the grand design of the occupiers to change the
basic characteristics of the Palestinian territories in order to
perpetuate their occupation. This policy is being pursued in
blatant contravention of international law and in open
defiance of clear provisions of numerous United Nations
resolutions, including those adopted by the Council itself.

Under the circumstances prevailing in the aftermath of
the cold war, it is indeed very difficult to conceive that the
violation of the most fundamental principles of international
law could be perpetrated with such a sense of impunity.
The only explanation seems to lie in the fact that Israel has
realized that the Security Council is not prepared to live up
to its commitments to stop aggression, thanks to the
unqualified and continuous support of certain members
who, at most and out of sheer embarrassment, express
dissatisfaction with the atrocious Israeli practices in the
occupied areas. Had the Council adopted concrete measures
in the past to discharge its obligations effectively in the
face of persistent Israeli intransigence, we would not have
faced the present calamity.

The recent decision of Israel to build 6,500 housing
units in Jerusalem is also designed to change the Islamic
character of the city in the continuous process of
judaization of Jerusalem, which is sacred to all Muslims.
As the firstrkiblah of Muslims, Al-Quds Al-Sharif has a
special place in the heart of every Muslim. Therefore, to
presume that the illegal continuation of occupation, the
imposition of demographic changes in Jerusalem as well as
the daily harassment of the Muslim inhabitants of the city
would erode the love and devotion of every Muslim to this
Holy City is pure delusion and, as such, out of touch with
reality and, in the final analysis, utterly impracticable.

History attests to the fact that Muslims have always
comprised the majority of inhabitants in Jerusalem and any
claim to the contrary is not only a mere fabrication of
historical facts butan insult to human conscience. All of
the Islamic countries are united on this position and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, which owes its
raison d'etre to the Muslims' response to an act of arson
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem, has always
condemned the Israeli practices in Palestine and called for
the liberation of the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

The Security Council has the legal and moral
responsibility to speak out against the violation of
international law by the Zionist regime. The urgency of
forceful action by the Security Council becomes all the
more imperative in the light of the fact that the leaders of
Israel are intent on building these new illegal settlements
despite the outrage of the local inhabitants and
condemnation from all over the world. Bearing in mind
that Israel is creating a fair accompli throughout Palestine,
particularly in Jerusalem, the Security Council should
condemn in the strongest possible terms the decision of
Israel to build new settlements in Jerusalem. It should
also take the necessary measures in accordance with the
Charter to reverse this decision. Only through the
adoption of decisive and effective measures can the
Security Council enhance its credibility. The Security
Council is called to act at a time when the memories of
the second Persian Gulf war and the way the Council
handled that conflict are still alive. Therefore, in order not
to be accused of further resort to double standards, the
Security Council should act expeditiously and vigorously.
The Israeli regime, shamelessly flouting international
norms and principles and even its own commitments
undertaken in bilateral agreements, deserves no leniency
whatsoever.

