Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Director Reena Ghelani for her comprehensive
briefing and to commend the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Syria.

The conflict in Syria has brought enormous suffering
to its civilian population. Almost 12 million people are
in need of multisectoral humanitarian assistance. More
than 6 million are internally displaced, of Whom an
estimated 870,000 live in sites oflast resort.

The conflict, which has been characterized by
widespread and systematic violations and abuses of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
affects the most vulnerable groups - children,
young people, women and girls, the elderly and
people with disabilities. People with both physical
and psychological disabilities often have particular
problems with protection in humanitarian emergencies,
as they are more likely to be exposed to targeted
violence, exploitation and abuse, including sexual and
gender-based violence. We should do our utmost to
prevent this group from suffering further, as they are
already disproportionately affected by violent conflict,
and should ensure that humanitarian assistance and
all services are available and accessible to those with
specific needs.

Getting back to a broader context, I want to
underline that we continue to be very concerned about
ongoing impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. I want to make it clear that there can
be no peace without justice. Any military operations
should be fully in line with international humanitarian
and human rights law in order to ensure that the
thousands of civilians Who are trapped in the middle of
the fighting are not harmed. The protection of civilians
is not a choice but a legal obligation for all parties to
the conflict. Those who do not comply should be held
accountable. In that context, I want to underline the
significance of the agreement between Russia and
Turkey on the Idlib de-escalation zone as a crucial
move in averting a humanitarian catastrophe. All
parties to the conflict should ensure that the agreement
is fully implemented.

We welcome the arrival in Rukban of a second
convoy at the beginning of February, for which I
want to thank all the actors involved, especially the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
which in eight days of operations managed to deliver
humanitarian assistance to 40,000 people in Rukban,
providing them with life-saving support. Nonetheless,
it is only a temporary measure, sufficient for about a
month. We desperately need a long-term, safe, voluntary
and dignified solution for thousands of people, many of
whom have been in the Rukban area for more than two
years now. We are encouraged by the positive steps that
the Syrian authorities have taken recently and expect
them to authorize another convoy.

The European Union is holding a third Brussels
Conference for Syria from 12 to 14 March, in a
demonstration of the international community's
deep concern about the situation in Syria and its

unwavering commitment to supporting the millions
of people affected by the conflict. The international
community has contributed on an unprecedented scale
to alleviating the immense humanitarian and resilience
needs in Syria and across the region, and to supporting
a peaceful solution to the conflict. I trust that this year
we will once again be able to prove our solidarity with
all those in need.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that there
can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A
political agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique' (S/2012/522, annex)
remains the only pathway to peace.

