Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting us to participate
in this debate. My delegation would like to express
its congratulations to the Mission of the United
Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the Council
for this month. In the same breath, we would like to
congratulate the previous presidency of the Council,
held by the delegation of Rwanda. We appreciate your
prioritizing this matter, Mr. President, and scheduling
this debate. We are particularly pleased that you, Sir,
personally came to preside over the debate.

We would like to pay tribute to Mrs. Mary
Robinson, the outgoing Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, for her hard work and political commitment
to the resolution of the challenges facing the Great
Lakes region. A lot of work has been done and a lot of
ground covered in the past 18 months during her tenure
in this role. We would also like to welcome the recent
appointment of Ambassador Said Djinnit as the new
Special Representative, and we look forward to working
with him. We also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Martin Kobler for his
comprehensive briefing and appreciate the work that
he continues to do. We take note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/450) in that regard. We also
want to thank the Minister of Defence of Angola for his
briefing in his capacity as Chair of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR).
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) is one ofthe oldest and the largest United
Nations peacekeeping missions in the world and on our
continent, Africa. We are pleased with the progress that
has been made in the past decade and in the past few
years. The security situation in the region and in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains fragile, but there is no doubt that significant
progress has been made. The recent strengthening
of MONUSCO and its mandate by the Council has
contributed a great deal to the progress that has been
made. In that regard, South Africa would like to express
its appreciation to the Security Council for its continued
cooperation with and support for regional efforts and
initiatives aimed at the resolution of the challenges in
the region and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

South Africa attaches great importance to peace
and security on the continent in general and in the Great
Lakes region in particular. It is for that reason that we
continue to be committed to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region. We are of the firm view
that its successful implementation will go a long way
towards comprehensively addressing the challenges
facing the region and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

South Africa's position is informed by the
decisions that were taken at the recent ministerial
meeting of the ICGLR and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) on the political and
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the continued voluntary disarmament
and demobilization of the Forces Democratiques de
Liberation du Rwanda (FDLR). The ministerial meeting
was mandated by the ICGLR/SADC summit that took
place last year in Pretoria. We remain convinced of the
political correctness ofthe decisions that the ministerial
meeting took to the effect that the disarmament of the
F DLR should take place within the framework of six
months, beginning on 2 July, with a midterm review.
It is therefore the responsibility of all of us - the
stakeholders - to jointly and collectively define the
criteria and terms of the review that will be done in
three months.

South Africa appreciates the manner in which
the Security Council has so far cooperated with the
regional organizations in addressing the challenges in
the region and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Given the critical stage that we have entered in all our
efforts as part of the international community, it will
be critical that we continue to build and consolidate
this cooperation, which is based on mutual respect and
an appreciation of the divergent roles of the various
stakeholders. In that regard, we would like to emphasize
the significance of respecting the decisions that the two
regions - the ICGLR and SADC - have taken and
will continue to take. On our part, we will continue
to appreciate the broader role of the international
community, particularly the Security Council and
MONUSCO.

South Africa remains committed to efforts to bring
peace and stability to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We will continue to contribute
whatever resources at our disposal that are required for
that purpose, including our participation in MONUSCO
and its Force Intervention Brigade.

We would like to call on the international community
and the United Nations to continue to provide the
much-needed resources for the implementation of the
disarmament process.

In conclusion, South Africa remains committed
to finding a lasting and durable solution to all the
challenges facing the Great Lakes and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo within the context of regional
mechanisms. We are convinced that in the next few
months and years as we move forward, the people of the
Congo, who have suffered many years of instability and
insecurity, will appreciate the collective efforts of the
international community, the region and their national
leadership.

