Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the Legal Counsel, Mr. Hans Corell, for
his very clear account of the actions undertaken by the
United Nations to combat international terrorism.

The French delegation, like many that have
already spoken, would like first to reaffirm its absolute

S/PV.4242

 

and unconditional condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, regardless of the cause
invoked or the perpetrators. Terrorist acts always
contribute to unravelling the very fabric of society and
to jeopardizing the bases of democracy and human
rights.

To fight international terrorism we must equip
ourselves with instruments for effective cooperation,
while respecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and at the same time combat the political
and human tragedies that contribute to instability,
which in turn nourishes terrorist groups. In this regard,
the United Nations plays a critical role.

The French delegation would like in particular to
emphasize the importance of the work being carried
out in the General Assembly on measures to eliminate
international terrorism. We recall the importance of the
various sectoral conventions that have been drawn up
in this framework. The entry into force of all these
international instruments will be decisive for
international cooperation against terrorism. The French
delegation calls upon the States that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Convention on the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings, as well as the Convention on
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. The
latter Convention, the result of a draft introduced by
France, tackles the pivotal issue raised by the question
of financing for terrorist groups. It establishes effective
means, relying in particular on cooperation from
financial institutions. Moreover, we favour the rapid
conclusion of the draft convention on the suppression
of acts of nuclear terrorism, which would complement
the existing conventions in a useful manner.

The significant concrete results achieved within
the framework of the United Nations are linked to the
chosen approach, which gives pride of place to
pragmatism, the search for consensus and a sectoral
consideration of problems. We remain dedicated to that
approach. We think, however, that the elaboration of a
comprehensive convention on international
terrorism- as foreseen in General Assembly
resolution 54/110, which was based on a draft
introduced by India - is desirable. Such a convention,
which would not replace the existing sectoral
conventions, would make it possible to fill the
remaining gaps, while preserving the gains of these
conventions.

Beyond the drawing up of legal instruments,
international cooperation must be based on an intensive
exchange of information. For its part, France is
actively participating in the work of Europol, which
since 1 July 1999 has been charged with making use of
information collected in the fight against terrorism.
The French delegation also recalls that the European
Union has established in-depth cooperation with other
States in order to combat terrorism, in particular within
the framework of the Barcelona process, with the
coastal countries of the Mediterranean.

As regards the Terrorism Prevention Branch of
the Centre for International Crime Prevention, in
Vienna, we believe it would be useful to increase
information exchanges between it and United Nations
Member States. In this context, the French delegation
recalls that, to be effective, the fight against terrorism
must take into account the specific nature of terrorist
acts. In particular, there is a need to distinguish
between the fight against terrorism and the fight
against organized crime. If there are links between
these two phenomena, they must be addressed in
different ways.

The 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism, annexed to General Assembly
resolution 49/60, and more recently Security Council
resolution 1269 (1999) have reaffirmed that terrorist
acts could constitute a threat to international peace and
security. That threat justifies the Security Council
taking a position on the question of terrorism, as in the
cases referred to in the Legal Counsel's statement. In
so doing, the Council is not acting as a substitute for
the General Assembly, which maintains its role of
defining the principles guiding the fight against
terrorism. To the contrary, in its resolution 1269, the
Security Council has endorsed the principles so
forcefully put forward by the General Assembly in its
1994 Declaration.

