Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to first of all thank the Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Yokio Takasu,
for his briefing. I would also like to thank each of the
Vice-Chairs of the Commission for their commendable
leadership.

Likewise, we would like to recognize the work
done by Ms. Carolyn McAskie as Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacebuilding Support and we welcome
the appointment of Ms. Jane Holl Lute.

The activities undertaken by the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission during its second session
represent significant progress in the fulfilment of the
tasks entrusted to us by the Heads of State and
Government at the 2005 World Summit. The expansion
of the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission to
include four countries clearly highlights the credibility
that this body has gained in the international
community. This has been achieved by developing
flexible, coordinated, coherent and integrated
responses to the challenges of peacebuilding as shown
by the cases of Burundi, Sierra Leone and Guinea-
Bissau.

In the same way, this trust has been strengthened
thanks to the participation of civil society, the Bretton
Woods institutions, the European Community and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. This
participation has also had a positive impact on the
operational criteria for the work of the Commission.

Additionally, the field missions have shown the
commitment of the Commission to the countries on its
agendas and have also inspired greater coordination
with national political actors, partners and donors.
Notwithstanding this success, the Commission still
faces a number of challenges if it is to have a genuine
and sustainable impact in the field.
It is important that the Commission take into
account its capacities and the lessons learned, that it
furthermore define adequate criteria in order to ensure
that the countries on its agenda participate as actors in
the process. They should own the process and be able
to benefit as much as possible from the work of the
Commission.

This requires a communications and
dissemination strategy in order to make known what
the Commission does, as well as its achievements.
Likewise, the Commission should redefine its points of
focus and working methods by establishing, for each
case, specific indicators for the monitoring and follow-
up of the integrated strategies.

We should also increase the participation of the
private sector as well as that of regional and
subregional organizations.

Panama believes that sustainable peace depends
on the interactive triangular relationship between
security, development and human rights. In this
context, it is important to improve the overall planning
process of the Peacebuilding Support Office, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs, in order to better
define the missions that are authorized by the Security
Council.

For its part, the Council, together with the
Commission and the other organs and bodies of the
United Nations, should create mechanisms for
preventing duplication and which ensure that there is
complementarity of effort in the countries that are
being dealt with through its respective programmes.

The responsibility to ensure the success of the
Commission is above all, the duty of the Organization.
Our ongoing and firm commitment to ensure the
continuous success of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission should be aimed at improving the impact
of this Organization as a whole and, in a tangible way,
improve the lives of thousands of people who are
returning to their post-conflict communities.

