Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Terrorism remains a
major threat to international peace and security. The
latest outbreaks of terror in Baghdad, Karbala and the
Pakistani city of Quetta killed scores of innocent
people as tens of thousands of Shi'ite pilgrims from the
Muslim world gathered for Ashura, the holiest day in
the Shi'ite religious calendar. These and other terrorist
acts have reminded us once again that the problem of
terrorism requires sustained, long-term global action.
We therefore share the view expressed by many
delegations today that the Security Council, through its
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), should continue
to play a leading role in promoting cooperation in the
fight against this scourge.

The Council has created the necessary framework
for a global response to international terrorism, and it
has to be maintained and reinforced. We are pleased,
therefore, that the Committee has continued to work
actively to implement Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). We are grateful to Ambassador Arias and to the
team of experts of the Secretariat for their outstanding
work. The CTC has already done an enormous job.
Furthermore, as was mentioned earlier, it has evolved
to assume a more proactive role in the dialog with
Member States, in facilitating technical assistance to
Member States and in promoting closer cooperation
and coordination with international, regional and
subregional organizations.

We note with appreciation the efforts of the
Chairman of the Committee and its members to
elaborate practical measures to give the CTC proper
means to fulfil its tasks. We share the view that the
CTC's supporting staff of experts and secretariat
should be reorganized within the existing United
Nations structure in order to enhance the Council's
ability to monitor and encourage implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The establishment of the
Committee's Executive Directorate will, in our view,
facilitate the work of the Committee and increase its
expert potential in all relevant fields.

We think that technical assistance should be
facilitated for those countries that require it.
Furthermore, the Committee should extend the
technical assistance to cover various activities related
to counter-terrorism. In that regard, I would like to
refer specifically to the problem of the Chernobyl
exclusion zone in Ukraine. The zone, surrounding the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant - the site of the
world's largest nuclear catastrophe - comprises 76
abandoned settlements, including the towns of Prypyat
and Chernobyl, as well as 800 sites Where nuclear
waste and contaminated materials have been dumped.
There still exists a great risk of unauthorized
penetration into the zone and removal of the
contaminated substances, which, inter alia, could be
used by potential terrorists for their own purposes.

To secure the exclusion zone and to ensure that
such radioactive materials are kept out of reach of
unauthorized persons, the Government of Ukraine has
been working on numerous projects. In this regard, an
appropriate request was transmitted to the CTC for its
advice and support. We would be grateful if that
request were granted and are waiting for specific
proposals in that regard.

In addition, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the possibility of using the Chernobyl
exclusion zone and abandoned settlements within its
territory for working out practical measures on the
prevention of acts of nuclear terrorism, as well as for
the training of appropriate personnel. Ukraine is ready
to consider all proposals from interested parties.

Secondly, Ukraine, as a member of the regional
organization comprising Georgia, Ukraine, the
Republic of Uzbekistan, the Republic of Azerbaijan
and the Republic of Moldova (GUUAM), attaches great
importance to cooperation between the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome the CTC's endeavours to
facilitate the dialogue and the exchange of information
between such organizations. I refer here specifically to
the Committee's special meeting last March in New
York with representatives of regional organizations and
the follow-up meeting at the headquarters of the
Organization of American States, in which GUUAM
participated and played an active part. A regular
exchange of opinions and information between
representatives of regional bodies will definitely
benefit the global anti-terrorist struggle.

Thirdly, the issue of combating the legalization of
proceeds from crime, which constitutes one of the
major sources of terrorism financing, has become
especially vital. In this regard, the more stringent
requirements of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund represent a strong contribution to the
consolidation of global efforts to prevent and rebuff
that extremely dangerous phenomenon. We hope that
the cooperation of the Committee with those
institutions will be further facilitated.

Let me also reiterate that the Government of
Ukraine fully supports the international measures in
this sphere, demonstrating its openness and readiness
for cooperation. Last Friday, FATF announced at its
plenary meeting that, due to the efforts made by the
Government of Ukraine, it has removed my country
from its list of non-cooperative countries and
territories. Ukraine will continue to pay paramount
attention to the enhancement of its national system of
combating money-laundering and terrorism financing.

In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that the Council will take all appropriate measures
referred to in the report of the Committee's Chairman
for the benefit of our common cause.

