Ms. Millar (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity this debate provides to Member States to
present their views on this very important issue.

The Security Council pronounced itself on the
general problem of land-mines in a statement responding
to the supplement of February 1995 to the Secretary-
General's Agenda for Peace. In its statement the Council
supported efforts to curb the spread of anti-personnel
mines and to deal with land-mines already laid, and
expressly welcomed General Assembly resolutions on
both aspects of the problem.

The Council also reaffirmed its deep concern over
the tremendous humanitarian problem caused by the
presence of mines and other unexploded devices, and
emphasized the need for increased mine- clearance efforts
by the countries concerned and with the assistance of the
international community.

 

Australia takes a close interest in land-mine issues,
and we have worked closely with the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and non-
governmental organizations on demining and rehabilitation.
Our activities include mine clearance, training and mine-
awareness programmes, assistance to mine victims and the
provision of prosthetics. An integral element of these
programmes is the transfer of knowledge and capacity to
local people so they are able to minimize the risk to
civilians, especially children.

Our assistance to these programs increased from $1.8
million in the financial year 1993-1994 to nearly $5.8
million in 1995-1996. Much of this contribution has been
directed towards Cambodia, as the most mine-affected
country in our region. But we have also assisted
substantially the programmes coordinated by the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) in other badly
mine-affected countries: Mozambique, Angola and
Afghanistan.
Not to neglect a problem which is equally serious
from a humanitarian point of view, we are contributing
$700,000 over three years to the United Nations trust fund
for clearance of unexploded ordnance in Laos, a long-
standing cause of great suffering and an obstacle to
development in that country.

In view of the dimensions of the land-mine problem,
we welcome the ideas being put forward in this discussion
today on the subject of mine clearance and United Nations
peace-keeping.

At this stage, our own thinking on this subject is of a
general nature. But it is clear that peace-keeping mission
planning should include consideration of the need for mine-
clearance activities. Planners need to address the question
of whether mine clearance is operationally necessary to
carry out the mandated functions of the mission, including
the protection of peace-keeping forces and ensuring
freedom of movement. It may be that there is a need for
greater specificity regarding mine clearance in peace-
keeping mandates. We wish to reflect on the views of other
Member States on that question.

Experience suggests that a truly comprehensive
political settlement should address in detail the elements of
peace-building, of which demining is an essential part.

It follows that the Council should take the opportunity,
in resolutions or statements related to a peace-keeping
operation, to explicitly address the subject of humanitarian
mine clearance. But whether it is to be regarded as an
aspect of peace-keeping is a matter that needs further
consideration, including in the light of financial
implications.

At present, our judgement is that the Department of
Peace-Keeping Operations and Department of
Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) are coordinating well in
their respective involvement in mine clearance, both at
Headquarters and on the ground, but we note some
Member States are of the view that there is a need for
greater clarity of their roles.

As a general proposition, the transition from a
peace-keeping mine-clearance programme to a
humanitarian programme needs to be carefully managed
and well coordinated, including in consultation with
non-United Nations actors.

As Member States are aware, demining strictly for
immediate peace-keeping needs can in many respects be
of a different nature from long-term humanitarian mine
clearance. For affected people on the ground, the
emphasis on demining to provide a safe working
environment for peace-keepers can be seen as a failure by
the United Nations to address urgent humanitarian
problems. Accordingly, it is Australia's view that
humanitarian demining programmes, including the
creation of indigenous demining capability, should be run
concurrently with demining for peace-keeping.

The Council therefore needs to coordinate its efforts
with other organs of the United Nations so that DHA can
begin concurrent planning for humanitarian demining.

Financing for humanitarian purposes is obtained
largely through voluntary trust funds. Inevitably, the
shortage of such funds during the early phases of a
mission works to prevent the concurrent operation of
peace-keeping mine clearance and humanitarian mine
clearance.

Adequate financing for humanitarian mine clearance
is a concern of all United Nations Members. One thing
the United Nations could do, through the Economic and
Social Council and the Fifth Committee, is develop a
position on the long-term budgetary situation of the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs. For example, could
more of its core activities, including those related to
mine-clearance programmes, be funded out of the regular
budget?

 

We believe it is false economy to invest our efforts
in mine clearance in the absence of a clear international
commitment to prevention. Australia is concerned that the
international community has still not developed a serious
humanitarian approach in international negotiations on this
subject to date.

In its recent resolution extending the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), the Council, addressing its message both to the
Government of Angola and to UNITA, stressed the need for
destruction of land-mines as part of a continued
commitment to peace. The United Nations should continue
to give attention to the disarmament aspect of the land-
mines problem in general.

On 15 April this year, Australia announced its support
for a global ban on the use, transfer, production and
stockpiling of anti-personnel mines, and the suspension of
the operational use of anti-personnel mines by the
Australian Defence Force. We will determinedly pursue the
objective of a global anti-personnel land-mine ban in a
number of forums: in the General Assembly, in the
Disarmament Commission, in the Conference on
Disarmament and at future meetings of the parties to the
inhumane-weapons Convention. We are looking forward to
a meeting of pro-ban States to be hosted by Canada in
October, which is expected to identify strategies for
achieving such a ban.

