Mr. Rahmtalla (Sudan): I should like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your
outstanding presidency of the Council during this
month. I clearly recall your outstanding chairmanship
of the Preparatory Committee for the World Summit
for Children. I should also like to thank your
predecessor, the representative of France, for his
distinguished performance as President last month, and
the French delegation for their work during the French
presidency.

Sudan attaches particular interest to the question
under consideration today in the Council. We have
participated in all the public meetings held by the
Council on the question of children in armed conflict
and all other questions dealing with the subject.

Before getting to the heart of the matter, I would
like to extend my thanks and appreciation to Mr. Olara
Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, for his
tireless and ongoing efforts to raise global public
awareness regarding this issue, which threatens
generations to come. In the same context, we pay
tribute to the work of the Secretary-General and thank
him for his report submitted to the Council and to the
General Assembly on children and armed conflict.

We believe that this meeting will be followed by
other meetings in the General Assembly and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations to consider
the report and its recommendations, so that all States
Members of the United Nations will be able to take a
stand on this highly important issue, which we believe
is of interest to all Member States without exception.
Sudan was among the first States to sign the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Because of the
interest we attach to children, we have recently
established a superior council on children that falls
directly under the presidency of the Republic. We have
also created a commission to put an end to the
phenomenon of child kidnappings. That commission
was established with the participation and support of
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the
European Union, as well as of a number of States and
national and international non-governmental
organizations.

The authorities in my country are currently giving
serious consideration to signing the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Sudan's
signing of the Ottawa Convention on anti-personnel
landmines reaffirms its commitment to enable all
civilians, and children in particular, to free themselves
of those dangerous weapons.

The Government of Sudan has also cooperated
with Mr. Otunnu, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
during the course of his visits to Sudan by reaffirming
its commitment not to enlist children under the age of
18 into the military or to expose their lives to danger.
The Government of Sudan reaffirmed its support for
the efforts made with regard to local and traditional
norms and values. Those efforts will help to promote
the rights of the child. My Government has also
assured Mr. Otunnu of its full cooperation, a fact that
Mr. Otunnu has lauded in his reports following his
visits to Sudan.

My delegation would like to make a few
preliminary comments on the report of the Secretary-
General, which includes a number of
recommendations. As we have said, those
recommendations require close study by the Council
and the General Assembly.

First, we welcome the recommendation that the
Council work to prompt armed groups to respect
standards on the protection of children, in accordance
with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol, and to respect international
humanitarian law concerning the situation of children
in regions of armed conflict. My country believes that
armed rebel groups in Africa are directly responsible
for violations of children's rights in areas of conflict.
We believe the time has come to condemn such armed
groups, to call things by their true names and make
distinctions between the responsibilities of States, on
the one hand, and those of armed groups, on the other.
It is also time to put an end to violations by those
groups of international and humanitarian laws.

Secondly, recommendation 53, which calls on the
Council to work systematically to obtain information
from non-governmental organizations regarding respect
by parties to a conflict of their obligations and
commitments regarding the protection of children, also
says that the Council should take that information into
consideration. This recommendation will take time.
With all due appreciation of the important role assumed
by non-governmental organizations in mobilizing the
international community about situations in which
children face dangers and other humanitarian problems,
we also want to emphasize clearly and categorically
that there have been violations of national laws by a
number of non-governmental organizations working to
provide humanitarian assistance. There have also been
flagrant violations of principles of international and
humanitarian law, as well as of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter.

It has been definitively proved that a great
number of non-governmental organizations have
participated in actions that exacerbate violence and
conflict in Africa. We would like to recall what was
pointed out concerning the involvement of certain non-
governmental organizations in the transfer of munitions
and personnel to the rebel movement in southern
Sudan. That involvement incited the rebel movement to
violate the humanitarian ceasefire in the Bahr El-
Ghazal region and to place the lives of civilians in
danger, especially those of women and children.

The Council is therefore urged, first of all, to
cooperate with States and Governments in gathering
information regarding respect by States of their
commitments in protecting children. The Council is
also asked to deal with credible and serious
organizations, to consecrate the principle of
transparency in its dealing with organizations, to render
its opinions clearly, and to verify the truth of these
violations to relevant States.

In conclusion, as we have already emphasized,
the comments we have made here are only preliminary
observations on the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General. We hope that report will receive all
the interest it merits from all Member States when it is
debated in the General Assembly. The Council needs to
take into consideration the opinions of all States before
taking any decision on the report. We hope that in the
very near future we will once again be able to discuss
the report in a detailed manner.

However, it is extremely important that the
international community demonstrate real interest in
finding fundamental solutions to the underlying causes
of armed conflict, namely, poverty and
underdevelopment. It should also seek to put an end to
the suffering of children who are victims of those
conflicts. People must make all efforts for sustainable
development.

Finally, at this late hour, I would like to say to the
representative of Uganda that what he said in his
accusatory statement is unfounded. The problem in
Uganda has to do with a conflict between the tribes of
Uganda. President Museveni visited the country's
northern region three months ago and said clearly that
Sudan was not involved with Uganda's problems and
that those problems stemmed from conflict and dissent
within Uganda. President Museveni is therefore
perfectly well aware that Sudan did not interfere in the
situation in northern Uganda. As I have already said,
this is a question of conflict among tribes regarding
minority rule. It is an internal problem for the people of
Uganda.

I would like to close by stressing that dialogue
and contact between Uganda and Sudan continue to
seek to remedy all the problems between the two
countries. Sudan will continue to make every attempt
to ensure the success of its efforts because we wish to
have good-neighbourly relations with Uganda, as we
have with all other neighbouring countries. We affirm
here that we want to implement all African and
international initiatives. I believe the representative of
Uganda mentioned the Zambian and Iranian initiatives.
We note that an initiative has also been launched by the
Carter Centre. Very important meetings were held over
a week ago at the ministerial level between Sudan and
Uganda, within the framework of a dialogue for the
application of the agreements we concluded. Those
meetings were held in Atlanta.

Finally, we reaffirm that differences between
peoples must be settled in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, through constructive dialogue
and with the necessary credibility in order to apply all
these agreements.

