Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I take this opportunity
to share with you some personal observations
concerning the two Sanctions Committees that I have
had the honour to chair for the past two years, namely,
the C6te d'Ivoire Sanctions Committee and the Sudan
Sanctions Committee. As Chair of the Informal
Working Group on General Issues of Sanctions during
the past year, I would also like to brief the Council on

the work of that Working Group during that period, in
which it accomplished the successful fulfilment of its
current mandate.

Let me begin with the Sanctions Committee on
Cote d'Ivoire established pursuant to paragraph 14 of
resolution 1572 (2004). The ongoing conflict in Cote
d'Ivoire has been at the heart of the Council's attention
for the past two years. The Council has adopted a
series of resolutions regarding the conflict, and has
used sanctions as a tool in support of the peace process
as well as of the important regional initiatives,
particularly those of the African Union, which aim at
bringing peace and national reconciliation to the
country.

The targeted measures imposed through the
relevant Security Council resolutions consist of an
arms embargo, travel restrictions and an assets freeze
on designated individuals and entities whose actions
seriously jeopardize the peace process or violate
human rights or incite hatred through the media. Those
measures were subsequently reinforced by new
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
1643 (2005), which, inter alia, imposed an embargo on
the import of all rough diamonds from Cote d'Ivoire.

That resolution also stated that any obstacle to the
freedom of movement of the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the French forces, as
well as any attack against UNOCI, the French forces,
the High Representative for the elections or the
International Working Group, constituted a threat to the
peace and national reconciliation process. A Group of
experts was also set up to monitor the implementation
of those targeted measures.

As I stated earlier, the major concern of the
Council in relation to targeted sanctions in Cote
d'Ivoire has been their impact on the peace process.
Although the measures were imposed by resolution
1572 (2004), the Committee did not designate any
individuals subject to the measures until February
2006, following the request of the African Union and
the mediator to withhold any action that would have a
negative effect on the peace process.

However, on 7 February 2006 the Committee
designated, on the basis of consensus, three individuals
on its list of targeted sanctions, following the outbreak
of violence against United Nations personnel in
September 2005. The aim of such action was to help
restore peace and stability in the country, which had

been seriously jeopardized by the above events, and to
avert similar disturbing events in the future.

It should be stressed that this decision came only
after the Council had issued several warnings to all the
parties to the conflict that it would not tolerate acts
which put the peace process at risk; there was also a
shift in the aforementioned position of the African
Union concerning the need for and timing of the
imposition of sanctions.

In addition, I myself, in October 2005, made a visit to
C6te d'Ivoire, previously endorsed by the Security Council,
with the aim of putting pressure on the Ivorian parties to
implement their obligations under the relevant peace
agreements and Security Council resolutions. I met with all
of the signatories to the agreements as well as with State
officials, representatives of State organizations and
non-governmental organizations. During those meetings, I
explained the real purpose of targeted sanctions and the
concern of the Council about the political developments
concerning the holding of elections. I made it clear that the
Committee was ready to apply such measures, without
further delay and in a non-discriminatory manner, against
all those who did not implement the agreements and who
incited hatred or violence and committed human rights
violations and abuses.

However, despite the calming effect that the
targeting of the aforementioned individuals had on the
situation on the ground for a short period of time,
violence resumed in the country, and the political
situation, in spite of the many efforts by the African
Union, has reached a new stalemate. That is also
confirmed by various reports on Cote d'Ivoire, such as
the reports of the Secretary-General, as well as the
monthly reports of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire on the monitoring of the arms embargo
and the monitoring of public incitement of hatred and
violence through the media; these have identified
individuals responsible for the situation who could be
subject to targeted measures.

The Sanctions Committee members, however, did
not demonstrate the unity of purpose and political will
necessary to take a decision and designate new
individuals on its list.

With respect to the arms and diamond embargoes,
the reports issued by the Group of Experts established
by resolution 1643 (2005), are well drafted and
substantiated, and I commend the Group of Experts for
its professional approach to its work. The final report

of the Group (S/2006/735) found no evidence of gross
violations of arms embargoes, but listed a number of
problems that it believed could be used to violate the
sanctions.

It is important to note also that the Group
investigated the importation of small arms and
ammunition into cote d'Ivoire by a criminal network
using international courier firms. It also found
continued evidence of diamond production in Cote
d'Ivoire and illicit export, especially to Ghana and
Mali. As regards the three Ivorian individuals
designated for targeted sanctions in February 2006, the
Group found that neighbouring States had not
disseminated information about the targeted Ivorians to
their local authorities at border posts at the time of the
Group's inspection.

Finally, the Group recommended that the UNOCI
arms embargo inspection process should be reviewed
and improvements should be made to its methodology.
UNOCI has confirmed that it has taken steps towards
improving its inspection processes. In that respect I
wish to state that the members of the Sanctions
Committee - whom I thank wholeheartedly for their
work, cooperation and support - were, on the whole,
united in agreeing on the group's recommendations.
The Committee has decided to follow up on the actions
it agreed to take with regard to the Group's
observations and recommendations.

The conflict in C6te d'Ivoire has now entered a
new and more critical phase. In this final, transitional
period it is important that all the parties demonstrate
the necessary political will to implement the road map
and lead the country to fair elections by October 2007.
That is the only way to guarantee durable peace and
stability. Ivoirian parties must refrain from all actions
that jeopardize the road to peace and stability, reject
violence and intimidation and concentrate on taking
concrete steps to implement the road map without
further delay. Sanctions, if properly used and backed
by all the States of the region, would be a useful tool
and could help Cote d'Ivoire emerge from the current
cr1s1s.

In addition, the political will of the members of
the Security Council is indispensable in respect of the
implementation of the Council's own resolutions. That
has to do both with their determination to support the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
credibility of the Security Council itself.

I shall now turn to the Sanctions Committee on

Sudan, established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),

which imposed targeted sanctions against those who

violate the arms embargo, impede the peace process,

violate international humanitarian law or are
responsible for offensive military overflights.

In my View, the question of implementation of
resolution 1591 (2005) cannot be seen in isolation from
the overall problem of Darfur and the complexity of
that crisis. The Sanctions Committee has thoroughly
discussed the three reports of its panel of experts
regarding the situation in Darfur and has adopted only
a few of its recommendations.

The Committee has been actively engaged in an
interactive discussion during informal consultations
with its panel of experts concerning their reports to the
Security Council. The latest report contained
information about the deteriorating humanitarian crisis
and the continuing attacks against civilians and
humanitarian personnel. The report also provided
information about gross violation of the arms embargo
by all the parties to the conflict.

Weapons and military supplies are transferred to
Darfur without the formal approval of the Sanctions
Committee as called for in the resolution. In addition,
weapons are delivered from neighbouring Chad into
North and West Darfur, given the inadequate border-
control situation in Sudan, posing a significant threat to
peace and security in Darfur and the region. The Darfur
Peace Agreement (DPA) is not being implemented, as
not all of the rebel groups have signed it, and the
Janjaweed and other rebel groups and militias have not
been disarmed, in flagrant violation of the Agreement.
There is also expressed fear that the signatories of the
DPA will attempt to implement the Agreement through
force, with severe consequences on the lives of
innocent civilians.

Based on its own information and on information
provided by the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS), the United Nations Mission in Sudan and
non-governmental organizations, the panel has, as in
the past, provided the Sanctions Committee with
findings concerning specific individuals whom the
Committee may wish to consider for designation for
targeted sanctions. According to the panel, those
individuals have allegedly violated arms embargoes,
impeded the peace process, violated international
humanitarian law and committed offensive military

overflights. Their names have been included in a
confidential annex to the panel' s third report. This has
raised the concern of some members of the Committee,
who emphasized that the panel should take political
sensitivities into account and be more attuned to the
ongoing diplomatic initiatives to address the situation
in Darfur. However, other members considered that the
panel has produced a high-quality report despite the
volatile environment in which it has conducted its
work.

At the same time Security Council resolution
1713 (2006) extended the mandate of the panel by one
year and requested that a fifth expert be appointed. The
divergence of views among Committee members
concerning the recommendations of the panel of
experts also exists with regard to the question of the
identification of individuals to be designated for
targeted sanctions. So far the members of the Sanctions
Committee have not been able to designate any
individual on its lists, due to lack of the unity of
purpose and political will necessary to take a decision
and to designate individuals on its lists.

The four individuals that have been designated
for targeted sanctions - travel ban and assets
freeze- have been identified not by the Sanctions
Committee but by the Security Council through
resolution 1672 (2006), adopted on 25 April 2006.
However, this resolution did not include sufficient
identifying elements on the designated persons, despite
the relevant provisions of its guidelines. There are
expressed fears that this might create problems of
implementation of the targeted measures by Member
States. In an effort to address these concerns, the
Committee subsequently posted the customary
sanctions list on its website, which included the
additional relevant information on the four individuals
that the Committee had in its possession.

I would also like to underline the importance of
continued cooperation of the Committee and its panel
with the African Union (AU) and AMIS. In this
respect, I recall that there have been written and face-
to-face exchanges between the Chairman of the
Committee, the panel and the AU.

The situation for thousands of refugees and
displaced persons in Darfur has considerably
deteriorated. The DPA and other ceasefire agreements
continue to be violated. The humanitarian crisis can be
resolved only through a series of robust measures,

some of which, such as the reinforcement of AMIS,
have already started to be implemented.

Sanctions must be one part of an overall solution.
They can be effective only if they have the full
political support of the members of the Security
Council. The Council should be in a position to
implement its own decisions and should try to avert a
more serious humanitarian crisis with spill-over effects
in the region. Sanctions can be a powerful weapon in
this respect, but only as a result of consensus among
the members of the Council.

In my view, the Committee Chairmen should visit
the countries involved more frequently. They will
surely have more influence by the mere fact of their
presence. Sitting in New York and making decisions is
one way of acting, but is, in my view, less effective.

I shall now brief the Council on the work of the
Informal Working Group on the General Issues of
Sanctions. I assumed the chairmanship of that Working
Group for the year 2006. After a year of hard work on
the part of its members, pursuant to its mandate to
develop general recommendations on how to improve
the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions
(S/2000/319), the Working Group fulfilled its current
mandate and approved some extremely important best
practices with respect to all aspects of sanctions.

These results are reflected in the report of the
Working Group that has become a document of the
Council. It sets out the best practices adopted by the
Informal Working Group with respect to sanctions
design, implementation, evaluation and follow-up,
Committee working methods, monitoring and
enforcement, and methodological standards and
reporting formats for expert groups. I am pleased to
note that this report will also be endorsed by the
Council when it adopts the draft resolution that has
been tabled this morning. I consider these
developments to be of major importance, as they
demonstrate the determination and the will of the
Council to improve its sanctions regimes and maximize
their effectiveness.

Lately the Council has very frequently used the
instrument of sanctions in carrying out its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Targeted sanctions are a
non-military means that the Council uses today to
address situations that threaten international peace and
security, such as terrorism, or to support the

implementation of peace agreements. They are directed
against political leaders and other non-State actors
whose actions constitute a threat to international peace
and security to apply pressure and change behaviour in
general. Such measures, if applied effectively, are
preferable to the general economic or trade sanctions
that the Council has imposed in the past, as they
directly affect decision-makers and have minimal
humanitarian impact. They can also deter the
continuation of such threats to peace and security.

For that reason, it is important that targeted
sanctions comply with certain principles and criteria
that should be implemented by the Security Council
when deciding to impose sanctions, by its Sanctions
Committees and by the panels of experts that assist the
latter in monitoring the implementation of targeted
measures. These include, for example, accuracy in
identifying information concerning individuals and
entities to be targeted, fair and clear procedures
concerning their listing and delisting, the use of the
highest evidentiary standards to substantiate findings
by the panels of experts when drafting their reports,
et cetera.

In addition, it is important for the Council to
ascertain, before imposing sanctions, whether or not
that instrument is the appropriate one to be applied in
view of the specific circumstances at hand. The
possible humanitarian consequences of the targeted
sanctions should also be evaluated.

The implementation of targeted sanctions is also
an important factor for the effectiveness of these
measures. The more implementable the sanctions, the
more impact they will have on the target. At the same
time it is important that Member States, which have
that primary responsibility to implement sanctions,
particularly neighbouring States, take the appropriate
measures for such implementation.

Finally, I believe that the greater the international
and regional consensus regarding the targeted
sanctions, the more likely it is that such measures will
be complied with by the target. We have seen lately
that targeted measures that are not supported by
Security Council members have not been implemented
by the State or non-State targeted actors.

The best practices adopted by the Informal
Working Group, which will be endorsed by the
Council, constitute an important step forward towards
more transparent, fair and effective implementation of
the sanctions regimes. The adoption of these best
practices by the Council and their consistent and
uniform implementation by the Sanctions Committees
and the panels of experts will improve the
effectiveness of sanctions and will enhance the
legitimacy of the Security Council and its subsidiary
bodies.

I would like to mention one of the points agreed
upon by the Working Group: the need to ensure that, as
the Council increasingly imposes sanctions regimes
and establishes committees and expert groups, the
Secretariat has the necessary resources to do its work
effectively.

Finally, I would like to thank all the members of
the Working Group and of my own team for their
commitment, dedication and collaboration in bringing
this important work to fruition. We would like also to
thank the members of the Secretariat for their support
and advice during our tenure, in particular Ms. Loraine
Rickard-Martin, Mr. James Sutterlin, Ms. Tatiana
Cosio and all the other colleagues who work with
them.

