Mr. Cotan (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for convening
this thematic debate. Let me assure you of our utmost
support for your stewardship in ensuring a productive
outcome to this debate. I should also like to extend to
you the personal greetings of Foreign Minister Hassan
Wirajuda. I very much enjoyed your conversation with
him on Myanmar a few days ago.

As did the Minster of Defence of South Africa,
my delegation would also like to associate itself with
the statement to be made later by the representative of
Jamaica, who will speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Since its introduction, in 1992, the concept of
post-conflict peacebuilding has evolved and entered
into the mainstream of various peace initiatives. It is
now an integral part of the efforts by the international
community to bring durable peace to countries
emerging from conflict. In a world where wars, famine
and destruction are acutely prevalent, post-conflict
peacebuilding is a commendable effort that deserves
our utmost support. Many countries that are on the
agenda of the Security Council have benefited from
such efforts. Post-conflict peacebuilding has been
instrumental in ensuring that peace becomes
sustainable in those countries.

Moreover, with the increasing significance of
post-conflict peacebuilding efforts, there are currently
high expectations to facilitate the expeditious
graduation of current United Nations peacekeeping
operations towards the post-conflict peacebuilding
phase. That is an important phase not only for the
country concerned but also for the Council, so that it
can focus its work on more pressing issues, such as
solving conflict and building peace in the Middle East,
where violence long ago became a daily occurrence. It
is indeed a tragedy that indiscriminate killings continue
unabated in that part of the world.

While we underline the importance of post-
conflict peacebuilding, we are nevertheless of the view
that such an effort cannot be perpetual. It must have its
exit and it must eventually strengthen the independence
and self-reliance of countries where post-conflict
peacebuilding missions are deployed. With regard to
the role of countries that are recipients of post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts, my delegation attaches primary
importance to national leadership and ownership of
endeavours. They must actively be involved in every
step of the post-conflict peacebuilding process. Since
post-conflict peacebuilding is a multifaceted process,
we believe that it needs to be guided by a hierarchy of
priorities established in response to the specific needs
and political dynamics in the given recipient countries.
Post-conflict peacebuilding plays a critical role in
guiding countries in the fragile post-conflict phase out
of an environment of conflict and into a more stable
state. While its significance cannot be questioned,
much remains to be done in order to improve its
effectiveness. Rapid deployment is as important with
regard to post-conflict peacebuilding as it is in
peacekeeping operations.

The United Nations has deployed various
peacekeeping operations with large numbers of troops
in different countries with some degree of success. As
indicated by the Secretary-General in his remarks, that
has to be supported by civilian experts, including
development specialists, judges, administrators and
other relevant professionals. As the United Nations is
currently over-stretched in terms of personnel available
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions,
enhancing and broadening the scope of international
cooperation becomes critical. However, the challenge
to international collaboration is how to provide a
sizeable, swift and coordinated response to the
demands of post-conflict peacebuilding.

That brings me to the issue of funding, which is
another critical element for successful post-conflict
peacebuilding. All funding avenues must be explored
and utilized. As helpful as they are, multi-donor trust
funds cannot be the foundation for normal socio-
economic activity, which requires self-sustaining
avenues. The trap of debt and overly tight fiscal
policies imposed by international institutions should
also be avoided. Therefore, more efforts can and
should be made to engage non-governmental resources
and the private sector to fill the gaps.

We would like to underscore the central role of
the Peacebuilding Commission with regard to post-
conflict peacebuilding within the United Nations
system. Now in its third year, the Peacebuilding
Commission is beginning to find its niche and
demonstrate its added value. It has been able to create
linkages between political/security and financial/
development actors and has maintained medium-term
political attention on countries emerging from conflict.

Again, as has been eloquently explained by
previous speakers, given the existence of so many
competing institutions and resources, coordination is a
major issue to be dealt with. We recognize the role that
the Security Council can play in enhancing adequate
coordination and division of labour at the level of
United Nations organs. In our View, the Council can
ensure the operational relevance of the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which remains essential
for countries on the agenda of both bodies and for
resolving the security-related aspects of peacebuilding.

Equally essential is the synergy between the
Peacebuilding Commission, the General Assembly -
including the Fifth Committee and the Special

Committee on Peacekeeping Operations - and the
Economic and Social Council. It is particularly
important to bridge the issues of peacebuilding,
political stability, socio-economic recovery and
humanitarian concerns, which could lay the
foundations for longer-term development activities.

As stated by the Secretary-General in his remarks
today, his Special Representatives play important roles
in peace processes. They can play a coordinating role
working with all relevant players in the overall efforts
of the United Nations in a given country. They can also
become focal points, both from a negotiation and
mediation standpoint as well as from the
administrative, financial and logistical ones.

Finally, my delegation would like to reaffirm our
support for international efforts at post-conflict
peacebuilding. We also reiterate our emphasis on the
central role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
providing the United Nations with policy guidance and
strategies in its post-conflict peacebuilding activities.

