Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): First ofall, I would
like to thank the Russian presidency for convening this
open debate on the theme "United Nations peacekeeping
operations: new trends".

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing and the Secretariat,
under his leadership, in particular the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, for their important support for United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Allow me at the outset to pay tribute to the more
than 118,000 men and women from 120 member
States who are currently serving in 16 United Nations
peacekeeping operations around the world. I have the
honour to inform the Council and the United Nations
membership that, starting from the end of this month,
officers from the People's Army of Viet Nam will stand
together with the men and women of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. That is further testimony of
Viet Nam's support for and commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, its unwavering
willingness to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security, and its continued
engagement and cooperation with the United Nations
and the international community. My country has also
established the Viet Nam Peacekeeping Centre as a hub
for training our future peacekeepers to ensure their
professionalism, dynamism and high standards.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have
indeed made significant contributions to reducing the
threat of renewed conflicts and facilitating progress
towards durable peace and sustainable development.
In the face of the evolving nature of conflicts, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have constantly
expanded in size, mandates and complexity. Their
multidimensional mandates today extend far beyond
the traditional keeping of peace after conflict to cover
the protection of civilians and the establishment of the
necessary foundations for successful peacebuilding.

As we have learned from past experience, the
success of United Nations peacekeeping operations
requires strict adherence to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and universally
recognized guidelines, namely, the consent of the
parties, the non-use of force except in self-defence,
total impartiality, respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, and non-interference in
their internal affairs. At the same time, recent attacks
targeting United Nations peacekeepers, which Viet
Nam strongly condemns, compel us to ensure the
highest possible standards of security and safety for
peacekeepers. It is vital that peacekeeping missions
be provided with sufficient resources to protect their
peacekeepers in any situation.

As part of a comprehensive approach to conflicts,
we believe that it is crucial to address the root causes of
conflicts by engaging all parties involved on the basis
of dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes;
by finding long-term, comprehensive solutions to
the political, security, economic and humanitarian
dimensions of conflicts; and by strengthening efforts
in preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means, in accordance
with international law.

As a troop-contributing country, Viet Nam remains
committed to working with other troop-contributing
countries, the United Nations and other partners in
the joint endeavour to ensure strong, effective United
Nations peacekeeping operations that can maintain
their contribution to durable peace around the world.
