Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting to consider the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I should also like to thank
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch for his detailed and
enlightening briefing on the development of situation
in that country.

The report before us today shows that there has
been slow progress, requiring sustained action on the
part of the international community as a whole. We
believe that the recent developments in the region are
conducive to creating a new, positive momentum which
could accelerate the implementation of the peace
agreements. They offer real hope for regional
stabilization.

Clearly, the task is complex and there is a long
way to go before a final and lasting peace can be
achieved. It will be necessary to overcome what is
considered to be localized resistance and intransigence
that is not characteristic of a situation that, on the
whole, is favourable.

In order for peace to be built on a solid
foundation, it must be based on moral values of
tolerance and respect for diversity. We continue to
believe that the establishment of a multi-ethnic society
in Bosnia and Herzegovina should allow for the
expression of specific identities on the part of the three
communities. In this context, it is important to place
special emphasis on education which enables young
people to learn to live together, coexisting with their
differences.

We are gratified that concrete measures have been
adopted to consolidate unity in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular through the establishment of
a single national passport and the drafting of laws
relating to identity cards and other national documents.

The consolidation of institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a strategic goal, endorsed by the
Brussels meeting ofthe Peace Implementation Council.
We support that goal and believe that strengthening
political institutions is essential for the establishment
of State authority. Furthermore, we await with interest
the forthcoming general elections planned for
November, and we hope that the trend initiated during
the April municipal elections will be reinforced and
that the multi-ethnic and moderate parties will continue
to make progress.

We encourage the Presidency to persevere in the
application of the New York agreements, and we
appeal to the parties to overcome their differences and
to adopt electoral laws as soon as possible in order to
contribute to the promotion of democracy.

The return of refugees and displaced persons is a
major concern for my delegation and an essential
condition for the implementation of the Peace Accords
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome the return of
refugees, particularly persons belonging to minorities,
in satisfactory conditions, and we appreciate efforts to
guarantee security and to procure the means of survival
for this vulnerable category of people.

Despite encouraging economic progress, the
situation remains fragile. The country continues to
depend heavily on foreign aid, with all the risks that
this could entail if the level of this aid drops. That is
why we think that economic reform needs to go deeper
and to create conditions conducive to the autonomous
development of the country, based on the domestic
capacity-building of the country and the promotion of
private investment. We are convinced that political
stability, restored security and the success of economic
reforms are all factors that could attract investors to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly since the country
must develop in a European context. The Stability Pact
offers many possibilities that should be explored.

An independent, effective and impartial judiciary
is the best defence against impunity and can promote
conciliation among the Bosnian communities. We
salute efforts made in this realm, particularly the
initiative to establish an independent judicial
commission that will seek to reform the judicial
system, coordinate international aid and design specific
programmes.

