Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): As we were
yesterday, the Senegalese delegation is pleased to see
you presiding over today's debate on security challenges
in the Mediterranean, Mr. President.

For a change, I will begin by reading out a press
statement issued today by the Government of Senegal.

"The Government of the Republic of Senegal
expresses its profound indignation upon learning
of the sale on Libyan territory of migrants from
sub-Saharan Africa. The Government of the
Republic of Senegal vigorously denounces and
condemns in the strongest terms such human
trafficking, which is a serious outrage to the
conscience of humankind. Senegal urges the
competent Libyan authorities, as well as the African
Union and the United Nations, to launch a prompt
investigation into this practice of a different era in
order to do everything possible to put an end to it."

As a natural link between Africa, Europe and Asia,
theMediterraneanbasinhas overtheyearsbecomeaplace
where complex internal and external factors - human,
cultural, socioeconomic and recently, owing to climate
change, environmental - are intertwined. The
Mediterranean is also a hotbed of passions and tensions
that have shaped diverse itineraries and trajectories and
directions for coastal countries and peoples.

The threats to the stability of the Mediterranean
region are therefore numerous and, to varying degrees,
present in all its countries, with roots that extend as far
as the Sahel-Saharan belt. In particular, North Africa is
directly affected, especially since the upheavals in the
Arab world that have destabilized Libya, among other
countries. The consequences of the disruption of Libya
are being felt today throughout the Sahel and well
beyond, including, of course, the Mediterranean region,
thanks to the double effect of the spillover of weapons
to the Sahel, which is pushing migrants towards Europe.

The Sahel region, which is feeling the full impact
of the consequences of the situation in Libya, is
now plagued by insecurity, trafficking of all kinds,
terrorism and violent extremism, whose consequences
include attacks, kidnappings and summary executions
of unprecedented violence, perpetrated by armed
groups - mainly criminal, but also terrorist - that
continue to spread terror within communities. We
know that these groups take advantage of loopholes
in international legal systems and flaws in national
and international financial systems to raise funds,
including through the illicit sale of oil, kidnappings for
ransoms, human and arms trafficking, looting, the sale
of cultural property and even of protected animal and
plant species. For now, violent extremism seems to be
taking permanent root in the Sahel and throughout the
Mediterranean region.

If we are to take up the challenge of insecurity in the
Sahel and the Mediterranean, we believe we must take
a holistic approach that will bring together the security,
humanitarian, development and environmental aspects,
since it is clear that only a comprehensive response and
united efforts will enable us to overcome the various
threats that continue to undermine the security and
stability of the Mediterranean and the Sahel. In that
connection, the United Nations must continue to play
its central role in supporting ongoing regional efforts
in both regions.

With regard to Libya, the delegation of Senegal
would like to insist, as it did at yesterday's briefing in
this Chamber (see S/PV.8104), on the importance of
addressing the issue within the overall framework of
the search for a political solution to the Libyan crisis
through inclusive dialogue, as part of a Libyan-led
process, through the good offices of the United Nations,
particularly Mr. Salame'. We firmly believe that the
restoration of peace and stability in Libya is essential
to all neighbouring countries and regions, including in
the Mediterranean region.

In general, the solutions to the challenges facing
most of the States of the Mediterranean could be
summarized as follows. We must prioritize political
approaches in the search for solutions to crises;
encourage and promote better subregional and cross-
regional cooperation and integration; fight together
against terrorist movements, organized transnational
criminal networks and violent extremism; and reduce
the fragility of States and their economies by mitigating
the effects of climate change.

Syria, a country in the Mediterranean basin that
is enduring a deep political crisis, is undoubtedly an
amalgam of these various challenges, with the presence
of terrorist groups such as the Islamic State, foreign
terrorist fighters, mass movements ofdisplaced persons
and refugees not only to neighbouring countries but
also to Europe, as well as the looting and trafficking of
cultural property. With the decline of the Islamic State,
now on the defensive in Syria and in Iraq thanks to the
efforts ofvarious stakeholders, my delegation reaffirms
its beliefin the urgent need for a political solution to the
Syrian dispute on the basis of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), with
a view to addressing the humanitarian challenges and
ensuring accountability for the multiple alleged crimes,
including the use of weapons of mass destruction, such
as chemical weapons.

My delegation has not forgotten the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which is as old as the Organization
itself, and calls on the international community, in
particular the Security Council, to redouble its efforts
so that, like the Israelis, who enjoy a democratic
and prosperous State, the Palestinians can fulfil
their legitimate aspirations to obtaining a sovereign
and viable State within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

Equally concerning is the situation in Lebanon,
where the resignation of the Prime Minister is
generating institutional instability.

We must also acknowledge that the lack of
cooperation and shared vision among the various
regions affected by the global security situation in
the Mediterranean basin complicates the search for
solutions. With regard to the Mediterranean and as
way forward, the Senegalese delegation proposes
reflecting on the outcome document (General Assembly resolution 71/312), entitled "Our ocean, our future: call
for action", which, last July, authorized the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14.

