Mr. Fernandez De Soto Valderrama (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you, Madam
President, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs for
having convened this open debate, which is of great
importance for the Organization in the process of
endeavouring to extricate children from situations
of conflict. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and the
Executive Director ofUNICEF for their briefings today
and for all the work that they have been doing in the
context of this important task. We also wish to convey
our gratitude to the other briefers for their reports.

As stated in the concept note convening this debate
(S/2019/605, annex), it is vital that we understand
that protecting and caring for children affected by
armed conflict is key to achieving sustainable peace.
Successful reintegration is critical to any peace process,
especially when it comes to the reintegration of boys
and girls who, from a very tender age, have known
nothing other than the tragic effects of violence.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
refers to the situation in Colombia, highlighting the
various serious violations of the rights of children
perpetrated by illegal armed groups. The main outcome
presented in the report makes it clear that the Colombian
State has striven to fully guarantee the human rights of
children, boys and girls alike. Those efforts include the
issuance of decree 1434 of 2018, which substantively
strengthened public-policy guidelines for preventing
the recruitment, use, sexual exploitation of and sexual
violence against boys, girls and adolescents. The
adoption of that decree represents the conclusion of
more than 10 years of work to fight, in a coordinated
manner, the recruitment of and other serious violations
against children perpetrated by illegal armed groups.

In 2007, we also established an intersectoral
commission for the prevention of the recruitment of
children and other grave violations of the rights of the
child, which will continue to serve as the main body
tasked with devising strategies aimed at eradicating
the problem.

Unfortunately, despite the tremendous efforts and
strong commitment of the Colombian State to eradicate
this painful situation, that example has not been
replicated by all the organized armed groups, which
continue to recruit and to use boys and girls in violation
of the international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.

In particular, the self-styled National Liberation
Army, which is still included on the list of parties
committing grave violations of the rights of children,
has continued to recruit and use children as part of
its illegal activities against the State. For instance, on
4 July that illegal armed group showed on social media
a series of videos showing boys, girls and adolescents
engaging in propaganda activities for the group, in
clear contravention of the provisions of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

By the same token, the use of anti-personnel mines
by that group not only affects children's right to life
and to personal integrity, but also, in areas where the
National Liberation Army has a presence, prevents
children from realizing their right to education and
health care without putting their lives in danger. The
National Liberation Army has systematically refused
to take measures aimed at enhancing the protection of
children; instead, the group has sought to ratchet up the
intensity of the hostilities against Colombian society,
including terrorist attacks such as the one perpetrated
against the General Santander Police Academy, which
took the lives of 22 young Colombians and which was
condemned in the strongest terms by the Security
Council on 18 January.

The Government of President Duque has placed
special emphasis on the importance of the transition
to civilian life for the hundreds of children who
had been recruited by the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo.
We are aware that despite the strenuous efforts of the
Colombian State, challenges remain in relation to this
issue, which is why our institutions will continue to
work to strengthen prevention strategies, in line with
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention ofthe Recruitment and Use ofChild Soldiers.

Finally, Colombia takes good note of the various
concerns and challenges that persist in the country in
this respect. We are committed to preventing boys and
girls from being used to wage war and will continue to
work and to do ever more to comprehensively address
the issue of their integration and education.

