At the outset, my country would like to thank the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, President of the Security Council this month, for holding this constructive dialogue. We are confident in his wisdom and able leadership. We also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, Henrietta Fore, for their tireless efforts in assisting and supporting children all over the world. Iraq, like many countries around the world, has been affected by the coronavirus disease pandemic and has made it clear to the Office of the Special Representative, during the preparation of this report (S/2020/525), that it was not able to clarify any alleged information mentioned in the draft version of the report, since Baghdad was under curfew and remains under partial curfew now. However, we call upon the Office not to further burden Iraq at a time when - not to mention the impact of the global pandemic - we continue to witness recurring terrorist attacks that claim the lives of innocent Iraqi citizens, including children. Iraq would like to thank Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter for calling upon the countries concerned to facilitate the repatriation of foreign children to their countries of origin, in line with the principles of international law and with respect for the best interests of the child. With reference to paragraph 77 of the report, Iraq would like to remind the Office of the Special Representative of its note verbal of 12 March 2020 (CMT 3/2/102), which clearly states that the authority concerned is working on a draft bill on the rights of the child that includes articles providing for the criminalization of the recruitment and use of children. The Iraqi Government works closely with the international organizations providing humanitarian assistance to Iraqis in camps for internally displaced persons. However, as with any other sovereign country, it has security measures that need to be respected. There are no so-called bureaucratic impediments, only security measures that guarantee the safety and security of our people, as well as humanitarian personnel. While we commend the commitment of the United Nations to assisting Iraq in reintegrating affected children, Iraq wishes to highlight the elements of rehabilitation and reintegration, which it considers to be complementary and must be brought together when dealing with children who were exposed to severe terrorist propaganda and a long brainwashing process by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Iraq does not consider innocent children as criminals, on the contrary. Iraqi laws on juveniles are in line with relevant international standards, bearing in mind that there are children who were associated with ISIL and were, as we mentioned, brainwashed, some of whom have committed crimes and are dangerous to themselves and to all Iraqis. Those children are being dealt with by the competent Iraqi authorities in a way that ensures the public's safety as well as theirs. There are steps and measures in place to rehabilitate them so that one day they may be ready to rejoin society as normal, productive and responsible individuals. However, it would be a threat to public safety if they were set free prior to rehabilitation. Despite our repeated calls on the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, inaccurate and incomplete alleged information is still being incorporated into the reports. In this year's report again, only the number of violations were included, with neither date nor place, which makes them impossible to verify and complicates the situation from our side in terms of addressing any alleged violations. Therefore, we call on the Office of the Special Representative to be reasonable in its approach while pursuing the best interests of children. Last but not least, Iraq works closely with the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) as part of the efforts to clear the land previously occupied by ISIL. The quantity of landmines and explosive remnants of war is unprecedented. Iraq, with the cooperation of UNMAS, is raising awareness and educating the people living in those areas about the threats posed by mines. We call upon United Nations agencies and offices working in Iraq to better coordinate among themselves, while avoiding overlap or duplication of their functions. Iraq reiterates its statement issued on 8 January 2020 in response to the third report on children and armed conflict in Iraq (S/2019/984).
