Mr. Akahori (Japan): I thank the Committee
Chair, Ambassador Llorenty Soliz of Bolivia, for his
briefing on the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which covers an
area of priority for Japan.

Japan once again welcomes the completion of
the comprehensive review process and the adoption
of resolution 2325 (2016). Japan commends Spain's
leadership in this regard. We look forward to working
with the new Committee Chair, Ambassador Llorenty
Soliz, and will promote further implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) as the new Working Group I
coordinator for monitoring and national implementation.
I am also pleased to announce that Japan will make a
contribution of approximately $1 million to the Trust
Fund to support the work of the 1540 Committee.

We must recognize that the danger of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
has not subsided despite the many efforts of the
international committee. Nuclear and ballistic-missile
development by North Korea is the most striking
example. This is a blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions and represents a clear challenge
to the global non-proliferation regime. It is simply not
acceptable. Japan strongly urges North Korea to refrain
from further provocations and violations and to comply
fully and faithfully with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2321 (2016) and 2270
(2016), as well as its other commitments.

The use of chemical weapons in Syria also
demonstrates the dangers of the proliferation of WMD.
This is not a hypothetical threat. Malicious actors are
benefiting from rapid advances in science, technology
and international commerce for proliferation purposes.
Moreover, individuals and entities can unwittingly
become complicit in proliferation activities. Therefore,
every effort needs to be made to prevent proliferation
activities whenever and wherever they are undertaken.

For this reason, Japan strongly believes that
enhancing the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is imperative, especially the implementation
of obligations related to domestic and export control.
Let me reiterate that resolution 2325 (2016) calls upon
those States that have not done so to start developing
effective national controls.

For further implementation, capacity-building
for all States is key. Proliferation can occur at the
weakest link. The 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts can help States wishing to strengthen their
domestic non-proliferation systems by, for example,
sharing expertise to formulate national implementation
action plans and clarifying actual assistance needs.
Facilitating direct interactions between Member States
and the Committee will without a doubt bolster the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). A significant
part of Japan's contribution will be used to finance
these direct interactions between Member States and
the Committee. Japan encourages interested States to
contact the Committee. As the Coordinator of Working
Group I, my delegation would be happy to relay any
message to the Committee.

In conclusion, given today's security environment,
it is an ongoing and urgent task for all ofus to strengthen
the non-proliferation regime at the global, regional and
national levels. Japan will continue to actively support
that endeavour.

