Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Why have we not been able to collectively ensure a
future of peace for Africa? Well, the truth is that there
is no simple reply. That is why I am particularly grateful
to the Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
having organized this debate. I also thank our invitees
for their briefings, which have given us a clearer picture
of the reality.

A decade after the United Nations and the African
Union developed instruments for peacebuilding, such
as the Peacebuilding Commission, we still have not
broken the Vicious circle of conflict. The situations
in Burundi and in South Sudan are sad examples of
that fact. We have not been able to help the people of
Burundi to build lasting, sustainable peace; nor have
we managed to unify ourselves in the Security Council
so as to convey to its Government the need to define
a solution to the crisis. The horrors of the 1990s come
to mind.

South Sudan is another case where the inability
of the country's leaders is largely to blame for the
situation. I recall that just a few years ago at the United
Nations we celebrated with joy the independence of
South Sudan. Today we are looking at a very different
South Sudan.

Fortunately, there are more positive examples
than negative examples - Burkina Faso, where the
instruments of the rule of law have triumphed, and
Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, where the crisis caused
by Ebola was overcome, or even Somalia, which was
a perfect example of a failed State and today sees
light at the end of the tunnel. I shall therefore focus
on the positive examples in order to try to draw three
clear and enlightening lessons from the situation and
strengthen our efforts to achieve sustainable peace in
the African continent.

First, if we take a comprehensive approach, we
can see that peacebuilding is a cycle. It is not just
one event. It is a cycle, a process that begins with one
fundamental word, "prevention". I will give an example:
Guinea-Bissau, where the preventive efforts of the
United Nations, including those of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council, the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union, might already be bearing fruit. Or consider
Somalia, as I mentioned earlier, where the excellent
cooperation among the various institutions is making it
possible for us to be truly optimistic.

The second lesson has to do with flexibility. I
think that it has become stereotypical, a platitude,
to say, as we often do, that there is no single recipe
for the mandates of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. However, one interesting
possibility that I might suggest to the Security
Council is that we consider establishing an automatic
transition mechanism that would make it possible to
take advantage of the potential of the Peacebuilding
Commission in order to fill, on an immediate basis,
the vacuum left by the withdrawal of a peacekeeping
mission. That would help in situations such as that in
the Central African Republic, which is beginning to
transition from the urgent situation of peacekeeping to
the sustained efforts necessary for peacebuilding. It is
essential to avoid situations in which countries that are
no longer on the agenda of the Security Council find
themselves left alone to face their problems.

The third major lesson is the ability to establish
priorities. Who should establish priorities? Obviously,
first and foremost, the national authorities, but the
national authorities also have a duty to protect their own
citizens. It is the African leaders who will shoulder that
difficult task. We in the international community must
support them in strengthening their own institutions.
Experience has shown us that the most successful
examples of post-conflict reconstruction are those
where it has been possible to sequence institutional
reform in an intelligent way, starting with security
reforms and moving on to justice-sector reforms and
then to reconciliation mechanisms. Experience also
tells us that the cycle of conflict can be overcome only
if- and I think that this is the most important thing I am
going to say - we manage to involve the participation
of the entire population of a country. What does the
participation of the entire population mean? It is simply
to give an active and prominent role to women.

