Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (Spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): I am honoured
on this occasion to address the Security Council,
convened to consider the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/579) on the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
from 16 April to 15 July 2015. I take this opportunity
to thank the members of the Security Council for
the attention they continue to accord the question of
Kosovo and Metohija, which is of priority importance
to the Republic of Serbia.
Through its proactive engagement and
compromise-seeking approach, the Republic of
Serbia has made every effort to contribute to the
lasting peace, stability and prosperity of the Western
Balkans. It is evident that substantive progress has
been made in the region in the fields of peacebuilding
and democratization. Exceptional results have been
achieved in strengthening regional cooperation and
in the process of European integration, to which the
Republic of Serbia has made an important contribution.
Yet, it is necessary for all countries of the region, as
well as relevant international actors, to invest additional
efforts in maintaining and promoting stability, all the
more as it remains brittle and in view of the challenges
that we continue to face.

An exceptionally important role in this context is
played by the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and
Metohija, and I shall repeat also on this occasion that
a status-neutral and undiminished presence of UNMIK
is of paramount importance to stability and the creation
of conditions leading to a lasting and sustainable
solution for the question of Kosovo and Metohija on
the basis of resolution 1244 (1999). I therefore reiterate
our strong opposition to any downsizing of the Mission
and reduction of its activities. Serbia highly appreciates
UNMIK's engagement towards creating the basic
preconditions for the peaceful coexistence of the ethnic
communities in the province, security and respect for
the basic human and civil rights of all its inhabitants.
Accordingly, we expect UNMIK to continue to
implement its mandate under resolution 1244 (1999),
particularly in the areas that are important to the
survival and normal and dignified life of the Serbs and
other non-Albanian communities.

We appreciate the contribution of other international
organizations Whose missions, carried out under the
auspices of the United Nations, are constituent parts of
international civil and military presences in the Serbian
southern province, including as the Kosovo Force,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Mission in Kosovo. Bearing in mind that this
is his last participation in a meeting of the Security
Council on the work of UNMIK in his capacity of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNMIK, I express my special gratitude to
Mr. Farid Zarif for his efforts to implement the UNMIK
mandate and to coordinate the international presences,
notwithstanding the persistent challenges. I take this
opportunity to wish him, on behalf of the Government
of the Republic of Serbia and in my own name, much
success in his new mission.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia has
confirmed in practical terms its full commitment
to the dialogue conducted with the facilitation of
the European Union. We expect its continuation to
solidify the basis for the implementation of agreements
already achieved. Serbia consistently meets all its
obligations under the agreements reached thus far in
the framework of the First Agreement on Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, initialled
in Brussels in April 2013. I am pleased to note that
the formation of the association/community of Serb
majority municipalities has been singled out among the
key issues in the context of the implementation of the
Brussels Agreement and that, equally historic, the visit
of Serbian Prime Minister Aleksander Vucie to Albania
has been recognized as another clear indication of our
commitment to and active engagement in the promotion
of the stability and European integration of the region
as a whole.

The continuation of the dialogue at a high political
level provides the necessary political momentum to the
quest for mutually acceptable responses to issues that
burden the life of the people of the province and prevent
the exercise of their basic rights. Serbia has approached
the dialogue with Pristina with a genuine desire to
find solutions that will allow all the inhabitants of the
province to normalize their lives within the broader
process ofthe integration ofthe region into the European
Union. It is in this context that the participation of
the Serbs in the political life of Kosovo and Metohija
is also being evolved. Going forward, in addition
to the aforementioned formation of the association/
community of Serb majority municipalities, the key
issues for Serbia in the dialogue with Pristina remain
those of internally displaced persons and the position
of the Serbian Orthodox Church, as well as property
issues.

As I point out regularly at Security Council
meetings on the work of UNMIK, the Republic of Serbia
comports itself with full respect and appreciation for
resolution 1244 (1999). I have repeatedly stressed the
constructiveness of the Government of the Republic
of Serbia vis-a-vis the participation of the Provisional
Institutions of Self- Government in Kosovo and Metohij a
in the work of regional forums without prejudging their
status. Yet, we continue to be met with Pristina's efforts
and requests to be included in the work of international
organizations outside the context of the agreement on
regional representation and cooperation, which are
unacceptable to the Republic of Serbia. The latest such
examples are Kosovo's attempts to become a member of
UNESCO and INTERPOL.

As a territory administered by the United Nations
under the valid and mandatory resolution 1244 (1999),
Kosovo is not and cannot be considered a State
subject to international law and cannot, ipso facto,
qualify for admission to organizations such as those
to which I have referred. In that sense, each and every
different attitude to the consideration of the question
of Kosovo's membership in these organizations would
be tantamount to ignoring - that is, violating - the
legal rules created under the auspices of the United
Nations for the purpose of maintaining international
peace and security. When and if such a time comes,
these questions should become the subjects of dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia attaches
special importance to the quest for a solution to the
problem of internally displaced persons from Kosovo
and Metohija. Creating conditions for their sustainable
return is one of the key elements of the process of
reconciliation. It is with regret that I have also to note
on this occasion that, even 16 years after the end of the
conflict and notwithstanding the years-long presence
of the international community, no conditions exist in
Kosovo and Metohija for the unhindered and sustainable
return of internally displaced persons, as is also noted
in regular reports of the Secretary-General on the work
of UNMIK and in reports of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

To correctly illustrate my contention and to help
explain the magnitude of the obstacles that still hinder
the return of displaced persons to Kosovo and Metohija,
let me remind the Council ofthe data according to which
an average of 25 per cent of refugees and displaced
persons in the world return home upon the end of
conflicts. According to the statistics, the minimum is
12 per cent, while the maximum can amount even to
more than 50 per cent. Out of the more than 220,000
persons who left Kosovo and Metohija since 1999, only
1.9 per cent achieved sustainable return in the past
16 years, while about 204,000 persons continue to be
displaced in Serbia. Accordingly, the percentage of
sustainable returns in this concrete case is below all
world standards and averages. The most recent report
on UNMIK bears out the continuity of the descending
trend of returns, while Serbia continues to top the list
of European countries by the number of internally
displaced in protracted displacement. I simply wanted
to familiarize the Security Council with that data, as
the Council has jurisdiction over such issues. How can
it be acceptable for any country that 1.9 per cent of
displaced persons have been able to return? The Council
meets daily to discuss various regions. It cannot remain
silent in the face of the fact that only 1.9 per cent of
the displaced have returned to Kosovo over the past
16 years. Perhaps it is the case that, when it comes to
Serbia and Serbs, everything is accepted and allowed.

The necessary conditions for return include
appropriate security guarantees as well such conditions
as the freedom of movement, an effective mechanism
for the restitution of property and other appurtenant
rights, protection against discrimination, guaranteed
access to institutions of the system, documents and
justice and support to returnees to regain economic
independence. What is also necessary is to prevent the
obstruction of returns, along with full respect for the
principle of the responsibility of international and local
actors engaged in the process.

I therefore call on the United Nations and other
representatives of the international Administration in
Kosovo to help overcome problems that make the return
of internally displaced persons even more difficult and
aggravate their already distressing situation, which
is replete with constant security incidents, including
personal attacks and attacks on property. The situation
is further exacerbated by the climate of impunity for
crimes committed against Serbs - a reflection of
the fact that no legally valid sentence has yet been
pronounced against a single perpetrator of any of the
more than 1,000 killings of Serbs committed since
1999.

The majority of attacks in the reporting period
were aimed at the property of returnees and at
returnees themselves in the localities of Klina, Pee
and Gorazdevac, as well as at religious sites. Also,
an explosive device was discovered in the vicinity
of the Holy Trinity Monastery at Musutiste, in the
municipality of Suva Reka. The incident occurred
immediately before a visit of about 100 internally
displaced Serbs who intended to mark a religious feast
on the ruins of the Monastery.

Proper records on ethnically motivated incidents
are still non-existent, just as is proper intervention by
the competent authorities of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government. That is yet another indication of
how much effort and will still need to be invested in
beginning serious and genuine work on reconciliation
and in ensuring a proper approach to the problem. In that
regard, promises do not suffice; what is needed instead
are concrete results so that a clear message is sent to
those who obstruct the survival and return of Serbs to
Kosovo and Metohija that such activities, harmful to
the process of reconciliation, will not be tolerated, and
to Serbs and other non-Albanians that they may return
and exercise their human rights and freedoms freely
and without apprehension. If that is not possible, then
the Security Council should send a message to all the
Serbs expelled from Kosovo that it has not been able
to ensure their safe return. I think that is only fair and
just to the Serbian people, given that many countries
represented in the Security Council have demonstrated
their willingness to participate in the reconciliation
process in the region. Perhaps by such an example the
Council could show whether or not it has the will to
guarantee and safeguard Serb returns. Again, I would
reiterate that 200,000 Serbs were expelled and nothing
has been done. I believe Serbs deserve a response, even
if it is negative.

As I did in my last statement to this body (see S/PV.7448), it is with concern that I again warn that
the desecration of Serbian monasteries is continuing.
That is a way of intimidating the remaining Orthodox
population in the province. The latest example was the
attack on the Orthodox Church of Saint Petka in the
returnee village of Drsnik.

One of the characteristics of the Serbian heritage
in Kosovo and Metohija is its connection to living
history. Its existence testifies to the ages-long presence
of the Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija. On
this occasion, I would also like to point to the drastic
discrepancy between the verbal pronouncements and
real attitude of Pristina to the question of the protection
of Serbian cultural heritage. Practical examples are
the best proof of this. Since June 1999, 236 churches,
monasteries and other sites owned by the Serbian
Orthodox Church, as well as cultural-historical
monuments, have been targets of attacks. As many
as 61 of them have the status of cultural monuments,
while 18 are of exceptional importance for Serbia. And
four of them have World Heritage Site status and are
under the protection of UNESCO. Let me mention just
a few: the Church of the Virgin Hodegetria, from 1315;
the Church of Saint Nicholas, from 1331; the Church
of Saint Saviour, from 1348; and the Monastery and
Hermitage of Saint Peter Koriski, from the beginning
of the thirteenth century. One hundred and seventy-four
religious sites and 33 cultural-historical monuments
have been pillaged or destroyed in Kosovo and Metohija,
while more than 10,000 icons and other ecclesiastical
artistic and liturgical items have been stolen. Five
thousand two hundred and sixty-one tombstones on
256 Serbian Orthodox graveyards have been destroyed
or damaged, and not a single intact tombstone stands
on more than 50 of the graveyards. Therefore, it is not
only live Serbs who are the targets of attacks, but also
the dead.

That was testified to by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, who said in a statement at the scene of
one such attack that the deliberate targeting of religious
sites, such as churches, cemeteries and monasteries,
was shameful and inexcusable. The attacks on Serbian
heritage are in that sense tantamount to attacks on the
identity of the Serbs, and affect directly their feeling
of acceptance in local communities. As part and parcel
of attempts to alter historical facts, they are aimed at
marginalizing and eliminating the presence of Serbs
and Serbia in the history of Kosovo and Metohija.

That is evinced also by the draft law on cultural
heritage that is in the process of being adopted in
the Kosovo Parliament and that denies the private
ownership of churches and monasteries to the Serbian
Orthodox Church and provides that they, as well as all
other heritage in the territory of Kosovo and Metohija,
are the cultural heritage owned by the "State of Kosovo".

Members will agree with me that those who aspire
to UNESCO membership should confirm, not only
in words, but also in deeds, the commitment to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Constitution
of UNESCO, the provisions of which are poles apart
from the deliberate, systematic vandalizing of cultural
and historic monuments of their fellow citizens aimed
at removing the traces of the ages-long existence of a
people in a territory, as well as the failure to punish
the perpetrators of these acts of vandalism unworthy of
the twenty-first century. Attached to my statement are
images of the destruction and a map of Serbian cultural
heritage and monuments in Kosovo. Unfortunately, the
majority of them have been devastated and destroyed.
The images show those monasteries and churches before
their demolition and the way they look today. There
are also television broadcasts and videos that show the
devastation of Serbian monasteries. The membership
of UNESCO cannot condemn the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) for ruining and demolishing
its cultural heritage while simultaneously rewarding
those who are doing the same thing elsewhere. There
is a monastery in Decani that is under the protection
of UNESCO. The pictures I have provided show what
has been written on the walls of that monastery, which
is also under the protection of international forces,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the International Security Force in
Kosovo (KFOR). Written in Arabic, under the name of
ISIL, it says that the caliphate is on its way.

We condemn each and every act of desecration
of the religious sites of any and all faiths. However,
while ISIL's desecration and destruction of the cultural
and religious heritage in the Middle East is met with
a worldwide outcry and condemned as terrorism, the
candidate for UNESCO membership who desecrates
and destroys Serbia's cultural heritage in Kosovo
and Metohija receives a pat on the shoulders as their
reward. That is absolutely unacceptable to the Republic
of Serbia. After all, resolution 1244 (1999) remains the
only valid legal framework regulating the question of
Kosovo and Metohija. If that were not the case, why
would we be convening today's meeting? If resolution
1244 (1999) is no longer valid, why are we meeting? If
displaced Serbs cannot freely and safely visit religious
sites and celebrate religious holidays in a dignified
manner, then the calls and encouragement of the
Kosovo institutions to displaced Serbs to return are
highly dubious, as is their ability to provide safety and
security to all in Kosovo, particularly at the local level.

I recall that we have been discussing those issues
in Brussels, but what kind of discussion is possible
when there is no mention of the fact that Kosovo is
seeking membership in UNESCO and INTERPOL?
The property of the Orthodox Serbian Church is on
the agenda in Brussels, but behind our backs they are
trying to bypass the Security Council and resolution
1244 (1999) and to request such membership. Those
who granted those sites World Heritage status are the
same countries represented here today that are also
members of UNESCO.

I believe that the creation of conditions for the
Serbian and other non-Albanian populations to enjoy
basic human rights without discrimination would
contribute to the improvement of the overall atmosphere
for the return of internally displaced persons.
Furthermore, we take this opportunity to express our
regret at the closure, without consultation with the
Republic of Serbia, of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Pristina,
which was headed by the representative of a friendly
country, Jordan. Taken allegedly for financial reasons,
that decision was far fromjustified by the human rights
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. How is it possible
to justify such a decision at a time when those tasked
with addressing human rights in Belgrade are being
offered extended resources while the same capacities in
Pristina are simultaneously downsized? I urge members
and Jordan to ask the High Commissioner for Human
Rights how that can be justified.

As a sponsor ofresolution 2178 (2014), the Republic
of Serbia has taken all possible measures to suppress
the financing and organizing of terrorism and the
ever more widespread phenomenon of recruitment of
foreign fighters who join armed terrorist organizations
in the Middle East, such as the Islamic State. We expect
the international missions in Kosovo and everyone else,
as well as the local Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government (PISG), to contribute, to the best of their
abilities, to that important global struggle.

In the context of the priority that the Government of
the Republic of Serbia attaches to the solution of property
issues in Kosovo and Metohija, I would like to draw
attention to the privatization processes being conducted
by the Privatization Agency of Kosovo. UNMIK also
determined that the process contravenes resolution
1244 (1999), since that Agency was not established
under the laws in force in Kosovo and Metohija under
the resolution. In that regard, it is evident that public
and socially owned companies are being privatized in
Serb-majority communities, leading us to conclude
that the basic motivation of such privatizations, whose
ethnic connotation is all too transparent, is precisely
the destruction of economic resources in Serbian
communities, which is incompatible with democratic
achievements and European standards.

We all are well aware of the importance of respect
for ownership rights, whether of private or public
property. The cancellation of the sale and the liquidation
of companies that are essential to the economic
development of Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija affect the
key criteria for creating the conditions for a sustainable
return. In that sense, it is necessary to ensure that
all activities related to privatization in Kosovo and
Metohija be restored to the valid legal frameworks.

We are deeply concerned that the draft law on the
Kosovo Property Comparison and Verification Agency
under consideration by the Parliament of Kosovo
directly contravenes the 2011 technical agreement
on cadastre records. The draft law would establish
conditions for the legalization of property unlawfully
expropriated from Serbs, which would do enormous
and irreparable damage to the Serbian community in
the province. With precisely that in mind, we have
requested that the procedure for the adoption of the
draft law be halted and that implementation begin on
the technical agreement on cadastre records, which
provides for the establishment of a body consisting of
representatives of Belgrade, Pristina and the European
Union that would conduct a comparison of cadastral
records.

The current situation in the province bears out
our assessment that conditions have not been met
for the transfer of competencies in the rule of law
sector to the provincial PISG. The fact that those
competencies have been entrusted to EULEX does not
diminish the authority and responsibility of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I expect
that, within its powers, EULEX will continue to fulfil
its executive competencies in the rule of law sector,
bearing in mind a realistic appraisal of the situation in
Kosovo in that area.

Serbia has stressed on a number of occasions the
need for continual monitoring and for ensuring objective
criteria for appraising the work of the provincial
institutions by the relevant missions deployed in
Kosovo and Metohija under the auspices of the United
Nations. In its Kosovo 2014 Progress Report, the
European Commission notes that much remains to be
done with regard to the functioning and accountability
of the judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija. Likewise,
strong concerns are also expressed in the European
Parliament's March 2015 resolution 2015/413 on the
European integration process of Kosovo with respect
to the independence, accountability, impartiality and
efficiency of judges and prosecutors and the overall
performance of the rule of law sector. The resolution
goes on to say that the implementation of legislation
on the protection of ethnic minorities and their cultural
rights remains a challenge in Kosovo and underscores
the ongoing need for serious efforts with regard to
adopting legislation in order to include provisions on
the right of ethnic minorities with a view to preventing
their direct and indirect discrimination.

I share the concern expressed in the report before
us about the capacity of the Kosovo judiciary to handle
socially sensitive issues. Highly illustrative in that
context is the case related to the ownership rights to
land within and outside the Visoki Decani monastery,
as mentioned in the report. At the same time, it provides
telling evidence of the attitude of the PlsG in Kosovo
towards the Serbian cultural and Christian heritage,
which on countless occasions has been the target of
orchestrated vandal attacks of destruction, pillage,
burning and desecration. None of the perpetrators
of those heinous acts, unbefitting the Europe of the
twenty-first century, has been properly tried in court.
What we are faced with now are somewhat different but
more perfidious methods. The goal, though, remains the
same: to erase the traces of the centuries-long existence
of the Serbs and Serbia in Kosovo and Metohija.

The new methodology is evidenced by the case
of the property of the Decani monastery, a jewel of
not only the Serbian but also the European and world
cultural heritage, which, alongside with Gracanica, the
Church of Our Lady of Ljevis and the Patriarchate of
Pee, has been included on the UNESCO List of World
Heritage in Danger.

The decision of the Appellate Panel of the
Special Chamber of the Kosovo Supreme Court
that - notwithstanding the dissent of two international
judges on the Panel - set aside the judgement rendered
in 2012 in favour of the Deeani monastery by a mixed
Trial Panel presided over by a EULEX judge, is an
attack on the Decani monastic fraternity, given that
agricultural land is of key importance to the monastery's
ability to be self-sustaining and that its security is at
stake.

Bearing all of this in mind, it was with concern that

we received information that EULEX was preparing to
transfer the cases and the accompanying documentation
processed by EULEX prosecutors and judges to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, that
is, the local judiciary. About 500 cases are involved,
about 300 of them related to war crimes, of which 270
have been taken over from UNMIK. The Government
of the Republic of Serbia expresses its concern at the
intention to transfer the cases related to war crimes in
the territory of Kosovo to the local judiciary, since all
of them fall under the exclusive competence of EULEX,
even after the amendment of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government regulations on the mandate of the
EU Mission relating to the rule of law in the province.

In fact, it is provided that EULEX prosecutors
should continue to process the cases in respect of
which they decided to launch an investigation prior
to 15 April 2014, as well as the cases allocated to
EULEX prosecutors before this date, which include
cases of war crimes that EULEX took over from the
UNMIK judiciary. If EULEX does proceed to transfer
the cases to the institutions in Pristina, in particular
the sensitive cases relating to the investigation of the
war crimes committed in the territory of Kosovo, the
consequences of the processing of the war crimes
committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
against Serbs, non-Albanians and Albanians, labelled
"Serbian collaborators" during the armed conflicts of
1998 and 1999, would be unforeseeable.

Let me point out that, since it is expected that a
specialist court will soon be established to adjudicate
the war crimes committed by the KLA in the territory
of Kosovo and Metohija, and since that court is
being established precisely because of the incapacity
of the local Kosovo judiciary to investigate and try
the perpetrators of war crimes from the ranks of the
KLA, the transfer of war crimes cases to the local
judiciary by EULEX runs counter to the activities of
the international community aimed at establishing the
specialist court.

There is reason to believe that, if said cases were
to be transferred to the local judiciary, much of the
material evidence would disappear and many witnesses
would be intimidated, which would make the work of
the future specialist court for war crimes much more
difficult.

Politically motivated arrests and lengthy trials,
as well as the different metrics of the local judiciary,
should not be disregarded either. One example I cited
at previous meetings of the Security Council is the case
of Oliver Ivanovie, the leader of the Citizens' Initiative
Serbia, Democracy, Justice, who was detained at the
end of January 2014 and remains in detention despite
the guarantees and the calls made by the Government
of Serbia that he be granted bail. In an effort to be
accorded this right, Oliver Ivanovie has been on a
hunger strike for days now.

Serbia is committed to the process ofreconciliation.
In that context, it is crucially important to ascertain the
fate of missing persons. To that end, Serbian experts
and expert teams are cooperating with UNMIK and
EULEX and with the competent agencies in Kosovo.

The process of mutual reconciliation cannot be
completed without trying in court the former members
of the KLA suspected of committing war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including the persecution
of Serbs, Roma and other non-Albanians, as well as
their political adversaries among Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians.

We attach special importance to trying the cases that
are based on the findings of the Special Investigative
Task Force of the European Union, set up to conduct an
investigation of the inhumane treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my conviction that
a lasting and sustainable solution to the question of
Kosovo and Metohija can be reached only through
dialogue, with full respect for the legitimate interests
of the entire population of Kosovo and Metohija, on the
basis of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), in the
context of which we are working with dedication and
commitment. In our efforts to achieve such a solution,
it is necessary to bring about mutual reconciliation.
This will certainly be helped by the adoption by our
region of European standards and values on its path
to the European Union. We expect the European
Union to continue to facilitate our dialogue with
Pristina. There is no doubt that the Government of the
Republic of Serbia will continue its active engagement
in the implementation of the Brussels agreements,
in the interest of peace, stability and the economic
development of the region.

I call on all actors to address this issue without
any double standards. We cannot expect Serbia, which
holds the chairmanship ofthe Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and is making every effort
in that respect, to guard the territorial integrity of
Ukraine but not to use the same zeal when protecting
the territorial integrity of its own country. I believe
that this world still functions on the basis of principles,
not according to who is closer or on better terms with
whom. I am for dialogue, but we are against unilateral
moves and actions. We have seen examples of this first-
hand, not in cases relating to Serbia but in others where
double standards have been applied.

As the Council is aware, I was born in Kosovo and
Metohija 49 years ago, in the city of Prizren, which in
the fourteenth century was the capital of Serbia proper.
Today only 22 Serbs live in Prizren. That is a historical
reality and fact. Today in Kosovo the majority of the
population - 60 per cent - is Albanian. Hashim Thaci,
in earlier statements before the Council, has said that
everyone supports this except for the Serbian Orthodox
population. This is the first step in admitting to ethnic
cleansing, because how can one say that with only 4 per
cent of the population of Kosovo being Serbs, there has
been no ethnic cleansing?

I would ask the members of the Security Council,
leading figures in the United Nations, not to apply any
double standards in the case of Serbia but to bring to
bear the same zeal and the same principles that they
have applied to other countries and peoples, and to take
into consideration the historical and cultural heritage of
the Serbs in this region. Serbs have extended the hand
of reconciliation, which remains outstretched. But we
did not raise both hands as a sign of surrender. We will
fight for our interests through political and diplomatic
means. What members see as being in the best interests
of their countries is what they should ask of Serbia;
we request that they please not ask us to apply double
standards. We will see what the result of the voting
in UNESCO is; we will probably see very different
attitudes and positions with regard to the admittance
of Kosovo to UNESCO. I think that we should stop
working under the table and be open. We should be very
frank as to whether resolution 1244 (1999) is still valid
or whether Pristina believes that UNMIK should leave
Kosovo.

If that is simply a waste of time, then we should
put an end to it. We cannot participate in such matters
if there are hidden attempts to find a back door for the
admittance of Kosovo to UNESCO and other United
Nations bodies and specialized agencies. That should
be a topic of frank and transparent talks. If the Council
determines that resolution 1244 (1999) is no longer in
effect, it should kindly clarify that intention.

