Mr. Lamani (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this official meeting to consider the prevailing situation
in Afghanistan in the light of the report prepared by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, which
was drafted following some positive developments in
the situation. However, that situation continues to be
somewhat tense, and a number of dangers remain. We
therefore need to continue our tireless efforts to ensure
the establishment of a State in Afghanistan and to
ensure peace and stability, in particular following the
successful meeting of the Emergency Loya Jirga, held
from 11 to 19 June, which elected a president,
approved infrastructures and established the
Transitional Authority.

The report of the Secretary-General refers to the
fact that, although the peace process has been slow
since the Bonn Conference, all the measures announced
in the Bonn Agreement have been implemented in the
time frames provided. That has been done despite
difficulties and numerous security, political,
humanitarian and constitutional obstacles, as well as
the ravages of civil war and the terrible chaos in
Afghanistan. In the light of the impact of this chaos on
peace and security in the region and throughout the
world, we feel that we must respond to three demands
on three fronts.

First, we need to strengthen security and stability
throughout the country, find rapid solutions to the
problem of refugees and facilitate their return.
Secondly, we have to reinforce this support by ensuring
a minimum of economic and social development,
which guarantees security and the return to normalcy in
Afghanistan. Thirdly, we have to strengthen popular
participation in the context of democratic
transformation in the Afghan society. We also have to
set up the constitutional institutions that will guarantee
the qualitative leap that will lead to the final exit from
the long dark tunnel that has been imposed on the
Afghan people.

In the last six months, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
taken a number of important measures to meet the
challenges. With regard to the primary challenge, the
International Security Assistance Force was created. It
has acted very effectively and efficiently in ushering in
positive results in Kabul, and these results must also
extend to the whole of Afghanistan. Furthermore, these
developments lead the international community, in
particular the Security Council, to reinforce, more than
at any previous time, these forces along with the role of
the United Nations. This should be done while
supporting the Afghan Government politically and
providing it with the financial and technical assistance
it needs in order to meet the desired objectives.

With regard to the second challenge, the
humanitarian situation, the Secretary-General's report
indicates that despite the progress achieved in planning
and executing the mission of UNAMA and in
encouraging the national Afghan potential, the
humanitarian crisis is still great. Furthermore, the
financing offered by the donor parties has been uneven.
Actually, the flow of resources, as reflected in the
report, has been reduced considerably since April. This
has led to deep complications in the implementation of
the programmes and has affected those which meet the
most urgent needs throughout the country.

These two operations are accompanied by
positive steps for guaranteeing the practice of
democracy, political reform and respect for human
rights. That is the third point I mentioned in my
statement. This programme must be serious and
legitimate to succeed. Furthermore, we should not
forget the difficult circumstances which the Afghan
people have had to face. Reinforcing institutions
necessarily requires ensuring security for this society
and putting an end to its suffering as a result of wars,
famine and poverty. We also have to realize a minimum
level of honourable living, of education and learning.

The question of Afghanistan and its developments
has been on the agenda of Islamic summits and
ministerial conferences. The most recent Islamic
ministerial conference, which was held in Khartoum
last month, adopted a decision that Afghanistan should
regain its empty seat in the Organization of Islamic
Conference (OIC) and emphasized the support for the
legitimate Government, under the presidency of
Mr. Hamid Karzai, the head of the Afghan State, in its
constructive efforts to reinforce peace and security
throughout the country, along with comprehensive and
lasting development.

I wish to say once more, in the name of the OIC,
that the OIC continues to praise the tireless, sincere,
outstanding and exceptional efforts carried out by
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as the head of UNAMA. These
efforts will help end the Afghan tragedy and will
enable the Afghans to play the positive and effective
role that they deserve in the international community.

