Mr. Molefe (South Africa): At the outset, allow me
to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Sudan. South Africa
continues to support the full implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation in
Darfur to the ICC Prosecutor to investigate war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

South Africa welcomes the report of the Prosecutor
and continues to call for the ICC to conduct effective
and fair prosecutions in accordance with its mandate. At
the same time, we continue to underscore the principle
of complementarity, which underpins the framework
of the Rome Statute, with States bearing the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute crimes.

South Africa welcomed the agreement signed
on 17 August between the Forces for Freedom and
Change and the Transitional Military Council in
the Sudan on the establishment of a new civilian-led
transitional Government and transitional institutions.
We furthermore welcome the inauguration of the Prime
Minister and the Sovereign Council on 21 August. We
underscore that those are important steps to deliver
peace and security for the people of the Sudan. South
Africa welcomes the vital mediation role undertaken by
the African Union and Ethiopia, as well as the support
extended by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the United Nations, the League of Arab
States and others in the international community.

We are deeply concerned about the continuing
violence and loss of life in Darfur, as indicated by
the Prosecutor in her report. South Africa deplores
the fact that violence has been directed at civilians in
particular. What is of particular concern is that women
and children remain the most vulnerable and affected
by sexual violence, which continues to be a weapon of
war in Darfur. South Africa calls on the military and
security forces to ensure the full protection of civilians
and respect for human rights and freedoms in Darfur.

We urge all stakeholders in the Sudan to engage
in constructive dialogue in order to restore peace and
stability in the country. In that regard, the support of
all stakeholders within the international community
remains vital, which is also vital for regional stability.

