Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of France,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month, which promises to be one of intensive
and successful work. I would like also to convey the
Pakistan delegation's high appreciation for the skilful
guidance of the Council by Ambassador Wang of China
last month. Ambassador Wang kept our business and
burdens light until the last day, when he called us for a
late Sunday meeting.

I wish also to take this opportunity to convey our
condolences to the people and the Government of
Macedonia on the untimely demise of President
Trajkovski in a plane crash in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Today we warmly welcome the presence in the
Council of Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Earlier this
week, on 1 March, Bosnia and Herzegovina celebrated
the twelfth anniversary of its independence. President
Musharraf and Prime Minister Jamali both sent warm
messages of congratulations to the brotherly
Government and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and I wish to take this opportunity to once again
express our fraternal sentiments to Prime Minister
Terzic today. I also assure him of Pakistan's continued
and unwavering commitment to his country and his
people on their path to peace and prosperity.

As a member of the Council, we will continue to
support the requests that have been made by Mr. Terzic
here today with regard to assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to achieve the goals that have
been outlined.

I wish also to welcome Lord Paddy Ashdown, the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
the Security Council and to thank him for his very
informative briefing, as well as to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his remarks.

Today, 12 years after a tragic war, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a more peaceful and stable country, a
far cry from the killing fields and ethnic cleansing of
the past decade. That is in considerable measure a
testament to the sustained commitment of the
international community to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But, even more so, the credit for progress must go in
the largest measure to the resilient and resourceful
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to their
leadership. They have demonstrated a determination to
rebuild a nation torn apart by hate, aggression and
international intrigue.

We appreciate Lord Ashdown's efforts in
promoting the rule of law, facilitating the return of
refugees, supporting efforts for reconstruction and
economic reforms, overhauling administrative
structures and building the country's capacity for
production and employment. Those efforts have helped
to move Bosnia and Herzegovina further towards the
goals of durable peace and national integration.

However, Lord Ashdown has conveyed here
today that, as yet, all is not completely well in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, that the restoration of Bosnia's pre-
war tapestry of coexistence remains an aspiration, not a
reality. He has mentioned the slow pace of reforms,
which undermines national integration. We note that
the success achieved in Brcko has yet to be replicated
in Mostar. Moreover, the peace process remains under
threat from organized criminal networks, extreme
nationalists and war criminals who remain at large. It is
amazing that Karadjic and Mladic cannot be found in
an area which is much smaller than, say, the Afghan-
Pakistan border, where Osama bin Laden is presumed
to be hiding. Lord Ashdown has also spoken of his
concern regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina's economic
recovery.

We note Prime Minister Terzic's remark that
today Bosnia and Herzegovina is "just another
European country well on its way through the process
of transition". The people of Pakistan enjoy historical
links with the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina -
links which were reinforced during Bosnia's recent
tragic and violent history. We are deeply committed,
therefore, to the goals of peace, harmony and
prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to its
emergence, as Lord Ashdown has stated, as a success
story and as a modern European country.

