Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for South Sudan, for his valuable briefing.

A few months from the beginning of the transition
period, we look forward to the implementation of
important pending agreements, particularly with
respect to the billeting and training of a unified
army and to the number and borders of states, which
will allow the revitalized transitional Government of
national unity to finally come to fruition. In the same
vein, we welcome the meeting, held last week in Juba
between the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, and
the Vice-President designate, Riek Machar. We consider
that gesture to be an important show ofpolitical resolve
that will provide the necessary impetus to tackle critical
issues and enable the establishment of the transitional
Government in November.

We note with satisfaction that the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan has resulted
in a considerable decrease in political violence in most
parts of the country. However, we regret that sporadic
attacks by non-signatory groups continue in regions
such as Central Equatoria, leading to a rise in internally
displaced persons.

We must reiterate our concern at the high rates of
crime, human rights violations and sexual violence
in South Sudan. Horrifying incidents continue to
be reported, as described in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/722). We hope that Rick
Machar's endorsement of the action plan of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement in Opposition on
conflict-related sexual violence will result in specific,
effective measures that do not foster impunity for the
perpetrators of such crimes but, rather, enable them to
be held accountable for their actions.

We call on non-signatory groups to join the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution ofthe Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. The construction of
a stable and secure nation is dependent on the entire
population and on the support that the international
community can provide to achieve lasting solutions that
include the greater participation of women and youth in
decision-making processes.

We regret that the humanitarian situation remains
critical despite the abating conflict. According to
the Secretary-General's report, the number of people
without food has reached an all-time high, severely
impacting the civilian population. Nevertheless, we
note that the report of the Secretary-General on future
planning for the protection of civilians sites in South
Sudan (S/2019/74l) highlights the growing willingness
of populations to return to their homes. However, the
report also points out that there are various barriers that
delay return, such as the unpredictable peace process,
the lack of security and the absence of basic services
in places of origin. We hope that the Government and
international partners can help facilitate the peaceful
return of the population to their homes, including
laying the groundwork for them to do so safely and
voluntarily and enjoy access to basic services, such as
water, sanitation and health services, allowing them to
live a dignified life in their homes.

We support the reprioritization of the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
as suggested in the report on the protection of civilian
sites. We believe that the UNMISS mandate must reflect
the current situation, thereby allowing the Mission to
deliver on its principal mandate, that is, the protection to
civilians, through early warnings and greater mobility
on the ground. We hope that coordinated action by
the Mission together with humanitarian actors and
development agencies will lead to lasting solutions.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the work
and efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union and the United
Nations, especially the valuable work of UNMISS,
in South Sudan. We reiterate the importance of
maintaining unity within the Security Council on the
political support and follow-up needed to continue
moving forward decisively in the South Sudanese
peace process.

