Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I am going to just briefly
address some of the notions presented here related to
the distortion of reality.

What is true is that Kosovo is a very difficult
place to live right now, and not exactly the kind of
place that Mr. Hyseni and a few other participants in
today's discussion were attempting to describe. So
when it comes to distortions of reality, I think that the
most difficult element of this is the way people actually
live right now in Kosovo.

I will try to address again the issue of
decentralization and the issue of participation in the
electoral process. Unfortunately, these elections were
not called in the way that all elections until now have
been called. Resolution 1244 (1999) is very clear as to
how they are supposed to be called. Had they been
called in the way that all previous elections have been
called, Serbian leadership would have, as every
previous time, supported the participation of Serbs in
these elections. These new elections were simply called
by the so-called institutions of the Republic of Kosovo.
There was no way for us to be able to support them.

We do, however, want to be very constructive and
engage in the process of coming up with a
decentralization concept that would benefit all the
residents of the province. I hope we are going to be
able to do that, for the sake of ordinary people there.

I have heard Mr. Hyseni repeatedly saying that he
looks forward to cooperating with the European Union,
United States and NATO in the territory. We do so as
well. But I want to remind Mr. Hyseni that he is sitting
in the United Nations building, and I would have hoped
for him to say that he looks forward to cooperating
with the United Nations, that is, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
the United Nations representation in the province, and
not refuse to meet the representatives of the United
Nations in Pristina. This is now changing, and I
commend this change of heart in Pristina, but I would
just like to encourage people there to continue to work
with UNMIK and the United Nations, as all of us are
going to do in the future.

I spoke about the need to fight organized crime
and terrorism and that that is the subject of the protocol
on cooperation between the Serbian Ministry of the
Interior and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX).

I did mention the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA), but I did not call the KLA a terrorist
organization in my remarks today. Mr. Hyseni,
however, did. But that is of course true. The KLA was
and is a terrorist organization. But I never said that. I
thank him for reminding us that the KLA is a terrorist
organization.

I am never going to try to diminish the deeds
carried out by the regime of Slobodan Milosevic in
Kosovo. That regime was overthrown by the people of
Serbia. The Government of Serbia is now led by the
people who risked their lives in overthrowing the
dictatorship of Slobodan Milosevic. I will never try to
deny or diminish the crimes committed in Kosovo and
in other parts of the region under the leadership of the
Milosevic Government. But I hope Mr. Hyseni is not
trying to blame the current Government of Serbia for
those deeds, including the burning of the mosques.

However, when it comes to the authorities in
Kosovo, I can very well blame the current leadership,
because of events such as the March 2004 pogrom, in
which 35 churches and monasteries from the medieval
ages were burned or desecrated in only two days by
organized mobs of people. By the way, no one is
currently behind bars in Kosovo for that horrible crime.
I commend Mr. Hyseni's determination to fight
organized crime and to protect the heritage of Kosovo.
I hope he starts doing that very soon. Maybe he could
start by prosecuting those who burned down those
churches and monasteries in 2004. Nobody is behind
bars for that right now.

The last thing that I am going to say is that, with
regard to the statistical data, 206,000 internally
displaced persons is the official figure of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Those are
the statistics I was referring to. Sitting here in the
United Nations, we decided to quote the United
Nations figure on this.

Having said all that, I think this is really the time
to try to set aside our differences on status, because our
differences on status are going to be contested in a
court of law. It is yet another United Nations organ, the
International Court of Justice.

But this is the time to work together, despite all
the differences and the difficulties that we have with
each other, in a status-neutral way, which is something
that I hope Kosovo can embrace, as we have decided to
embrace that approach, especially in regional
organizations and international meetings. Serbia is not
going to try to shut Pristina out of regional
organizations where they have had membership in the
past. Every single place where Pristina is a member, we
are going to support their participation - but
according to the rules. The rules are clearly laid out,
and they are written in the statutes of these
organizations. We are just willing to follow the rules. I
think this is the safest approach.
UNMIK has a very important role to play in those
meetings. Kosovo has spoken before in those bodies
and forums in a certain way, and we welcome their
doing just that again. But if they expect us to support
the change of format because on 17 February they
unilaterally declared independence, I am afraid that we
can be of no help in that regard. We want to hear them
out, and we want to allow other people to hear them
out, but we also want rules to be followed. I just think
that that is the safest way forward.

I do stand behind the claim that the unilateral
declaration of independence was an ethnically
motivated attempt at secession. Yes, in the so-called
parliament of Kosovo, they did have representatives of
various ethnic groups, but I just want to remind
Mr. Hyseni that there were a lot of Albanians who were
part of the Government of Slobodan Milosevic, and I
am not trying to make any claim that they were
genuine representatives of the Albanian people.

