Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (Spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief
the Council on the latest developments in Yemen.

The past several months have seen a dangerous
escalation of military activities, with tragic
consequences for the Yemeni people. Armed hostilities
have continued in many areas, including Sana'a
governorate, Taiz city and the border area between
Yemen and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Civilians in
Taiz continue to suffer from indiscriminate shelling in
residential areas of the city, with such attacks increasing
in recent days. Ground shelling and air strikes have
also escalated along the western coastline following the
launch of Operation Golden Spear by the Government
of Yemen and allied forces.

Both sides continue to claim in the media that
they have made significant military progress, but
I remain convinced that there is no possibility of a
military solution. We are witnessing daily attacks and
counterattacks. Those who seek a military solution will
only prolong the suffering caused by the war, allow
the terrorist threat to continue to grow, and deepen the
challenges of Yemen's eventual recovery following the
war. The continued military activity is all the more
tragic as a viable proposal for peace is on the table and
within reach of both parties. With political courage and
will, this war can be stopped.

On 18 December, the Foreign Minister of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia hosted a meeting in Riyadh
with the Foreign Ministers of the Sultanate of Oman,
the United Arab Emirates, the United States and the
United Kingdom, and I was invited to join. The meeting
ended with an urgent call for a rapid recommitment
to a cessation of hostilities, followed by a two-week
preparatory period in order to look into the violations
that have taken place every time a cessation ofhostilities
has been announced.

We want to ensure that this time the parties honour
the cessation of hostilities fully and effectively in
order to allow assistance to be provided to the Yemeni
people. My Office has completed preparations for
the preparatory meeting, which includes a five-day
workshop for representatives from both sides to
develop a concrete joint implementation plan to ensure
the strengthening of the cessation of hostilities and that
no violations occure by either party. The successful
implementation of the cessation of hostilities will bring
about a much-needed respite for many Yemenis, as well
as hope after suffering long months of war, and will
pave the way for progress towards a political agreement.

I met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan two days after he took
up his position. He stated that his country was willing
to host the workshop. He also expressed the Kingdom's
willingness to provide any assistance needed for the
people of Yemen and to support peace in that country.
We were not surprised at that stance, given that Jordan
hosts a large number of neighbouring countries'
citizens, including Yemenis, providing them safe
shelter and basic health services.

In that regard, I welcome the positive response
of the Yemeni Government and the fact that it has
agreed to send its representatives to the workshop. I
hope that the delegation of Ansar Allah and General
People's Congress will confirm their participation at
that gathering.

On the political front, the statement issued at
the meeting on 18 December in Riyadh called on the
parties to respond constructively to the United Nations
proposal I submitted in preparation for a next round of
cosultations. While the parties still have some concerns
and reservations, I will continue my consultations
with them in order to arrive at compromises and a
convergence of views.

To a large extent, this proposal builds on the main
points discussed during the Kuwait consultations and
paves the way towards a political solution that is in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015), and the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism.
It is also the first step along the path towards peace and
sets the stage for a transitional period in accordance
with the National Dialogue Conference decisions. The
international community has welcomed that proposal.

In November, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and
the United States helped us to ensure that the delegation
of Ansar Allah and General People's Congress agreed
to a road map as a negotiable working paper, which was
a positive development. However, they did not provide
any practical proposals or detailed plans for security
arrangements dealing with military withdrawal
or the handover of heavy weaponry. Therefore, no
progress was possible, specially given that the security
component is essential and fundamental to peace. We
discussed these topics in details during my latest visit
to Sana'a.

Undoubtedly, the decision by Ansar Allah and
the General People's Congress to set up a parallel
Government within the Supreme Political Council
throws up an additional barrier along the road to peace
and has an adverse impact on trust between the parties.
More than once, we have said how dangerous it is to take
unilateral decisions in these difficult times and how
that will impact the revitalization of State institutions.

On the Government level, since my previous
briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.7797) I have
undertaken two visits to Aden, under difficult and
sensitive security conditions. My latest trip took place
on 16 January, when I met Yemeni President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, Prime Minister Ahmed
Obaid Bin-Daghr and Foreign Minister Abdulmalik
Al-Mikhlafi. I called on the President to commit
publicly to the consultations based on my proposals
made in Kuwait and thereafter. Continued criticism
of the proposals without agreeing to discuss them in
order to make amendments undermine the path towards
peace and prolongs the conflict.

I emphasized, and assured President Hadi, that
what was being presented by the United Nations were
proposals open for discussion in order to reach a
comprehensive solution acceptable to all sides and that
there was no other way to bring about peace in Yemen
and to afford all Yemenis an opportunity to come to the
table to address their country's challenges, including
the south's historic grievances.

Yemen's economic and humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. According to humanitarian
organizations, 18.8 million Yemenis require
humanitarian assistance and 2.2 Yemeni children
are malnourished - one of the highest rates of acute
malnutrition in the world. That is not only a result
of poverty, but of a deterioration in basic services in
the areas of health, water and sanitation, as well as
other factors. The Emergency Relief Coordinator, my
colleague Mr. Stephen O'Brien, will be able to provide
members more details on the war's terrible impact on
the humanitarian situation.

In that regard, the continued closure of the Sana'a
airport has added to the overall hardship. Many people
who want to leave Yemen to seek medical treatment
abroad cannot do so, while Yemenis abroad are unable
to return home. As well, the journey to and from Aden
airport is too difficult for many to undertake, leaving
many people with no option. I call on the Government
of Yemen to allow for the resumption of commercial
flights to Sana'a without further delay. And I call on
all parties to ensure the safety of air navigation. I have
addressed a formal letter to all parties calling on them
to ensure the safety of the airport and of all civilian
commercial aircraft.

The extensive delay in the payment of civil servants'
salaries has severely undercut the purchasing power
of most Yemeni households. The continuing lack of
payments will drive ever more people into destitution.
The Government of Yemen, the Central Bank, Ansar
Allah and the General People's Congress must work
together to ensure the resumption of salary payments to
civil servants in all areas ofthe country. Earlier today, I
received information from the Government that salary
payments had resumed.

It will also be critical, in cooperation with UNICEF
and the World Bank, to fully fund the social welfare
fund that provides cash payments to the most vulnerable
people in Yemen. I also encourage international
partners to find ways to ensure access to hard currency

for importers of basic commodities, so as to guarantee
the continuity of such imports.

There is a clear path out of the violence that plagues
Yemen. Although it requires some concessions, the
proposals that I put forward are based on the concerns
and needs of both sides and take into account the
political, security and social situation in the country,
while providing for a secure future for Yemen and
Yemenis. I will present the sides with a detailed timetable
that reflects the political and security stages and their
sequencing, as we envisage it. I call upon the parties
to demonstrate political wisdom and responsibility in
order to make the necessary progress.

Since my previous briefing to the Council, over the
past few weeks I have held meetings with the Foreign
Ministers of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and Jordan, as well as Sweden. I
also met with the Deputy Foreign Ministers of China
and the Russian Federation. I have seen that there is
in fact consensus for the efforts of the United Nations.
In that regard, I would like to mention the support I
received from the Russian Embassy in Sana'a during my
latest visit. I hope that the international community will
continue to bring pressure to bear on the parties so that
they recommit within the next few days to a cessation
of hostilities. I am confident that improvements in the
security situation will open up space for a renewed
political dialogue, which we hope will bring about a
solution.

I have seen for myself the suffering of the Yemeni
people. Ijust returned from a devastated Sana'a. I saw
at first hand the suffering of Yemeni women and men. I
hope that Yemeni leaders will be able to see the impact
that this tragedy has had on the country, take the bold
decision to commit to a political solution and put an end
to the conflict. The solution to the Yemeni situation is
not external. The United Nations and the international
community can help to promote, mediate and bring
pressure to bear. But the key decisions and compromises
must be made by Yemenis and will depend upon their
ability to make consessions. Failing that, history will
judge them harshly.

