Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Very
briefly, I wish first to thank the Deputy President of
South Africa, Mr. Jacob Zuma, for his briefing today
and for his important work on behalf of Burundi in his
capacity as Facilitator. We also thank the Government
of South Africa for its commitment to this process.

We believe that the briefing given by the
President of the Economic and Social Council, whose
welcome presence in the Council has become
customary, was also of great interest and a valuable
contribution.

The progress achieved in bringing peace and
stability to Burundi is significant and the Council
should welcome it, while recognizing the important
challenges still facing that country. At the same time,
we regret the fact that, despite the progress achieved,
the Forces nationales de liberation (FNL) has not found
a way to associate itself with the peace process. We
encourage continued efforts to incorporate the FNL
into the Transitional Government.

The international community's reaction to
Burundi must be immediate, because the peace process
under way must be consolidated by international
assistance. The assistance must be comprehensive and
include economic and social aid, improvement of the
humanitarian situation and assistance in national
reconciliation. There is also a need to assess the best
way to address security and peacekeeping problems in
Burundi, be it through the African mission, renewed
resources or United Nations participation. As for the
Organization, a comprehensive approach will require
the participation of different United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly.

I believe that the work being done by the ad hoc
group on African countries emerging from conflict of
the Economic and Social Council is linked to a certain
degree to the work of the Security Council. We might
consider exploring formulas, such as those mentioned
by the Ambassador of Pakistan, to improve the work
done by the two bodies.

In conclusion, the important thing is to
consolidate peace in Burundi and the results already
obtained so as to ensure that there will be no recurrence
of violence in that country.

