Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): For more than
a century, Canada has struggled to defend the values that
it holds dear, namely, justice and freedom - including
the freedom of religion - democracy, respect for the
rule of law, respect for the rights of persons and human
dignity. Those values are the foundation of Canadian
society and we hold them dear, as The Right Honourable
Prime Minister of Canada, Stephen Harper, recalled
on 4 August during the commemoration of the one
hundredth anniversary of the start of the First World
War. The outbreak of armed conflict undermines the
progress made in the areas of economic development
and prosperity. The most vulnerable people, those
who depend on the stability and development of a
community, are too often the main victims of conflicts.

It has also been consistently noted that lasting peace
and stability are achieved only when women are fully
involved at all levels of decision-making, including
the economic and political levels and during peace
processes. In the context of the post-2015 development
agenda, it is therefore important to take into account
obstacles to peace, development and prosperity, such
as the subjugation of women and girls through policies
of exclusion, violence and female genital mutilation,
as well as child, early and forced marriages. The best
way to put an end to such crimes and terrible practices
is to ensure that women can fully exercise their rights
and contribute completely to their communities and
country. Peace cannot be maintained if half of the
society is excluded from the political, economic and
social life of a community and a country.

(spoke in English)
Canada is committed to promoting respect for the
human rights, dignity and well-being of women and
girls worldwide. As Foreign Minister John Baird said at
the London Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict in June, where he chaired a high-level dialogue,
women must have full and equal representation at peace
tables and throughout society. It is essential that they be
not just in the room but at the head table.

Canada urges the Security Council to underscore
the importance of the empowerment and well-being
of women and girls as a precondition for conflict
prevention. While we cannot predict what will trigger
an outbreak of violence, we can identify persistent and
escalating drivers of conflict and fragility.

Today, it is impossible to discuss the issue of
conflict prevention without calling to mind the bloody
clashes that are occurring at this very moment in so
many places on the planet. Indeed, it is difficult to
address the topic of prevention without feeling a sense
of failure as major conflicts rage on in Syria, the
Middle East, Iraq, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, to name but a few.

Recently, Canada has used this forum to stress the
importance of recognizing collective human dignity
above all else. Doing so requires a commitment to
conflict prevention, which is as important as an effective
response. The political, humanitarian, security and
development resources and tools at our disposal must be
brought to bear more effectively in order to strengthen
national capacities for conflict prevention. It is now
widely accepted that a successful preventive strategy
not only depends on the cooperation of the United
Nations actors, including the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and the General Assembly, but also
requires sustained political will on the part of Member
States.

First and foremost, that includes the readiness of
the membership as whole to provide the United Nations
with the necessary political support to undertake
effective preventive action in specific situations. If
neighbouring countries, regional allies and other
Member States that would be well placed to support
United Nations efforts lack the political will to provide
their support, preventive action is not likely to succeed.

While the success of our efforts in conflict
prevention cannot always be quantified, we have
learned certain truths from history. The appeasement
of aggressors, tyrants and terrorists is clearly not an
option. We must remain resolute in the face of such
regimes and organizations. Above all, we must not
forget that the responsibility for the crimes committed
falls first and foremost on those who commit them.

Conflict prevention matters, because without it
vulnerable people in societies, including religious
minorities, women and children, are disproportionately
victimized. We need the United Nations to use all the
tools at its disposal to prevent conflict before it occurs.
The Security Council has a major role to play in that
regard. We need the Member States to give their full
support at all times to United Nations efforts aimed at
preventive action. The resistance and political division
among Member States have already cost too many lives.

We appreciate the efforts to strengthen the
Secretariat with regard to conflict prevention,
including the increasing focus of the Department of
Political Affairs on deploying special political missions
and envoys. Moreover, the United Nations is one actor
among many. Cooperation with other key actors is
critical to success and to ensuring that international
organizations play to their strengths and support the
strengths of others.

