Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, my delegation welcomes the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland,
Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz. We thank him for his excellent
stewardship of the Security Council's work within the
framework of today's very constructive debate. We wish
the Polish delegation every success in its presidency of
the Council this month. We would also like to thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his very
important briefing today. Furthermore, we thank the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Yves Daccord, for the important role
that the Committee plays in delivering humanitarian
assistance to various regions, in particular areas that
are made difficult to access by the danger caused by
the presence of terrorist groups. Finally, we would also
like to thank to Ms. Hanaa Edwar, a renowned human
rights advocate who has been particularly active in my
country, the new democratic Iraq.

Our armed forces have achieved major successes in
the liberation of territories that were under the control
of terrorist entities. Our forces - and I would go so
far as to say our heroes - have demonstrated great
professionalism by behaving in line with international
humanitarian law and in respect for human rights.
Those efforts have been welcomed by the entire world
and are the pride of Iraq.

Immense efforts have been made to combat
terrorism. In that regard, we have received welcome
support and assistance from the international
community as well as from friendly and brotherly
countries. They have created humanitarian corridors
for civilians to ensure they are able to leave the most
dangerous areas formerly under the control of terrorist
groups. Safe camps have also been created for displaced
persons where basic services, including food, medical
care and financial assistance, are provided.

The Government ofIraq has mobilized all ministries
and all the means and resources at its disposal in order
to deliver humanitarian assistance, medical care and
drinking water to our citizens in liberated areas in
the Nineveh, Al-Anbar and Salahadin governorates.
We have been supporting those people by all means
possible. Psychological rehabilitation programmes
have been successfully conducted for the benefit of
the population so that they can be reintegrated into
society and national reconciliation achieved, following
the destruction of infrastructure and homes in various
regions by terrorists who have fled.

The Iraqi Government is committed to cooperating
with the United Nations so as to implement resolution
2379 (2017). We have therefore worked to criminalize
the terrorist organization Da'esh. We cooperate with the
United Nations to provide needed assistance to victims
and punish those responsible, who must not enjoy
impunity. Accordingly, Iraq signed a joint communique
on 23 September 2016 with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which entered into force at the beginning of this year,
thereby enabling us to provide assistance to victims of
sexual violence linked to terrorist activities. We have
also worked to strengthen the capacities of the various
Iraqi institutions that provide support and assistance to
victims. The Prime Minister of Iraq also signed a work
plan with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, which is
aimed at rehabilitating children abused by Da'esh.

Moreover, in a letter from High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy Federica Mogherini, on 20 June 2017, the
European Union condemned the crimes committed by
Da'esh in Iraq and qualified them as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes of genocide. Iraq gladly
welcomed the training provided to its security forces,
who are in daily contact with civilians. That training
is provided by United Nations specialized experts, in
line with the memorundum addressed to the office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict on 16 May 2017. Through
its national legislation and international commitments,
the Iraqi Government is working to hold accountable
the terrorist organization Da'esh, which has committed
numerous crimes, including murder, kidnapping and
human trafficking, all of which must not go unpunished.
We are therefore coordinating our efforts with those of
the international community to that end, not only at the
national, but also at the international, level.

We have established specialized courts responsible
for investigating crimes committed by terrorists, in
particular crimes of genocide and crimes committed
by Da'esh against minorities in Mosul. We have also
conducted investigations into crimes perpetrated
against prison inmates in Badoush prison. The
Iraqi Government has also established a high-level
monitoring and reporting interministerial commission
responsible for protecting the rights of children within
the framework of human rights violations during armed
conflict, the establishment of which was approved by
the Prime Minister on 23 November 2017. Currently,
the Minister ofLabour and Social Affairs is responsible
for monitoring human rights violations concerning
children who have been deprived of their most basic
rights owing to armed conflict. We have also established
a central commission to compensate victims affected
by military operations and terrorist attacks under Law
No. 57/2015 to mitigate the suffering of citizens caused
by military activities.

We have also set up a common coordination centre
so as to coordinate our work related to managing crises
linked to recent military and civilian activities in order
to provide protection to civilians and guarantee the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those who are
in need. The Iraqi armed forces are working under our
Commander-in-Chief, who has given explicit orders to
protect civilians in the various regions in which we have
had to confront terrorists. We have worked to protect
infrastructure, which has cost us some time in terms of
military operations. We did not want to move forward
too quickly so that we would not put the infrastructure
in jeopardy and also to protect civilian lives. We have
provided all the necessary information to the air and
ground forces so as to carefully target various objectives
without putting civilians in harm's way. Our security
forces have also worked professionally to restore the
various civilian organizations that had been used by
Da'esh and sites that were used to train terrorists and
stockpile weapons. We therefore worked to liberate
civilians who had been used by Da'esh as human
shields. We have liberated territories, and today we are
working to rehabilitate the various sites and regions.

Our victory at the military level was followed by
another victory at the civilian level. Through legislative
elections, we have enshrined the principle of peaceful
succession to power by holding parliamentary elections
on 12 May, which strengthened the unity of Iraq. All
Iraqis worked as one to defend their humanity and
their very existence. The entire world stood with Iraq
to end terrorism and extremism in my country, which
must never again return to any part of Iraq. We want
to rebuild our human capital and reassure a dignified
return to our displaced persons and refugees.

Lastly, we thank the international community and
the United Nations for their work in the areas of the
protection of civilians and the responsibility to provide
support to Iraq against terrorism.

