Mr. Kawamura (Japan): IthankHigh Representative
Inzko for his informative briefing. Japan continues to
appreciate Mr. Inzko's important role in supporting
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also welcome the unanimous adoption of an extended
mandate for the European Union-led peacekeeping
force, which plays a pivotal role in maintaining peace
in the country.

All ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina share
a common position on joining the European Union
(EU). Japan strongly supports the Government's efforts
in the country's accession process towards membership
in the EU and NATO. We welcome progress on regional
cooperation, which can be seen in the signing of the
EU transport community treaty in September. Japan
calls for further accelerated efforts on the country's
EU candidacy through the submission of answers to
the European Commission's questionnaire by the end
of the year.

We note, however, that the Government's efforts on
economic reforms have not been sufficient. We hope
to see progress in efforts on a fuel-tax bill, including
addressing the serious unemployment situation,
especially for young people, and measures to create
an environment conducive to foreign investment. In
that regard, at the Japan-Bosnia Herzegovina Foreign
Ministers meeting on 1 October in Tokyo, Foreign
Minister Kono of Japan particularly stressed the
importance of improving the investment environment.

Next October's elections and campaigns provide
a prime opportunity to solidify national unity and
inclusiveness among different ethnic groups, and
they should in no way be an occasion for ethnically
based actions and rhetoric. Japan strongly hopes that
electoral reform will move forward based on consensus
and inclusivity among ethnic groups in order for fair
elections to be held on schedule.
As I did in our previous debate (see S/PV.7943), I
unfortunatelymustreiterate Japan's deep disappointment
over a number of ethnically divisive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are particularly concerned
by actions, such as the Republika Srpska National
Assembly's adoption ofa resolution on the protection of
the constitutional order and on the military neutrality
of the Republika Srpska, which have a negative impact
on Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We also emphasize that actions by Republika
Srpska's leaders to undermine the authority of the High
Representative are not only politically unacceptable,
but they are also violations of the Dayton Agreement.
The international community must continue to
convince the leaders of the Republika Srpska that
containing nationalism and separatism are crucial for
people's peace and prosperity. The High Representative
and his Office, the Peace Implementation Council and
the Security Council all have important responsibilities
and roles to play in this area.

Since the end of the conflict, Japan has provided
over $500 million to support Bosnia and Herzegovina,
both now and into the future. Recent efforts include
demining, agricultural development in Srebrenica,
the installation of a flue-gas desulphurization plant to
fight pollution in Republika Srpska, the development of
shared health- and physical-education curriculums for
all ethnic groups, and support for children of different
ethnic backgrounds to learn sports together in Mostar.

While December will be Japan's final month on the
Security Council during its current term, it will remain
a core member of the Peace Implementation Council.
We will continue to contribute to reconciliation, acting
as a neutral party among ethnic groups, while fully
supporting Mr. Inzko and his Office.

