Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for its efforts in
organizing today's meeting and shedding light on the
humanitarian tragedy that has resulted from the actions
of Daesh in Iraq and the region. I would also like to
express the thanks and greetings of my Minister for
Foreign Affairs to His Excellency Mr. Laurent Fabius,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.

My delegation would also like to express its
condolences to the clergy and the Assyrian Church
of the East on the death of Patriarch Mar Dinkha IV.
We welcome the presence of Patriarch Sako and of
Mrs. Dakhil, a member of the Iraqi Parliament, at this
important meeting, and we thank Mrs. Dakhil for her
accurate and impressive remarks.

Iraq is proud of its millennia-old traditions built
on a multiplicity of cultures, religions and ethnicities,
represented by, for instance, the abundance of artifacts
on its land as well as the various elements that make
up its people, who have evolved in ethnic, cultural and
religious diversity. Our new Constitution states that all
Iraqis are equal before the law, with no discrimination
on the basis of race, nationality or gender, and that all
have the right to life, security and freedom.

The events that Iraq has experienced in recent years
and whose repercussions have increased following the
growth of the terrorist group known as Daesh, pose a
double threat to Iraqis as a whole and religious minorities
in particular. This danger threatens the traditions of
coexistence that have reigned in Iraq throughout its
history. The various segments of the Iraqi population,
distinguished by their religious identities - Christians,
Yazidis, Shabak, Baha'i, Feylis, Sunni and Shia - or by
their ethnic identities 4 Arab, Kurd and Turkmen 4 are
all part of the indigenous population and form the
basis of the Iraqi civilization. They are also part of
the inclusive elected Government, which includes all
elements of Iraqi society. Since my Government was
established and Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi took
office, they have fostered national unity and the future
and security of the country by providing Iraqi citizens
with a decent and dignified life characterized by the
rule of law.

In Iraq today, human existence is seriously
threatened. We must fight that threat. Daesh has
taken control by force, despite the existing regional
and international systems. It has managed to extend
its power over large areas of Iraq and Syria. It has
become a serious threat to those States and their
territorial integrity. Daesh initially targeted religious
minorities 4 Christians, Yazidis, Kurds, Feylis and
Shias. Since then, its crimes have engulfed all segments
of the Iraqi population without exception.

The events of 2014 are a case in point. It was not
enough for Daesh to kill Iraqis and seize their property,
but it also carried out systemic aggression against
private places of worship, mosques and churches and
destroyed Iraqi monuments. The degrading practices
espoused by that bloody organization have multiplied
and include forced displacement. Members of Daesh
consider others to be unbelievers and force them to
embrace their dogma. They rape women and abduct
children who refuse to comply with their laws.
Thousands of Yazidi and Christian girls have been
abducted and sold as prisoners in the areas under Daesh
control. Thousands of Shia, Sunni, Shabak and Sabians
have been victims of the brutal actions perpetrated
by Daesh, such as killings and terror. The violence,
persecution, displacement and killing to which the
Iraqi population is subject could unravel the Iraqi
social fabric and threaten the stability and harmony
among Iraqis. No group will be safe unless the terrorist
organizations that fuel sectarian tensions, tear society
apart and destroy coexistence are eliminated.

The brutal actions perpetrated by Daesh can only
be described as war crimes, crimes against humanity
and even genocide. This was mentioned in the Human
Rights Council report (A/HRC/28/18) that was issued
only days ago. At the beginning of the week, the Iraqi
Cabinet declared the crimes perpetrated by Daesh
against segments of the Iraqi population to be genocide.

As a result of the heinous crimes perpetrated by
Daesh, hundreds of thousands of Iraqi citizens have
been displaced and forced them to flee their country
as refugees. Therefore, Iraq is losing the diversity
of its culture and civilization that it has enjoyed for
thousands of years. Consequently, we must put an end
to the phenomenon of forced migration. The solution
does not lie in removing Yazidis, Christians and others
from Iraq. That simply signifies a victory for Takfiri
thinking, which is aimed at tearing Iraq apart and
eliminating its cultural, ethnic and religious diversity.
On the contrary, we must put an end to this phenomenon
by extirpating the terrorist Daesh entity.

The situation of internally displaced persons in
Iraq remains tragic and critical. It requires greater
relief efforts and solidarity to alleviate their suffering
by liberating the areas under the terrorists' control
and ensuring the triumph of the message of love and
tolerance and the preservation of the dignity of Iraqis,
regardless of their religious or national identities, which
are being targeted by extremist terrorist thinking.

In conclusion, Iraq endeavours to ensure the
respect for and protection of basic rights and freedom
of religion, as enshrined in the Iraqi Constitution. We
also seek to eliminate the radical thinking that hinders
peaceful coexistence. Iraq looks forward to the day
when all Iraqis are able to freely practice their religions
without fear, be it in the Yazidi temples or by praying
in mosques, hussainias or churches.

