Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, we would like to thank you and
Ambassador Sergey Lavrov of the Russian Federation
for having suggested this public debate, which has
provided the Security Council with an opportunity to
assess the progress made towards achieving its goals in
the Gulf region and the Middle East, and to visualize
clearly the next step. My delegation would like to make
its contribution to the debate with the following
thoughts.

I turn first to the general guidelines for the
Security Council. The Council must take a
comprehensive approach to the question of Iraq. As we
know, there are many varied aspects to this question,
but they are not unrelated. Indeed, they have a potential
impact on one another, whether it be disarmament, the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, or other humanitarian
issues such as Kuwaiti nationals and nationals of other
countries, or Kuwaiti property. The status of those
issues, and the continuing quest to attain the objectives
that have been set in those areas, must be viewed in
relation to the achievement of the Council's goals in
the region - that is, security and stability for all.

Secondly, I turn to the humanitarian situation in
Iraq. Because of the many different sanctions imposed
on the country - indeed, the most extensive and the
harshest ever imposed by the United Nations on a
country - Iraq's economy is devastated, its society is
crumbling, and the humanitarian situation of the Iraqi
people is on the brink of utter collapse and a source of
serious concern, according to international
humanitarian organizations.

Last week, the London Economist wrote that this
country of 22 million people, with its great civilization,
has been reduced to the level of a Stone Age society.
Despite its positive contribution, the oil-for-food
programme - a temporary and limited measure -
cannot stand in for a genuine recovery of the Iraqi
economy, which is the only way of providing an
appropriate response to the urgent and immense needs
of an entire population.

But how can one possibly even think of economic
recovery in the country without direct foreign
investment, particularly in the key oil sector, without a
cash component for that same sector, without service
activities, without any real lifting of the restrictions on
air transport, without financial resources - enough for
Iraq to pay its arrears to the various international
organizations - and the list goes on.

The Security Council should accept and approve
such steps, because otherwise, the humanitarian
tragedy of the Iraqi people, which has been playing out
for so many years now, will simply continue to be a
blot on our conscience. Tunisia will continue to work
daily in the Security Council, as it has consistently
done, with a view to improving, before it is too late,
the situation of the Iraqi people, who are in such
distress.

Thirdly, I turn to the question of implementation
of Security Council resolutions. The Council's
resolutions on Iraq provide a legal framework and
define Iraq's obligations, in particular in the area of
disarmament. They also reflect the Council's
commitment to modifying the sanctions regime on
Iraq-in other words, to easing the sanctions and
lifting them completely, once and for all, depending on
Iraq's cooperation in discharging its obligations.

Those resolutions must be implemented in good
faith by all parties. The principle of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States - one of the
cardinal principles of the Charter, which can be found
throughout the Council's resolutions on Iraq - must
be respected by all, including members of the Council,
as the Council's resolutions are the collective
expression of its will. Indeed, legality is indivisible, as
is the law. What is at stake is the credibility and
effectiveness of the work of this organ, which has the
great responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this connection, I would mention
that the question of no-fly zones should be reviewed.

Moreover, and in order to facilitate
implementation of those resolutions, every effort
should be made to avoid ambiguity, which, far from
being constructive, only complicates their
implementation on the ground. The Council must
therefore consider the possibility of making the
necessary clarifications to certain resolutions - such
as resolution 1284 (1999) - because, failing that, there
is a danger of the resolutions' simply remaining a dead
letter. Indeed, if this were the case, a comprehensive
solution would not be facilitated, the sufferings of the
Iraqi people would not be eased, and the achievement
of the Council's objectives would not come any faster.
This also applies to any resolution to be adopted in
future, and it is even more true in respect of resolutions
that would innovate and introduce substantial changes
in the existing regime.

As for Iraq itself, it has been cooperating for
several years with the United Nations and the
Disarmament Commission. This cooperation, which
must be duly noted and recognized, must continue with
a View to resolving the remaining pending problems,
because its contribution is indispensable. It must be
encouraged, through incentives and through the real
and tangible prospect of finally seeing light at the end
of the tunnel - in other words, seeing the sanctions
lifted, so that it can resume its seat in the community of
nations.

Fourthly, I turn to the question of post-conflict
settlement for the region. For 11 years now, Iraq has
been under a very broad embargo. The situation is
painful, both morally and in humanitarian terms.
Geopolitically, it is a factor of instability in the region.
Obviously, this does not serve the objectives of the
Council. That is why we believe that the question of
Iraq should not continue to be viewed and dealt with
only from the standpoint of sanctions and coercion.
Political and diplomatic paths do have their virtues,
and they should inspire a fresh approach to this
question by the Council, with a View to hastening the
advent of a comprehensive solution that would
facilitate a final settlement of pending issues, such as
Kuwaiti missing persons and Kuwaiti property, and
would ensure for all countries of the region - I stress,
all countries of the region - conditions of security,
stability and peaceful coexistence - in a word, peace.
On the basis of that peace, the Governments and
peoples concerned would build good neighbourly
relations and mutually beneficial cooperation in
rediscovered trust.

In order to get the Iraqi issue out of the current
deadlock, and finally to sketch out a comprehensive
solution, which is what we all would advocate,
negotiation is the only right road. Since joining the
Security Council, Tunisia has always called for
negotiation. We welcomed the beginning of a dialogue
last February in New York between an Iraqi
government delegation and Secretary-General Kofi
Annan. However, that exercise was not continued as
had been envisaged between the two parties. Our
Council should encourage resumption as soon as
possible. It is high time that some movement or
dynamic be started so that we can move ahead;
otherwise, this situation runs the risk of continuing to
stagnate - but at what price for Iraq, for its people and
for the region? It is a region in upheaval because of the
situation in the occupied Arab territories. It is a region
where public opinion is bitter and frustrated,
impatiently waiting for the winds of peace and
reconciliation to blow through.

It is our hope that the Security Council will be
inspired by this overall approach in its future actions.
This is the approach that we would advocate at a time
when the Council is actively seized of a draft to review
the sanctions regime.

