Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
participate in this debate.

(spoke in English)

Canada thanks the Security Council for this opportunity,
and the Luxembourg presidency for holding this debate.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support for
the work undertaken by the Council to protect children.

The robust system of child protection built by the
Security Council has been judiciously implemented in
the field by key partners such as UNICEF and others.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and UNICEF have worked tirelessly to raise awareness
and to address the rights and protection of girls and
boys affected by armed conflict. Canada commends
their efforts.

(spoke in French)

The international community has made a lot
of progress in the protection of children who find
themselves in conflict-related situations. Much
remains to be done in this area, however, as we witness
the devastating impacts of the conflicts in Syria, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to name but a few.

As we work to ensure that Government armed
forces uphold their obligations, we continue to call
on the Security Council for action to hold persistent
perpetrators to account. I am referring here to those
who continue, year after year, without accountability,
to commit violations against children. In that regard,
Canada encourages dialogue between the United
Nations and non-State actors to advance child
protection in armed conflict, and urges action plans
that result from these dialogues to be implemented with
time-bound deadlines.
(spoke in English)

Both formal and informal child-protection systems
are important. Formal systems include donor support
for civic registration and vital statistics, with data
collection that is disaggregated by sex, ethnicity,
wealth quintile and other factors. That, in turn, would
contribute to establishing age-verification procedures
for recruitment in the military. Informal systems
include active participation by families, communities
and children themselves to create and foster protective
environments that contribute to preventing recruitment
and other grave violations. Capacity-building is
an essential element of the protection of children.
Experience has shown that the protection of children
in conflict situations is very complex and requires
the application of diverse and specialized medical,
psychological and social skills and knowledge.

We should support effective predeployment training
in child protection for personnel involved in field
missions, including military and police personnel. It is
also crucial that such personnel be screened to prevent
individuals who have themselves committed violations
against children from serving with the United Nations.
That goes to the very heart of the United Nations
mandate.

Canada condemns in the strongest terms the
targeting of schools and hospitals. We welcome the new
report from the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack, which found that over the past five years
armed non-State groups and State military and security
forces have attacked thousands of schoolchildren,
teachers and schools in at least 70 countries worldwide.
In 13 countries more than 500 attacks alone have been
recorded. Since 2009 there have been more than 1,100
attacks on education facilities in Afghanistan, including
arson attacks, explosions and suicide bombings. In
Colombia 140 teachers were killed in four years, and
more than 1000 received death threats. Canada urges
all Member States to act to protect schools, teachers
and students from attack and to hold perpetrators
accountable.

(spoke in French)

We are alarmed that more than 10,000 children have
been killed and 3,000 schools damaged or destroyed
over the course of the conflict in Syria. Approximately
3 million children are in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. Canada calls on all parties to the conflict
immediately to end all violations and abuses against
children and to facilitate unimpeded humanitarian
access in compliance with the new resolution 2139
(2014).
(spoke in English)

Canada also deplores the practice of using schools
for military purposes during armed conflict and urges
States to restrict the use of schools for any military
operations. Schools ought to be safe and protected
and must never serve as barracks, fighting positions,
detention centres, interrogation or torture sites, or
weapons depots in conflicts.

Canada is committed to ensuring that the rights of
children are always protected. Be assured that we will
continue to fight against the unspeakable violations
that threaten the safety, dignity and lives of girls and
boys in situations of armed conflict in every corner of
the world.

