I wish to begin by thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for his important update to the Council on the latest developments on the ground. With the unprecedented spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), it is high time for the Council once again to support the Secretary-General's call to protect the most vulnerable populations and those least able to protect themselves, including people under occupation. The Secretary-General has also reminded the world that "international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law continue to apply, even - and especially - in challenging times like these". With that in mind, I would like to make the following points. First, Israel must not be allowed to continue its path of annexation. Recent developments in Israel indicate that the occupying Power is persistently aiming to formally annex parts of Palestinian land in the West Bank. That intention, coupled with Israel's unrelenting statements, demolition of Palestinian properties and insistent creeping annexation - I repeat, creeping annexation - through its settlement activities, show that the threat of Israeli annexation is real and imminent. These are clear violations of international law, including international humanitarian law, and various Security Council resolutions. Israel's insistence on continuing this path of annexation would demolish any prospect of peace, destabilize regional stability and ultimately undermine the security interests of Israel itself. We therefore urge the Security Council to stand by its solemn mandate to maintain international peace and security and halt Israel's illegitimate actions in the West Bank. The Security Council must make its stance clear. Secondly, Israel has the legal obligation to safeguard the lives and safety of the people under its occupation. Instead of pursuing the vicious objective of formally annexing Palestinian lands, Israel should be focusing on discharging its international legal obligations. Unfortunately, that is not the case. Based on figures from the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, since 5 March Israel has demolished at least 53 Palestinian properties, conducted hundreds of arrests and raids, killed 3 Palestinians and injured another 52 persons. Not only are these measures illegal; they also clearly undermine efforts to address the pandemic. Technical coordination between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities is a necessity during this crisis. This, however, does not absolve Israel of its legal obligation to take all necessary measures to enable Palestinians to better cope with COVID-19. Israel must ensure that Palestinians have the required medical facilities and equipment. It must also provide unhindered humanitarian access and stop all punitive and illegal actions against Palestinians, including the Gaza blockade. I also concur with Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov on the need for Israel to release Palestinian detainees from Israeli prisons, in particular during the COVID-19 pandemic. Thirdly, I turn to the need to ensure the availability of necessary assistance to the Palestinians. Palestine is facing immense challenges, including limited health- system capacity and a serious fiscal situation resulting from the occupying Power withholding Palestinian revenues. The public health implications of the outbreak of the virus could be catastrophic, not only in Gaza but also in the West Bank, as alluded to by Mr. Mladenov. There is already case of COVID-19 in the refugee camp. I take this opportunity to express my appreciation to all the United Nations agencies, including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well as all donor countries and various civil society organizations working hard to help Palestine cope with this situation. On emergency response funding, the $34 million targeted need for the COVID-19 Inter-Agency Response Plan has yet to be fulfilled. But again, this is only limited to 90 days emergency response funding; it does not cover the larger scope of the problem. I would therefore appeal to the international community to extend support to the Palestinians at this time of heightened need. We are in this crisis together, and only by joining hands can we prevail over it. In closing, let us be reminded that the Security Council has a moral and legal obligation to hold Israel accountable for its illegal actions, and to end its occupation of Palestinian lands. Our objective should remain to achieve the vision of a region where two sovereign States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace, within secured and recognized borders based on those of 4 June 1967. Finally, I once again reaffirm Indonesia's unequivocal solidarity and support of the Palestinian people, particularly during this difficult time. As tomorrow is the start of the holy month of Ramadan, I appeal for peace and for assistance for the people of Palestine. I also echo my Palestinian brother - now is the time for the occupying Power to be humane and have a heart.
