Mr. Voronkov: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on this
important topic. I would also like very warmly to
welcome the presence of Ms. Azoulay at this meeting,
the new Director-General of UNESCO.

In particular in situations of armed conflict,
terrorists today are not only destroying lives and
property, but also historical sites and objects. The
goal is obvious: to undermine national identity and
international law. Because heritage constitutes a
source of identity and cohesion not only for particular
communities but for the world community as a whole,
when terrorist groups target world heritage sites it is
an attack on our common historical roots and cultural
diversity. Additionally, the looting and illicit trafficking
of cultural objects lead to the financing of terrorism
and criminal networks.

The protection of cultural heritage has therefore
become a vitally important task for the international
community. Awareness of this matter has grown
considerably over the past several years. Resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) established the link
between the illicit trafficking of cultural objects and the
financing of terrorism. Importantly, these resolutions
have put in place a worldwide moratorium on the trade
in cultural objects originating from Iraq, as of6 August
1990, and from Syria, as of 15 March 2011.

The Security Council, in resolution 2347 (2017),
adopted in March, focused specifically on cultural
heritage, highlighting the protection of cultural
heritage as an issue ofpeace and security. Similarly, the
General Assembly in its resolution 70/291, on the fifth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, expressed concern that terrorists may benefit
from transnational organized crime in some regions,
including from the trafficking of cultural property,
and condemned the destruction of cultural heritage
by terrorist groups. In resolution 70/109, the General
Assembly deplored attacks

"on religious places and shrines and cultural sites
in violation of international law, in particular
human rights and humanitarian law, including any
deliberate destruction of relics and monuments"
(General Assembly resolution 70/109, para. 3).

There is already a strong international legal
and normative framework to address these crimes.
Resolution 2347 encourages Member States to ratify
the UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, the 1954 Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict, and its two Protocols,
both of which are key instruments for the protection
of cultural property in the event of armed conflict, as
well as in peacetime, through the implementation of
administrative, legal, military and technical measures.

Other important international legal frameworks
include the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; the United Nations
Convention against Corruption; the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism; and the International Guidelines for Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with
Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other
Related Offences.

Protecting our cultural heritage requires us to make
every effort to implement the international legal and
normative framework by strengthening international
cooperation. The all-of-United Nations approach is key
to effective action. There is a need to put a stronger
focus on investigation, cross-border cooperation and
the exchange of information, and on bringing in private-
and public-sector painters, including collectors, art
dealers, auction houses and the tourism sector, to
promote supply-chain integrity and stop the illicit trade
in and sale of cultural property.

The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
through the Inter-Agency Working Group on
Countering the Financing of Terrorism of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, is supporting
Member States' efforts to curb illicit trafficking
through advocacy and capacity-building assistance. For
example, UNESCO and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are already working together, along
with INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization and
other partners, to assist Member States in protecting
cultural heritage and countering trafficking in cultural
property. We have also asked United Nations entities
to propose new projects and would welcome new
proposals by Member States and regional organizations
on how best we can support them in protecting their
cultural heritage.

With the assistance of United Nations entities,
Member States are strengthening their legal frameworks
and criminal justice systems and enhancing their
collaboration to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks
on their cultural heritage. We can and must do more.
The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism stands
ready to do its part.

