We thank France for including this issue on the agenda and for the opportunity to participate in today's open debate. We also thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. On Sunday, 17 May, a new Israeli Government was sworn in. Costa Rica is eager to work with the new Israeli Government based on a long-standing friendship that unites us. We hope that the Government will relaunch and strengthen the peace process in the region through direct and meaningful negotiations between the parties based on international law. Nevertheless, Costa Rica would like to raise its voice and reiterate our profound concern, in particular over certain provisions stated in the coalition agreement among the political parties that formed the incumbent Government regarding the prospect of the annexation by Israel of parts of the occupied Palestinian territories. The agreement to annex significant parts of the West Bank in the occupied Palestinian territory after 1 July would constitute a serious violation of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, the Geneva Conventions and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, negatively impacting the two-State solution, while also halting the renewal of negotiations and threatening the efforts to advance regional peace and security. In that regard, Costa Rica would like to stress four important aspects. First, Costa Rica reiterates that all unilateral actions should be stopped. These measures will only create deeper wounds and further increase the already profound resentment and mistrust that prevail in this conflict. Costa Rica will not recognize any changes to the June 1967 borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed upon by the parties through direct negotiations. Secondly, we call on Israel and Palestine to take steps towards resuming direct, meaningful and fair negotiations, in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions and taking into account the legitimate aspirations and concerns of both parties. Only a solution that is acceptable to both sides will pave the way for sustainable peace, not only for Israel and Palestine but for the whole region. Thirdly, we reiterate our concern about the human rights violations, as well as the acts of terror, violence against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric among the parties. Costa Rica also condemns all acts of violence and the deaths and injuries on both sides. These crimes should be thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators should be held accountable. Finally, we call on the Security Council to fulfil its mandate to maintain international peace and security. On two previous occasions, Israel annexed occupied land: East Jerusalem in 1980 and the Syrian Golan Heights in 1981. On both occasions, the Security Council immediately condemned the annexations, but it did not take measures to oppose Israel's actions. We, the international community, have a legal and political responsibility to defend a rules-based international order and to oppose violations of human rights and of the fundamental principles of international law. In conclusion, Costa Rica remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs. We also remain committed to supporting the Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty and to an end of the occupation that began on 4 June 1967. The two-State solution will resolve all protracted issues, including those related to borders, the status of Jerusalem as the capital of both States and guarantees of equal rights for all inhabitants.
