Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Chef de
Cabinet Viotti and Ambassador Chergui for their
briefings. The document signed by the Secretary-
General and the African Union Chairperson on 19 April
is appropriately entitled the Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We welcome the
strong signal of cooperation and coordination that the
Framework brings, and we support further efforts to
strengthen the partnership on both sides. Each challenge
to peace and security that we face today has a unique
combination of underlying factors.

In Africa, we have many good examples of
international, regional and subregional organizations
coming together in varied ways to tackle them. In
some instances, the United Nations is best placed
to lead a response, as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - where the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has played a critical role in protecting
civilians. In others, the African Union has taken the
lead - critically, in Somalia, where for 10 years the
African Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) has played a vital role in degrading the
threat posed by Al-Shabaab. The bravery and sacrifice
of AMISOM. troops has created a security space
conducive to political progress.

On other issues, the subregion has stepped up
to find solutions, as we saw with the Economic
Community of West African States in The Gambia
and as we look to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to lead in South Sudan. In some cases, the
solutions will evolve, as we saw in Mali and the Central
African Republic, where initial responses by regional
and subregional organizations then transitioned in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In Somalia,
the United Nations provides vital logistical support
to an African Union operation. That flexibility in our
partnership is essential to ensuring the best response
to crises.

In each case and as the Council set forth in
resolution 2320 (2016), we should consider the
comparative advantage of each institution to ensure
the most appropriate and effective response is deployed
to resolve conflict and achieve stability. In order to
assess which solution is best for each situation, we
must enhance our partnership. That means more
joint analysis, more joint planning and more joint
assessments to form a common understanding of crises
and determine the optimal solution.

The recent work of both the United Nations and the
African Union marks a new period in that partnership,
and it is imperative that we find more and better ways
of working together. The African Union's commitment
to financing 25 per cent of the African Union peace
support operations budget is a welcome development
and Mr. Kaberuka and his team have made significant
strides in developing a roadmap to achieve that goal
by 2020. This work is a positive step towards greater
African ownership of peace and security, and a deeper
partnership with the United Nations.

We must continue to explore ways to make our
joint efforts more systematic and we look forward to
discussing that issue with the African Union Peace and
Security Council during our visit to Addis Ababa in
September. We agree with the African Union report,
that in response to some of the most serious threats to
peace and security, the deployment of African Union
peace support operations will be a key requirement
and will once again demonstrate the African Union's
comparative advantage to deploy where the United
Nations cannot.

We should continue to look at how the United
Nations can best support those missions in order to
combine our strengths to bring about lasting solutions
and peace on the African continent. That includes the
further consideration of options to provide reliable
and sustainable funding for operations but must also
focus on how we conduct those operations. In parallel,
therefore, we should examine joint standards for
reporting, accountability and protection to ensure the
highest standards and most robust oversight of missions
to make them as effective as possible. Those issues will
require further debate and further joint work, we look
forward to engaging with all members of the Security
Council to strengthen and develop our partnership.

