Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres; Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children; and Mr. Smai'l
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their briefings. We also thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a
subject that is of special interest to Uruguay.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2388 (2017),
which reaffirms the importance of resolution 2331
(2016) and goes one step further in the fight against
trafficking in persons, especially in conflict situations.
Uruguay emphatically condemns trafficking in persons
in the broadest sense, as well as related crimes, which
are crimes that aim to exploit an individual and take
advantage of him or her or his or her situation of
vulnerability. This deplorable crime implies disregard
for an individual as a human being, and the debasement
of their human rights and their fundamental freedoms.
It also involves the destruction of their human dignity.

Without going any further, recent press reports
on the sale of slaves in Libya show that this scourge
continues to thrive under our very noses. It is an
aberration that should be unanimously and vigorously
condemned; it cannot and should not be tolerated.

Over the past few years, the proliferation of
armed conflicts and the persecution of ethnic and
religious minorities have brought with them a series
of consequences, including the phenomenon of
unprecedented mass migration and situations of
refugees, internally displaced persons and asylum
seekers, which are precisely the situations that can
be exploited by traffickers of human beings, who
are profiting in the vilest way possible from the
vulnerability and misfortune of these individuals.

Trafficking in persons in situations of conflict is
an issue that is global in reach, because it concerns not
only countries of origin, but also countries of transit
and destination of victims, as well as countries where
criminal networks operate and where those networks'
profits are transferred. Consequently, efforts aimed at
combating trafficking in persons should be undertaken
as a commitment of the international community as a
whole. This is the point on which I wish to focus.

There is a series of initiatives that all States can
promote so as to combat this scourge, whether or not
they are involved in an armed conflict. As can be seen
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/939), of
particular relevance are State policies in taking up the
fight against trafficking in persons and related crimes,
but also migration policies in the area of refugees as
well as judicial cooperation.

The UnitedNations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, constitute the international legal
framework that sets forth obligations and standards
to assist States in developing national instruments
for combating trafficking in persons. Accordingly,
Uruguay would like to congratulate the Governments
of Fiji and Japan for recently becoming parties to the
Convention and the Protocol, and urges those States
that have not yet done so to join them.

The efforts of States should be focused not only
on fighting and combating trafficking in persons
in situations of conflict, but also on guaranteeing
the fundamental rights of victims by strengthening
measures and mechanisms of prevention and protection.
Those persons who are fleeing conflicts not only
move around within the political borders of their own
countries, but they also try to find a better lives across
borders, in other States. As stated in the latest report
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on
this topic, 60 percent of trafficking victims are female
foreigners in the country where they are identified.

Bearing that in mind, as we prepare to start
negotiations on a global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration, Uruguay would like to stress the
principle of non-criminalization ofirregular migration,
providing migrants with the tools they need for coping
in countries of transit and destination, so that they can be
less vulnerable to trafficking in persons. States should
promote and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their status.
In terms of refugees, it is important to ensure that
those who seek refuge * until their applications are
resolved - are provided with the basic means they need
for access to social services of the country in which
they find themselves. In that way, we can take concrete
steps to prevent trafficking in persons.

Positive and inclusive national practices in the
area of refugees and migrants set the right path for the
international community to take in order to combat
trafficking in persons, especially in situations of armed
conflict. In addition, those responsible for such horrific
crimes must be held accountable. In that regard, we
congratulate the Secretary-General for establishing
an investigative team to compile, preserve and store
evidence of acts of terrorism, as well as human-
trafficking activities. We would like to express in this
forum the wholehearted support of Uruguay for this
initiative, and we encourage other States to do the same
and work with the investigative team where necessary.

Finally, I would like to emphasize the importance
of addressing the needs of the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children, by adopting appropriate
and specific measures at the domestic and international
levels. We must acknowledge that we are the ones who

must bring about real change by adopting a broad,
comprehensive and multidimensional approach to the
issues of human trafficking in conflicts. To that end,
determination and political will are necessary. In this
endeavour, the international community can count on
Uruguay's unwavering commitment. The enactment
of, and compliance with, modern legislation that is
inspired in solidarity and international cooperation will
be key for all these practices to be effectively pursued.

