Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I, too, should like to thank Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his presentation. His briefing, which
provided the Council with useful details, and the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2006/361) give us a clear
picture of the situation in Kosovo - a situation that
recent events have made even more disturbing.

Indeed, we are concerned by certain unilateral
statements and initiatives that could threaten to
destabilize the situation on the ground. We refer in
particular to the recent demonstrations against the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which only serve to heighten
needless tension at a time when the international
community is calling for more responsibility,
particularly to give every chance to the political
process, which has just begun, to determine Kosovo's
future status.

Permit me to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen, who is preparing to leave
UNMIK, for his far-sighted activities during the past
few years in a particularly difficult environment.
During his mandate, he was able to carry out and
consolidate activities to combat crime and to promote
economic recovery and the building of a multi-ethnic
society. The Secretary-General's periodic report clearly
indicates the favourable developments noted in recent
months as a result of those activities.

Thanks to the impetus provided by UNMIK,
many initiatives have been undertaken to enable
members of the Serb community and other minorities
to feel that they belong in Kosovo and are living in
peace and security. We must build on those results for
the long term.

During this period, UNMIK satisfactorily
transferred competencies to the provisional
authorities - represented here today by Prime
Minister Ceku - in various areas such as respect for
the rule of law, the police and justice, while retaining
general jurisdiction on those issues. This is now
enabling the Pristina authorities to carry out daily
administration of their own affairs. We are pleased to
note that the recent political changes have not altered
such cooperation, which is being demonstrated at all
levels, including the local level. The commitment of
the new authorities to continue investigating the crimes
committed in March 2004 is an encouraging sign for
the affirmation of justice and the fight against
impunity.

However, those positive developments must be
built upon, because they remain limited. Although the
Secretary-General highlights some areas of progress,
we must note that, since the Security Council's last
meeting on Kosovo (see S/PV.5373), there has been
much work to do in the areas of deepening democracy
and building the rule of law and respect for the rights
of minorities, which remain among UNMIK's top
priorities.

In that regard, we note several sources of
concern. The implementation of the standards must be
a prerequisite for Kosovo's future development. We
must note that, whether it be dialogue with Belgrade,
Serb participation in the political process and in the
Provisional Institutions, economic development, the
strengthening of security or the return of refugees and
displaced persons, there have been too few results so
far. That could compromise the attainment of the
Contact Group's objective of concluding the political
negotiations during 2006.

Only reconciliation and confidence among the
various communities can attain what must remain the
international community's objective: building a
modern, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo in
keeping with the standards established by UNMIK and
in everyone's interests. Thus, we look forward to the
briefing to be made by Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, on the developments
in the political process. Of course, we wish him every
SUCCESS.

