Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me also join colleagues in expressing my appreciation to the Belgian presidency for convening today's debate. I also thank the briefers. My country, Georgia, aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I would like to add the following comments in my national capacity. Transitional justice is an essential building block for the establishment of reconciliation and sustaining peace. But, first, justice needs to be served. Atrocities committed during conflict cannot go unpunished. Only after justice is restored will the wounds of society start to heal. Transitional justice processes are ideally nationally owned and always context-specific, but in the case of my country they reflect not only the domestic reality but the international dimension as well. The Security Council is well aware that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of my country is being violated and that two of Georgia's regions, Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia, continue to be under illegal foreign military occupation. The Georgian Government cannot exercise its jurisdiction over those territories, while international organizations and monitoring mechanisms are also denied access by the occupying Power. Therefore, impunity continues, and we have seen gross violations of human rights against ethnic Georgians, including restrictions on their freedom of movement, access to health care and education in their native language; kidnappings; arbitrary detentions; and deprivation of life. The only mechanism available to us is to uphold the rule of law at both the national and international levels. To that end, Georgia recognizes the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice and reaffirms its support for the primacy of the peaceful settlement of disputes. Georgia actively cooperates with the Court in investigating crimes committed during the Russian aggression in 2008, which represents the first- ever case of the Court entering Europe's legal geography. We are also engaged at the regional level. Georgia has submitted two inter-State applications to the European Court of Human Rights against Russia - one concerning the August 2008 military aggression and continuous occupation of its territories and the other concerning Russia's administrative practice of harassing, arresting, detaining, assaultingand murdering Georgian citizens living in the occupied territories, as well as along the occupation line. We hope that, after more than a decade, the alleged crimes will effectively be investigated and justice served, thereby paving the way for reconciliation, rebuilding and sustaining peace. In that regard, we call on the international community to take a consistent and firm stance, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international law.
