Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you, Madam
President, for giving us this opportunity to discuss what
could be a consequence of this major epidemiological
crisis, namely, the undermining of all the achievements
that have been the product of lengthy work by the
United Nations and our three peacekeeping missions in
West Africa. While today this may be about Liberia, we
have to be very attentive to what could happen in C6te
d'Ivoire or perhaps even in Mali. For now, however, I
shall focus on Liberia.

Human tragedies are unfolding on an unprecedented
scale in Liberia. At the same time, Liberia is a country
to which 11 years ago we deployed a peacekeeping
operation. Despite a certain degree of fragility, I think
we can say that the Mission has accomplished real
progress on the path towards peace and stability. I
believe this is an opportunity to thank all staff members
for their commitment.

Let us recall the history - a century of systemic
exclusion, decades of dysfunction, 14 years of
successive civil war, each year more brutal than the
previous one. But today there are achievements. Yes,
they are precarious, but they are significant: the return
to constitutional order in 2006, a modest but significant
expansion of the economy and access by the population
to the most basic services. We can say that Liberia is on
the path towards transformation, and this is where the
Ebola crisis changes all prospects. A whole series of
phenomena are developing. I witnessed them first-hand
when I visited a month ago to inspect the status of our
Mission to see just what the problems were.

First, political and social divisions are widening;
the public health system is on the verge of collapse; the
economy is coming to a standstill as civilian flights
have halted and fewer ships are docking in Monrovia;
and certain businesses - logging, mining - have
stopped or packed up because the owners have decided
to relocate outside of the country during the crisis. In
sum, the prospects and impacts on the most vulnerable
populations are deteriorating.

We have been addressing the agenda that the
Council adopted in 2012 to promote political reform
and national reconciliation and assist the country,
despite remaining divisions, in gradually expanding its
political sphere and fostering improved understanding
on the part of the Government, thereby promoting
State-building in the interest of its citizens.

Nevertheless, I believe the crisis has demonstrated
the crucial nature of those tasks. While they are in fact
under way, they have not yet achieved results.
One could imagine that such an enormous
crisis could bring people together, as long as serious
communication on transparent decision-making takes
place, as long the allocation of resources is transparent
and as long as all of those issues are addressed.
Unfortunately, however, it must be admitted that
there is major and growing distrust on the part of
the population towards State institutions. Questions
directed at leadership have resulted in certain changes,
including resignations by key Government officials.

We have also seen in the media that a strengthened
commitment on the part of the Government is necessary
regarding health care workers, some of whom are on
strike and many of whom, I am happy to say, are working
with courage and determination despite conditions that,
one must admit, are truly appalling.

More broadly speaking, the entire health care
system is crumbling. Women are dying in childbirth due
to lack of care. People are dying from malaria because
no health care is available. Children risk dying from
curable diseases because the vaccination campaigns
have been suspended. There is a widening crisis in
Liberia whose consequences are difficult to gauge.

It is also true that the Ebola crisis has led to
noticeable political tension and a degree of uncertainty.
The Council will know that elections were to have
taken place this very day. Clearly, it was not an option.
The decision was taken to postpone them. Furthermore,
there is a debate in a Liberia regarding the nature of the
political and legal body authorized to take that decision.

For the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the importance is to continue to urge leaders
and political actors to seek agreement in order to make
progress in protecting public health and to enable the
continuing operation of the legislative branch.

The Council is also aware that President
Johnson-Sirleaf requested Parliament to extend her
powers in the context of the state of emergency that was
decreed in August. She also sought ways and means
to ensure that the State could take over private assets
and sometimes even limit the use of such assets in the
interest of security and the public health system. Again,
there was no agreement in Parliament on whether to
grant or to not grant those extraordinary emergency
powers to the executive branch.

In terms of UNMIL, what is important is to respect
the rule of law and the rights of the citizens. That has
prompted us to take a closer look at the changes being
considered - the restrictions that could potentially
be established - to ensure that such measures do not
extend beyond the absolutely necessary tasks of such
an emergency. That requires the ongoing commitment
of all Liberian stakeholders, bearing in mind the goal
of seeking consensus each and every time, as well
as the agreement of all, in order to ensure effective
governance and a Government that is accountable and
transparent, all the while ensuring the protection of the
population from the further spread of Ebola.

Fortunately, up to now there has not been any
tangible deterioration on the security front. There was
tension in July and August. There was the incident at
West Point where, according to media reports, a 15-year
old adolescent died after being wounded by Liberian
army soldiers. The situation has somewhat improved
since that time, but it needs close follow-up. Public
discontent remains high, and any public discontent
anywhere represents an additional risk factor in terms
of security.

We are working very closely with Liberia's
security institutions to plan security operations that
may be deemed necessary in the context of a state of
emergency. As the Council is aware, the army has been
removed from domestic security operations. Instead
it is concentrating efforts on building humanitarian
infrastructure and securing Liberia's still highly porous
borders.

I would like to add a few words regarding
the situation in Liberia, concerning the human
consequences ofthe crisis. When I visited Monrovia one
month ago, I was struck by the fact that people did not
touch each other any more. People do not shake hands
any more - they wave at one another, at a distance at
best. That is taking place in a complicated, complex
society that has suffered and remains deeply divided. It
is a caring and even tactile society. Traditionally people
touch each other and kiss each other. None of that
remains. I believe that is something that should draw
our attention, for the last rites given when a person dies
are a major part of society. Circumstances now dictate
that even when one loves someone, one cannot express
one's love or affection or be close to them. I believe that
is causing a lot of pain.

I return to the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). Until now, no United Nations staff had
been affected. However, despite all of the vigilance,
a Liberian member of the Mission died at the end of
the September. The cause was most likely of Ebola,
although we are not entirely sure. As the Council is
aware, last night an international staff member of
UNMIL died in Germany after having been diagnosed
and then evacuated to Europe on 8 October. There are
now 39 other UNMIL staff members, half of whom are
military staff personnel, who are quarantined or under
close watch.

I think what needs to be understood clearly, and it is
the reason that I visited Monrovia, is that our missions
are made up of men and women who have families,
people they love and people who love them. They have
the legitimate expectation of being able to return home
once their mission has ended. We must continue to do
everything possible to ensure that they can fulfil their
role and ensure that the Mission can again fulfil its role
in maintaining peace and security. It is complicated
work. The maximum possible guarantees must be
provided in terms of treatment in the country and
evacuation - as required. Of course, that is something
on which we need to garner the utmost support from the
members of the Council and from the group of nations
that comprise the international community.

In conclusion, I will mention the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire and in Mali. Fortunately, at this point no
cases have been reported in either country. The two
Governments have taken extremely robust measures
to prevent the spread of Ebola in their territories or,
if that were to happen, to prepare themselves for it. It
should be noted that cote d'Ivoire and Mali have much
more advanced health-care systems than most of their
neighbours.

Extensive preparations have been undertaken by the
United Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to respond to any potential outbreak of
the epidemic, including developing emergency plans,
operational plans based on a variety of scenarios, as
well as business continuity plans for the missions if,
in spite of all efforts, there is an accident. They have
put in place plans for medical isolation and treatment
facilities, all with the support of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, with which the
cooperation has been excellent, and other stakeholders.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
deep gratitude to all our personnel who, in tragic
circumstances and an environment whose danger we
are taking the full measure of, do their jobs in spite
of everything with courage and determination. In
expressing my sadness for all the victims, including
the victim we have been personally mourning since last
night, I think we owe them assurances that the United
Nations is doing everything it can in this collaborative
effort to try to keep things from getting even worse.
