Mr. Windsor (Australia): Australia is very
grateful for this opportunity to restate its commitment
to strong and effective measures to protect and
rehabilitate children from harm and exploitation in
situations of armed conflict. Australia worked to ensure
the renewal of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict during the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly and we commend
Ms. Coomaraswamy's progress in mainstreaming this
issue.

Australia recognizes the importance of effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and, to that end, in September 2008
endorsed the Paris Principles and Guidelines on
Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups and committed funding to UNICEF for its work
on child soldiers, particularly in Sri Lanka.
Australia welcomes recent progress in
implementing resolution 1612 (2005) and in
operationalizing the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. We are pleased that the mechanism has
now been adopted in all situations listed in the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2009/158). That
achievement will be further advanced by ensuring that
all parties develop concrete, time-bound action plans
that meet international standards. We commend the
recent real progress in halting the recruitment and use
of child soldiers.

However, more remains to be done. Australia is
particularly concerned about ongoing reports of the
forced recruitment and use of child soldiers by the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka and of
the continued recruitment and use of child soldiers by
the national forces and other parties in Myanmar. The
current situation in Sri Lanka only serves to underscore
the serious impact that that conflict has on children. We
owe it to all children in situations of armed conflict to
strengthen the current monitoring and reporting
process.

Australia reiterates that there should be no
hierarchy of treatment amongst the six grave
violations. Australia is very concerned at the large
number of reported sexual violations contained in the
Secretary-General's report. We are particularly
concerned at the significant number of reported cases
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Clearly, rape
and other forms of sexual violence are endemic in
many conflict situations worldwide. The threat that this
poses to peace and security was recognized by the
Council when it adopted resolution 1820 (2008). The
Council should consider the feasibility of a new
resolution to expand the scope of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism to include, at a minimum, rape
and other forms of sexual violence as a trigger for
listing.

We recognize that the mechanism should be
expanded only if it enhances the protection of children
in armed conflict and the effectiveness of resolution
1612 (2005). A well-supported and adequately
resourced Working Group is crucial to the mechanism's
effectiveness. That would not only ensure that the
Working Group is well placed to respond to any new
situations that may be included in its agenda, but also
assist its ability to respond promptly to rapidly
evolving situations of urgent concern.
International efforts to address the problem of
children in armed conflict must be accompanied by
effective action at the national level. Concerned States,
including Myanmar, should allow United Nations
access to listed non-State parties for the purpose of
discussing possible child protection measures.
Effective domestic legislation, including legislation
criminalizing rape and other sexual crimes, is of
paramount importance. We encourage the adoption by
concerned parties of national action plans on sexual
violence and commend the efforts of parties in Cote
d'Ivoire in that regard.

With regard to the broader issue of violence
against children, I am pleased to announce that today,
the Australian Government released "Time for Action",
a major report prepared by the Australian National
Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children. The Australian Government simultaneously
announced its intention to move immediately to
advance 18 of the 20 priority recommendations of the
report. The Government will further consider the
remaining two recommendations within the context of
developing a national plan to reduce violence against
women and children.

Australia encourages the Working Group to
utilize the full range of tools available to it in
responding to situations of concern. Given the valuable
and constructive results of the Special Representative's
field visits, including her recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, there may be real merit in the
Group's visiting situations in which persistent
violations occur or in which there has been no reaction
to the Group's recommendations. Persistent violators
should not go unpunished. National and international
accountability is at the heart of resolution 1612 (2005)
and will have a significant deterrent effect.

In conclusion, the commitment of all Member
States is required to realize the full potential of
resolution 1612 (2005) and to further the fight against
impunity. We must work together to fight the scourge
of violence against children in all its forms. Australia
remains firmly dedicated to that goal.

