Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, to the Council today
and to congratulate Ukraine's chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I thank him for his briefing outlining the
priorities of the OSCE for 2013.

The security challenges we are facing today clearly
show the importance of the close partnership between
the United Nations and regional bodies in maintaining
international peace and stability. The Republic of
Korea welcomes the OSCE's increasing contribution
to addressing global threats and challenges, as well as
its greater readiness to enhance cooperation with the
Security Council. The OSCE's expertise and its own
experience of overcoming the Cold War and division
have enabled it to become a more reliable partner of the
Security Council. We also note the priorities set out by
the Chairperson-in-Office. In the light of that, I would
like to highlight several points today.

First, we welcome the OSCE's greater focus on
non-proliferation. That is an area where I believe
we can expand our ongoing cooperation. As the
largest regional organization, the OSCE has served
as a torchbearer in leading the global fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Moreover, it is also commendable that the OSCE is
playing an important role in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), incorporating it as a priority in
its work programme for 2012 to 2015. As the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), I believe that such regional efforts are crucial
in implementing, complementing and supporting the
existing endeavours of the 1540 Committee. In line
with that, I plan to exchange views with the members
of the OSCE on that matter at the meeting of the Forum
for Security and Cooperation to be held in Vienna
next week. I am confident that it will serve as a timely
opportunity to further mutual cooperation towards the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Secondly, we welcome and encourage the efforts
of the OSCE to resolve the protracted conflicts in the
region. While the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, I recognize that the OSCE can
effectively contribute to addressing regional conflicts
while complementing and reinforcing the work of the
Security Council. We commend the OSCE for its active
engagement in the political process of the comprehensive
settlement of such conflicts, particularly in the South
Caucasus and Transdniestria. We encourage the OSCE
to continue its efforts in that regard, with its intimate
understanding of the political, social, cultural and
economic underpinnings of the conflicts.

Thirdly, the Republic of Korea applauds the OSCE
for its firm commitment to counter transnational
threats such as terrorism, organized crime, illicit drug
trafficking and cyber threats. Particularly worthy of note
among such challenges are the threats stemming from
cyberspace. In an attempt to effectively address that
challenge, the Korean Government will host the Seoul
conference on cyberspace in October. We are confident
that it will be a good opportunity to explore constructive
ways to build a safe, reliable and open cyberspace. The
efforts of the OSCE to develop confidence-building
measures in cyberspace can provide valuable insight
for the deliberations at the conference.

Lastly, let me briefly comment on the Helsinki
process of the OSCE and the vision for peace and
cooperation in North-East Asia. The concept of
cooperative, comprehensive and indivisible security
and confidence- and security-building measures of
the Helsinki process still has special significance
for other regions of the world, especially in North-
East Asia. In North-East Asia, where overarching
multilateral security institutions are markedly absent,
the level of political and security cooperation remains
at a nascent stage, despite the high level of economic
interdependence. Against that backdrop, the Korean
Government seeks to create a North-East Asian peace
and cooperation initiative, namely, the Seoul process.
It would involve countries in the region extending their
cooperation from non-political issues, such as climate
change, to political areas on the basis of trust. As we
take this trust initiative forward, the Helsinki process
of the OSCE can be a useful guide for the promotion of
peace and prosperity in North-East Asia as well.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea would like
to express its appreciation for the OSCE's valuable
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security and hopes that it will further strengthen
its close cooperation with the Security Council in
addressing global threats and challenges.

