Mr. Finlayson (New Zealand): New Zealand
commends the continuing Security Council leadership
on addressing the threat of foreign terrorist fighters.
It is a complex and multifaceted challenge, and the
Council's role in providing strategic direction and
coordination, marshalling United Nations resources and
outlining concrete measures is essential. In particular,
the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) was a milestone
in our collective efforts to combat foreign terrorist
fighters. We welcome today's presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/ll as a means offurther focusing Member
States' efforts to implement this important resolution.

New Zealand agrees wholeheartedly with the report
on foreign terrorist fighters prepared by the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, when it states
that

"[t]he most effective policy against foreign
terrorist fighters is to prevent their radicalization,
recruitment and travel" (S/2015/358, para. 46).

The most successful responses will contain measures
that address all three of these challenges. And yet, it is
important to recognize that there can be no one-size-fits-
all response. States will need to use a diverse range of
approaches to ensure the appropriate balance is struck,
depending on their context, including whether they are
source, transit or destination countries.

In New Zealand, as a source country with a small,
but evident foreign terrorist fighter issue, we have
strengthened our national framework in response to
resolution 2178 (2014). We ensure that our law penalizes
recruitment and that our enforcement agencies have the
power, either on their own or in cooperation with other
States, to prevent would-be foreign terrorist fighters
from travelling. However, the focus of our efforts is on
preventing radicalization in the first place.

We agree that, in preventing radicalization,
education and countering extremist messages are
essential. We note the significant role of the Internet in
radicalization and the need for education in cybersafety
to protect young and vulnerable individuals. But more
than that, New Zealand's experience is that the most
effective outcomes derive from working closely with
and alongside our communities.

For New Zealand, tackling the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon is much more than a security issue.
Our national approach to countering violent extremism
is built on supporting individuals and communities,
continuing to have a positive stake in our society and
rejecting ideologies that promote violence. The key
is to be inclusive, not exclusive - to integrate, not
marginalize. We have worked to develop leadership
programmes, provide counselling support and develop
safety nets for those at risk - in short, to address the
specific drivers of radicalization for individuals and
communities.

We accept, however, that countering violent
extremism cannot be the whole story. We have to tackle
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters, including those in
transit or about to travel, through more robust means. We
need access to better real-time information, especially
at our borders, as is made clear in the reports of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(S/2015/338, annex) and the Al-Qaida Monitoring
Team (S/2015/358, annex). That can be achieved only
through States' efforts to improve intra- and inter-State
cooperation, and by utilizing the tools and platforms
provided by INTERPOL and other organizations
working on the issue of foreign terrorist fighters. For
States with small populations, foreign fighters may also
have a disproportionate impact on their society, but so
too will modest and well-managed technical assistance.
In the Asia-Pacific region, my country is working hard
to share its best practices relevant to the foreign-fighter
threat. We have assisted many States, particularly on
the issues of border control, money-laundering and
community engagement and policing.

We welcome the United Nations counter-terrorism
committees' continuing work on risk assessment and
capacity-building and support the vision outlined in
today's presidential statement on how those bodies
can better coordinate their work. The Council should
also bear in mind the very real and understandable
constraints that small developing countries face in
implementing foreign terrorist fighter frameworks.
Capacity-building is essential, but in some cases there
may be inherent limits on what is appropriate and
reasonable to expect of very small States.

In conclusion, resolution 2178 (2014) is the start ofa
long, collective journey working steadily, cooperatively
and successfully against this threat. Today's briefing
is a timely opportunity to take stock of the work done
so far and to re-focus and re-energize our efforts to
implement resolution 2178 (2014).

