Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Russian Federation for having convened
today's debate on the situation in Haiti and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
Ambassador Sandra Honore, for her detailed briefing
to the Security Council.

Colombia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti.

At the outset, allow me to extend the condolences of
Colombia to the people and the Government of Haiti and
to the loved ones of the hundreds of victims claimed by
Hurricane Matthew as it swept through the Caribbean.
We would also like to offer our solidarity in the light
of the immense damage. Colombia sought to help ease
the painful situation being endured by the Haitian
population by donating emergency humanitarian aid,
consisting of food and hygiene kits, which arrived on
the coast of Port-au-Prince today on our national naval
vessel 7August.
We would like to acknowledge the efforts of
Haiti's Provisional Electoral Council in accepting
most of the recommendations of the Independent
Electoral Evaluation Commission, which will allow
for presidential elections to be held. In that regard, we
reaffirm the importance of ensuring that the elections
are free, fair, peaceful and fully respectful of democratic
values and principles. Colombia is making an appeal
to ensure that the devastation caused by Hurricane
Matthew does not lead to unnecessary delays in the
revised election timetable. It is crucial to maintain the
rule of law in Haiti, and it is up to its Government and
leaders to honour that commitment. Colombia shares
the concerns outlined in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/753) with regard to the slow progress being
made in consolidating the rule of law, as well as to
the social and economic inequalities that have led to
a significant increase in the number of protests and
strikes since April.

We are also concerned that, four months before the

deadline date for implementation, only 58 per cent of the
development plan for 2012-2016 has been implemented.
The humanitarian challenges that Haiti faces are being
exacerbated by the impact of the latest natural disaster
and the increase in the number of suspected cases of
cholera and the deaths resulting from the disease. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's intention
to prepare a package of material assistance and support
measures for Haitians who have been directly affected.
Colombia believes that the advances made in the areas
of security, rule of law, national reconciliation and
sustainable development, including the fight against
joblessness and poverty, are mutually reinforcing.

Once again, we highlight the invaluable work done
by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
and in particular the leadership of Sandra Honore as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of Mission, to ensure the sustainable well-
being of the Haitian people. Our country reiterates its
position that any decision about the permanence of
MINUSTAH should be taken solely on the basis of the
conditions on the ground, while taking into account the
Mission's contribution to the security and stability of
the Haitian people, thereby avoiding backsliding in the
progress already achieved.

We recognize the important efforts of the Haitian
National Police to increase its numbers, the ground it
covers and its institutional strengthening. Colombia
reaffirms its interest in maintaining its support for
MINUSTAH by sending more Colombian police
officers and by providing advice and training to officers
of the Haitian National Police.

