Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak also on behalf of the European Union
(EU).

First, I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura for his briefing and, above all, the efforts he is
making on the ground with his team. He is putting all
his determination, tenacity and courage into these
efforts, for which we are grateful. I also wish to thank
the Permanent Representative of the United States for
his briefing, as well as our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for his statement.

The European Union would like to see a secure,
stable, democratic, prosperous and unified Iraq in
which human rights are respected. The EU is
committed to Iraq's independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity.

The European Union welcomes both the progress
achieved in improving the security situation and the
steps taken towards national reconciliation with the
adoption of the law on provincial elections, the holding
of which is essential to strengthening democracy and
the rule of law. The European Union takes note of the
adoption of an amendment to that law that stipulates
the conditions for the representation of persons
belonging to minorities. We hope that the elections will
be held as planned in early 2009. As the Secretary-
General has indicated in his reports, the priority
challenge to be met is that of the national
reconciliation and constitutional review process. All of
us in the international community have an important
role to play in helping the Iraqi people.

The European Union approves of the central role
taken by the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and welcomes the progress achieved in
implementing resolutions 1770 (2007) and 1830
(2008). The European Union encourages further close
cooperation between UNAMI and the Iraqi authorities.
In that regard, the European Union would like UNAMI
to continue advising and supporting the Iraqi
Government on its political reforms, which, as I have
just mentioned, represent the major challenge.

The European Union remains concerned about the
human rights situation, in particular that of women,
children and persons belonging to ethnic and religious
minorities. The EU welcomes the commitment made by
the Iraqi Government to take action in that area. The
EU also supports the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and reiterates the need to
provide special protection to all vulnerable groups.

The European Union commends the work of the
United Nations with regard to the humanitarian
situation in Iraq. The European Union is concerned
about the situation of displaced Iraqis inside Iraq and
Iraqi refugees in neighbouring countries, in particular
in Jordan and Syria. Those countries deserve our
gratitude for the hospitality and solidarity they are
providing. We reiterate that the Government of Iraq
and the international community have an obligation to
protect and assist displaced Iraqis inside Iraq and in
neighbouring countries by addressing their immediate
and foreseeable needs and ensuring their safety. We
encourage the Iraqi Government to use its resources to
help neighbouring countries to cope with the additional
burden of refugees.

Lastly, notwithstanding the decisions to be taken
with regard to the mandate of the Multinational Force,
the European Union underscores the importance it
attaches to maintaining an adequate level of security
that, as called for by the Secretary-General, enables the
effective functioning of the United Nations in Iraq.
The European Union thus notes with satisfaction
that a number of neighbours and partners in the region

have honoured the commitments undertaken in the
final communique of the Ministerial Conference of the
Neighbouring Countries of Iraq, which was held in
April 2008 in Kuwait, and have increased their
representation in Baghdad. Constructive engagement
by Iraq's neighbours and partners in the region remains
essential for peace and stability. The EU encourages all
of Iraq's neighbours and partners to do the same. The
European Union continues to support the process that
Iraq's neighbours have initiated and is ready to
participate in the forthcoming expanded ministerial
conference.

The European Union would like to actively
participate in efforts to further stabilize Iraq. In
particular, I would like to emphasize the importance of
our renewed commitment as regards the rule of law
through community assistance efforts by the European
Security and Defence Policy Rule of Law Mission and
the bilateral programmes of member States. In that
regard, at the General Affairs Council meeting held on
10 November 2008, European Union member States
agreed to extend the mandate of the European Union
Integrated Rule of Law Mission for Iraq, with effect
from June 2009. That will enable the Mission to
conduct progressive and experimental pilot activities,
where security conditions permit, in the area of the rule
of law on Iraqi territory.

The European Union also welcomes the major
progress made in the negotiations on a cooperation and
trade agreement and expresses its determination to
conclude those negotiations as quickly as possible.
Such an outcome will help to establish the first
contractual relations between the European Union and
Iraq and allow us enter into a structured and regular
political dialogue that is both technical and political.

Finally, the European Union remains committed
to develop its partnership with Iraq in compliance with
the principles of the International Compact with Iraq.
The EU welcomes the meeting held last May in
Stockholm for the first International Compact with Iraq
Annual Review Conference. The EU encourages the
progress made in its implementation and invites all
parties to honour the commitments made on that
occasion.

