Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea appreciates Nigeria's initiative in convening
this open debate, and we are grateful for your personal
participation in the meeting, Mr. President. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on security sector reform
(SSR).

Security sector reform is a crucial tool for conflict
prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding activities
whose importance when the Security Council considers
peacekeeping and special political missions is growing.
In reality, however, the normative operations for SSR
are often blurred during the operational process. In
order to narrow the differences among the relevant
stakeholders and support SSR more effectively, a
review of SSR strategy should focus on various aspects.

First, the importance of national ownership cannot
be overemphasized. National ownership, however,
presupposes a certain degree of national unity. In
situations where grievances and animosity are not
adequately addressed through reconciliation and
traditional justice mechanisms, security sector reform
cannot be expected to produce its desired effects.
It can hardly be successful if it lacks broad support.
Host Governments must therefore prioritize national
reconciliation with a view to creating an environment
conducive to sustainable security sector reform.

Secondly, security sector reform should be
pursued within the context of the rule of law and good
governance. It is not supposed to be designed to support
specific regimes, but rather to strengthen the security
and judicial systems of societies as a whole. In that
regard, we hope the United Nations and host countries
will seek to maximize their common understanding of
the rationales, goals and strategies for SSR in a country-
specific context.

Thirdly, the concept and scope of SSR continue
to evolve. We should therefore strike a balance
between expansion and concentration from a results-
oriented perspective. In the broader context, SSR is a
coherent element that runs throughout the sequence
of conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development. Given its multifaceted character,
the United Nations is best placed to coordinate both
comprehensive and streamlined responses. The
modalities of the system-wide approach of the United
Nations, including the inter-agency Security Sector
Reform Task Force, should be further developed.
Regional and subregional organizations, as well as
donor communities, should also strengthen their
partnerships in order to achieve optimal outcomes.

Finally, I would once again like to thank the
Nigerian presidency for leading the Council towards
the adoption to come of its first-ever draft resolution
on security sector reform, in the wake of the 2011
presidential statement on SSR (S/PRST/2011/19),
also the work of the Nigerian presidency. We believe
the Security Council should continue to develop the
concept of SSR as a key element in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

