Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): We all know that
today's meeting takes place in uncertain times in
the Sudan. The African Union Peace and Security
Council issued a clear statement two days ago. Recent
developments and what happens over the coming days
have an impact on Darfur and, potentially, the wider
region. The Council has to consider the implications
of these important political developments. I will
therefore divide my intervention into two parts: first,
on the wider situation in the Sudan; and, secondly, on
the impact of that wider situation on Darfur and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

On 11 April, we witnessed the climax of four
months of peaceful protests demanding change and a
better future for the Sudan. Let us admire the bravery
and determination of the Sudanese people, which saw
the removal of a President who had headed a brutal
regime for 30 years. However, the legitimate change
that the Sudanese people are demanding has not yet
been achieved. The Transitional Military Council must
listen to the people, who continue to protest.

First and foremost, the authorities must protect
the ongoing peaceful protests and continue to
exercise restraint. The Sudanese authorities have a
responsibility to uphold human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the right to peaceful assembly.
There must be no violence and no forced removal of
protesters. We are at a moment when the Sudanese
authorities have an opportunity to build trust with their
people and the international community. They should
seize this opportunity and demonstrate that they are
genuinely committed to ending the Sudan's history of
violent repression.

The people are saying that the Sudan needs a
political system that is inclusive, respectful of human
rights and the rule of law and properly constitutionally
rooted. The United Kingdom stands with the Sudanese
people and supports the African Union's call for the
Sudan to return swiftly to civilian rule. All need to
work together in an inclusive political transition. In
particular, women have played a critical role in the
protest movement. Their contributions will be vital
in the political transition process and the subsequent
civilian-led Government.

From the beginning, the protestors have demanded
accountability. The United Kingdom supports their
call. We believe that there must be justice for the
crimes committed by individuals within the former
Government of the Sudan. It is right that the Sudanese
people should hold those individuals accountable. Of
course, we fully support the International Criminal
Court and expect the full cooperation of all States with
the Court and its Prosecutor.

The latest political developments have a direct
impact on Darfur. We, like others, are concerned by
reports of violent clashes in several locations in recent
days, which have resulted in civilian death and injury.
In particular, on 15 April, as reported by UNAMID, in
the Kalma internally displaced persons (IDP) camp, 16
IDPs were killed. I have a question for the Joint Special
Representative for Darfur. What was the response of
the two UNAMID formed police units stationed in
Kalma to that incident? We have also seen the negative
impact of recent political turmoil on the Darfur peace
process, which is currently stalled. It is vital for the
future stability of Darfur, but also the wider Sudan
and the region, that we as a Council maintain our
expectation that progress will be made in finding a
peaceful solution to the root causes of the conflict.

Throughout UNAMID's drawdown, the United
Kingdom has consistently called for a gradual and
sensible approach, guided by the situation on the ground,
and we share the Secretary-General's assessment that
ongoing political and economic uncertainty pose a
number of challenges for a responsible exit ofUNAMID
and the transition to peacebuilding. The international
community must not abandon its responsibility to
ensure that the handover of UNAMID responsibilities
and assets is done appropriately and to those with the
capacity to manage the ongoing tasks. There remains
a high level of need in Darfur, and the root causes of
conflict have not yet been resolved.

An immediate step that the Transitional Military
Council could take to build confidence and alleviate
need would be to abolish the burdensome system of
approvals and permits that hinders the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We need to think carefully
about how best we tackle those issues after the eventual
departure of UNAMID, in particular with regard to
what sort of African Union and United Nations presence
on the ground is needed to provide the expertise and
programmatic ability and ensure a proper flow of
financial support to address ongoing challenges. We
therefore encourage the African Union and the United
Nations to make recommendations to the Council on
what those future arrangements should be.

The Sudan is at a crossroads. The Transitional
Military Council faces a choice. It should listen to the
Sudanese people, respect their legitimate demand for
civilian rule and enable the transition to a system that
respects human rights, democracy and fundamental
freedoms, and delivers accountability. Making that
choice would mean a new Sudan. It would be a Sudan
respected in the international community of nations.
It would bring support and resources from across the
globe, both to underpin the resolution of long-standing
peace processes, including in Darfur, and to support
the Sudan's own economic and social development. It
would herald a new chapter in the Sudan's relations with
its region and the world. The people of the Sudan have
shown incredible bravery and perseverance in their
dignified demands for an end to a brutal, unaccountable
regime that has impoverished its own people through
decades of economic mismanagement. The Sudanese
people have forced change in their country. I salute
them. Let us stand by them.

