The President (spoke in Spanish): I Should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Uganda, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Butagira
(Uganda) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document 8/2006/861, which
contains the text of a letter dated 3 November 2006
from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes efforts
aimed at bringing an end to the long-running
conflict in northern Uganda, and is following
closely the Juba talks process between the
Government of the Republic of Uganda and the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). The conflict with
the LRA has caused the displacement of up to 2
million people and the death of about 100,000
people in the region, as well as leading to the
death of eight United Nations peacekeepers.

"The Security Council welcomes the
cessation of hostilities which took effect on
29 August 2006, and was renewed on
lNovember 2006, and stresses the importance,
for peace and stability in the region, of both
parties respecting that cessation of hostilities. The
Security Council commends the Government of
Southern Sudan for facilitating this agreement,
and for its efforts to further a long-term and
peaceful solution to the conflict, and calls on all
parties to commit themselves fully to this end.

"The Security Council demands that the
LRA immediately release all women, children
and other non-combatants, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict, and that the peace
process be concluded expeditiously.

"The Security Council will continue to
monitor developments closely. It invites United
Nations Member States to support efforts to bring
an end to this conflict so that peace and security
can be restored to the region and the rule of law
re-established, and to ensure that those
responsible for serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are brought to
justice.

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing provided by the Secretariat on
7 November 2006, which it will consider further,
in particular in light of progress in the Juba talks
process. It recalls the briefing provided on
19 April 2006 by the Ugandan Foreign and
Defence Ministers, the visit to Uganda of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict in June 2006, and
the briefings by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs on northern Uganda on
20 April and 15 September 2006.

"The Security Council welcomes the
announcement by the Government of Uganda of
the establishment of a Joint Monitoring
Committee to oversee the delivery of a prioritized
Emergency Action Plan to tackle the
humanitarian issues in northern Uganda, looks
forward to further progress on improving the
living conditions for civilians in northern
Uganda, measurable against clear benchmarks,
and urges Member States to maintain their
support to these efforts. It also welcomes the
Government of Uganda's work so far on its
06-61854
Peace, Recovery and Development Plan to
address the long-term needs of the region."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2006/45.
06-61854

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.

