Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express my satisfaction at the
Council's meeting today under the presidency of the
Republic of Korea. We wish to thank you, Sir, for
convening this general debate on the subject of protection
for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in
conflict situations. The delegation of Egypt hopes that
these deliberations will help to strengthen the Security
Council's role in providing the necessary protection to
refugees and displaced persons in conflict situations.

The Government of Egypt fully appreciates the
activities of many humanitarian agencies and
organizations. We are especially grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Akashi and the representatives of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Children's Fund
and the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their statements, which touched on several points that I
hope the Security Council will take under advisement.

In recent years, numerous radical changes have
occurred on the international scene and it is important to
stress those that have taken place in the nature of the
conflicts addressed by the Security Council. In that
connection, it can be said that the conflicts of the 1990s
are characterized by the following features:

First, these conflicts are often internal, intra-State
rather than inter-State. Secondly, the parties to a conflict
sometimes disregard standards of international law, in
particular of international humanitarian law. They even
attack, by every means available, civilians from every
walk of life and persist in such actions when they realize
that they can do so with impunity vis-a-vis the
international community. Thirdly, innocent civilians are
deliberately targeted, which may explain the recent
UNHCR estimate that 90 per cent of victims in all
conflicts are civilians rather than military personnel.
Fourthly, some of the belligerent parties today feel that
humanitarian assistance is a legitimate objective which
they can therefore attempt to control and profit by.
Fifthly, humanitarian assistance workers today are easy
prey for the belligerent parties and the number of such
workers killed or wounded in attacks has accordingly
risen. Sixthly, United Nations peacekeeping forces
experience many difficulties when their mandates include
the protection of and security for refugees and the flow of
humanitarian aid.

The international community, represented by the
Security Council, should be ever-vigilant and equipped to
meet crises that threaten international peace and security,
and in particular those that lead to such deplorable
humanitarian situations as the expulsion by force of
civilians who are compelled to take refuge in
neighbouring States.

 

We reaffirm the importance for the Security Council
to take into consideration the following factors when
drafting the mandate of any operation that includes a
military component in a crisis with humanitarian
dimensions:

First, the Council should consider the crisis from a
comprehensive perspective and in an integrated manner,
analysing the deep-rooted causes of the conflict and the
circumstances of its outbreak. It should not limit its actions
to remedies of some of the conflict's consequences, such as
its humanitarian repercussions.

Secondly, a distinction must be drawn between the
responsibility, nature and objectives of the peacekeeping
operation and the nature and objectives of humanitarian
assistance.

Thirdly, the mandate should include special provisions
and arrangements for the voluntary return of refugees and
their resettlement and compensation for loss of property.

Fourthly, it is important to specify and determine the
rules of engagement that form the basis of relations
between United Nations forces and the parties to an armed
conflict. In that connection, we would point to the
important report submitted by Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjold in August 1958, two years after the
establishment of the United Nations Emergency Force
(UNEF) by the General Assembly. That report defined the
limits of actions of self-defence by United Nations forces:

(spoke in English)

"...A reasonable definition seems to have been
established in the case of UNEF, where the rule is
applied that men engaged in the operation may never
take the initiative in the use of armed force, but are
entitled to respond with force to an attack with arms,
including attempts to use force to make them
withdraw from positions which they occupy under
orders from the Commander, acting under the
authority of the Assembly and within the scope of its
resolutions."

(spoke in Arabic)

It is paradoxical that rules laid down for traditional
peacekeeping operations created by the General Assembly
expressly included the defense of the mandate conferred
upon the forces. Today, unfortunately, in the much more
difficult and complex conditions such as those faced by the
United Nations force in Bosnia, we have seen the
Security Council establish such forces, pursuant to
Chapter VII of the Charter, while the world watches on
its television screens the injury, humiliation and contempt
suffered by the international forces in Bosnia without
their having the ability or competence to defend
themselves or their mandate.

That is unacceptable, and it must not happen again.
One conspicuous example of such an unacceptable
situation is the experience of the "safe areas" established
in Bosnia. Beginning on 16 April 1993, the Security
Council adopted a number of resolutions declaring certain
areas to be "safe areas" in which the parties to the
conflict were to refrain from armed attacks and other
hostile acts. But peacekeeping forces were unable to
protect the "safe areas" and the Security Council was
unable to take any action to assert the peacekeepers' right
of self-defence or their right to protect their mission and
their mandate.

The Egyptian delegation therefore proposes an
overall review of the rules of engagement of
peacekeeping operations in order to articulate them more
fully in such a way as to address situations the Council
could face in the future. As Mr. Akashi said a moment
ago, the mandate assigned to a peacekeeping operation
should be matched by the functions entrusted to it.

Turning to Africa, we note the constant growth of
the humanitarian dimension of the problems of that
continent. In Somalia, for example, the central
Government collapsed in 1991; civil war ensued, leading
to an exodus of great numbers of refugees to
neighbouring States. This problem persists to this day and
can be resolved only when we have identified and
addressed its political causes. We recall too that the
deplorable humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes
region, to which other speakers have referred, cannot be
addressed independent of the persisting elements and
deep-rooted causes of the crisis.
Such crises highlight the problems faced by
international aid workers. Elements here include the
following: First, as noted by the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, protection as
required in each instance must be provided for personnel,
their headquarters, their convoys and their transports.
Secondly, they must have unharnpered access to refugees.
Thirdly, there must be greater coordination between
intergovernmental aid agencies and non-governmental
organizations.

 

It is urgent for the Security Council and the General
Assembly to assume a greater role in responding politically
and, indeed, militarily to these crises. This requires political
will. The Egyptian delegation believes that this can be
achieved. First, we must stress the need for all parties to
respect all international instruments relating to refugees and
international humanitarian activities. Appropriate political
pressure should be brought to bear on the parties to respect
those instruments. All parties bear a collective responsibility
to respect the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949; all
parties to international conflicts must be made to respect
their obligations under the Geneva Conventions. Secondly,
there must be respect for the principles set out in the 1951
United Nations Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees, as relates to the non-refoulement of refugees.

We must also consider defining comprehensive
approaches to humanitarian endeavours, taking into account
the political, economic, military and humanitarian aspects
of conflict areas, in full consultation with all actors on the
humanitarian stage. We must make every effort to remove
refugees from the front lines between protagonists, and to
prohibit the protagonists from using refugees as bargaining
chips. We must bring to trial those responsible for
violations of international law relating to refugees: here the
administration of justice is vital to achieving a peaceful and
lasting political settlement of any conflict.

The conflicts of the 19905 are complex; they cut
across State boundaries. It is thus important to address
humanitarian problems resulting from such conflicts in a
comprehensive manner, with complete coordination between
the Governments of the States concerned and the competent
United Nations bodies, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as
lead agency and other humanitarian agencies.

We pay tribute to the efforts of Mrs. Ogata, and stress
the special responsibility and role of UN HCR in
coordinating international efforts to assist refugees. I
reiterate the hope that today' s deliberations will result in the
definition of a form of protection for refugees that is much
firmer and more comprehensive.

