Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Coordinator once again for his briefing and for the
work that he is doing to improve the situation and bring
it closer to peace, as well as for all the hard work of his
teams on the ground.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
achieving a two-State solution, leading to a safe and
secure Israel, living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as a shared capital.
We continue to believe that the best way to achieve
that is through negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians, and for all parties to focus on steps that
are conducive to peace. As the French Ambassador
said, some 25 years ago we concluded the Oslo
Accords. It is doubly concerning, therefore, to see the
recent developments on the ground on key aspects
of resolution 2334 (2016). The level and rhetoric of
hatred in dehumanization on all sides is repellent, and
also dangerous.

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the Israeli authorities' planned demolition of
the village of Khan Al-Ahmar, which is located in
an area of strategic importance for the contiguity of
a Palestinian State. Its demolition threatens a major
blow to the prospects for a two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as the shared capital, by paving the way for
settlement building in Area E-l. The United Nations has
said that demolition could amount to forcible transfer in
violation of international humanitarian law. The recent
decision of the Israeli Supreme Court does not mandate
demolition. Demolition remains at the discretion of the
Israeli Government. We therefore call on the Israeli
Government, once again, not to go ahead with its
plan to demolish the village, including the school, and
displace the residents.

I share concerns about the situation at the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which is facing
severe financial pressure at a time of increased
demand. We support a just, fair, agreed and realistic
settlement of Palestinian refugees. Until that point we
remain firmly committed to supporting UNRWA and
Palestinian refugees across the Middle East. We are
concerned about the impact the recent United States
decision on funding. We believe UNRWA is a lifeline
for millions of Palestinian refugees across the Middle
East. We have ourselves so far provided approximately
$67 million to UNRWA, $59 million to its core services
and $7.8 million in humanitarian aid in Syria. We
hope that will help meet immediate needs and that
programmes and services can remain uninterrupted.
We call on the international community and other
donors to follow that and step up support to UNRWA to
ensure its vital services are not interrupted. At the same
time, I would like to stress that, for UNRWA to have
a sustainable future, it needs to continue to promote
realistic and technical cost-saving reforms. The United
Kingdom will continue to work closely with UNRWA
and donors on how best to ensure the continuity of
essential services to Palestinian refugees at this time.

Lastly, and as the French Ambassador said, there is
an urgent need to address the awful and deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The United Kingdom
recently announced a new $49 million programme to
support economic development in Gaza and in the West
Bank. We have released $2.6 million to UNICEF to help
provide up to 1 million Gazans with access to clean
water and sanitation, and we have given $2 million to
the International Committee of the Red Cross appeal to
support emergency medical needs. We are supportive of
efforts to reduce the conflict in Gaza. It is in everyone's
interest that peace and stability prevail in Israel and in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We fully support
the efforts of the Special Coordinator to improve the
situation in Gaza, and we urge the relevant parties to
engage fully with his proposals.

We also would like to see progress on humanitarian
and economic proposals at next week's meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians, and we
call upon both Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
deliver on their outstanding commitments. We reiterate
the need for Israel to reduce its movement and access
restrictions on the people of Gaza, and for Hamas
to commit to non-violence and fully end its attacks
on Israel.

In order to see a long-term improvement in Gaza,
momentum around Fatah-Hamas reconciliation needs
to be maintained. The United Kingdom is supportive
of Egyptian efforts to enable the Palestinian authority
to resume control of Gaza. And we encourage all
parties to engage constructively. The recent deaths
on both sides of the conflict, including the deaths of
three Palestinians in Gaza over the past week and the
stabbing of an Israeli in a settlement on 16 September,
reflect the need for progress to end the cycle of
violence. We strongly urge all the relevant parties to
respect international law, de-escalate tensions, exercise
restraint and prevent occurrences that could jeopardize
the lives of Palestinians and Israelis.

