Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould
like to begin by saying that I think Mr. Van Bohemen
has just stated the points that we wanted to make much
more eloquently than I can, and I fully support his
statement. However, in order to enjoy my 15 minutes of
fame, I shall deliver my statement anyway.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group.

I would like to talk about some of my personal
experiences in the somewhat informal way that I
usually prefer to address the Council. In fact, many
of the things that the Council could undertake do not
require new rules. Agreements may be reached but then
are simply not implemented.

I would like to refer to two issues that are actually
only one issue - that of transparency. The two
themes that I want to address today are the drafting
of resolutions and the formats of meetings. Presidential
note S/2014/268, on the drafting of resolutions, refers
to three elements: consultations with Council members,
penholdership, and consultations with relevant actors.

With regard to the first element, the note says
that penholders should hold consult and exchange
information with all Council members as early as
possible in the drafting exercise. That generally does
not occur, however. This has its roots in what we would
call a cultural problem in the Council's functioning.
The permanent members prepare draft resolutions,
discuss them among themselves and share them at the
end of that process, with very little time left before
the document is to be presented for adoption. When
we, the elected members, wish to make comments or
suggestions on the text, we are usually told, "Well,
what a shame! There is a very delicate balance that we
need to strike in the wording of the text, and there is no
time to incorporate any new suggestions".

This leaves the elected members with the options of
either accepting a fait accompli, giving an explanation
of vote, abstaining in the voting or voting against the
draft resolution, even in cases where they endorse the
content if not the particular wording. It is unfortunate
that this culture of dominance by the five permanent
members permeates all Council activities to the
point that, when an elected member presides over the
Council, the President cannot sign a simple procedural
letter without subjecting that text to the prior scrutiny
of permanent members. This occurs even when the
letter is just a template of the sort that has been used
throughout the Council's history. Ultimately, this
culture of dominance by the permanent members is
the fundamental reason that the Council's proceedings
lack transparency.

Turning to the second element, regarding the
active participation of all Council members in drafting
documents, that does not happen either. In general,
penholders are almost exclusively permanent members
of the Council, and in most cases they are the so-called
P-3. Uruguay believes that elected members could have
a greater role in that regard. Suggestions to that end
include the idea of a co-penholdership, which could
be held by both a permanent and an elected member
of the Council. We are not even close to reaching an
agreement on that topic.

With regard to the third element - consultation
with other relevant actors and other States Members
of the United Nations, and in particular Member States
concerned, including groups of friends - I would
suggest that this is not the case either. Perhaps the
sole exception is that of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
which Uruguay chairs. Our delegation does indeed
interact with the penholder, the United States, in the
drafting of resolutions pertaining to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. For all these reasons,
I must insist on the need to introduce a culture of
greater inclusivity and transparency in the activities of
the Council.

The final point I wish to make concerns something
I have mentioned on several occasions, namely, the
culture of holding open briefings in the Council, at
which we listen to a briefing by a senior official and
then quickly adjourn the meeting to move into the
much-touted informal consultations. I will say it
again - let us demystify the informal consultations.
In general terms, they are merely a routine succession
of delivery of previously prepared statements that put
forward national positions. There is basically little
debate or interaction among the membership. In my
limited experience on the Council, there have been
very few occasions on which I have heard any point
made in those consultations that could not have been
made in the open Chamber. That is why we believe that
we need to have more open briefings at which Council
members deliver their statements before the entire
United Nations membership.

Obviously, the Council will continue to hold
closed informal consultations, which provide a private
atmosphere in which it can discuss some sensitive
issues. However, open meetings should be the norm,
which would be a major step forward in ensuring
greater transparency before and accountability to
Member States. I would like to highlight presidential
note S/2016/619 and the improvements introduced
therein with regard to the participation of new Council
members, which, we trust, will contribute to improving
the functioning of the Council.

