Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation)(interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation, which is a member of
the troika of observer States of the Angolan peace process
and a troop-contributor to the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), is greatly interested in the
successful completion of the peace process and a speedy
restoration of lasting peace and national reconciliation in
Angola.

The achievement of that objective is of great
significance, both for Angola itself and for the
strengthening of stability in the entire region. We are
deeply concerned over the fact that in recent months the
course of the peace process has been blocked. There is no
doubt that the motives for that are exclusively political,
namely, the efforts of the UNITA leadership to delay on
any pretext implementation of the inter-Angolan agreements
entered into and to depart from implementation of the
commitments set out in the Lusaka Protocol.

The UNITA leadership has openly disregarded the
requirements of resolutions 1127 (1997) and 1130 (1997)
and has not properly used the two goodwill pauses offered
it by the international community. As a result, today at
midnight the sanctions against UNITA provided for in
resolution 1127 (1997) will enter into effect. We should
like to believe that this time the UNITA leadership will
draw the correct conclusions and will immediately and fully
comply with its commitments, thereby sparing the Security
Council the task of further increasing the sanctions.

Given the present critical situation in the Angolan
peace process, the second element of the draft resolution -
the three-month extension of the mandate of MONUA
and the postponement of the withdrawal of United
Nations military formed units - is of great significance.
The draft resolution offers wide-ranging possibilities for
effective monitoring of the peace process and for adapting
Security Council action in the light of further
developments.

The coming months will be decisive for the peace
process as a whole, and we are pleased that the draft
resolution clearly demands that the Government of
Angola and UNITA complete fully and without further
delay the remaining aspects of the peace process,
cooperate fully with MONUA and refrain from any action
which might further complicate the peace process.
On the basis of the foregoing, the Russian
delegation, together with other members of the Council,
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

