Mr. Klein (United States of America): Tomorrow
in the United States it is the Thanksgiving holiday.
My delegation is actually giving thanks today to the
delegation of Australia for its professionalism, flair and
excellent stewardship of the Security Council during
the month of November.

Today I would like to share my delegation's views
on some areas in which the Council has been productive
over the past month, while also looking ahead to what
we still need to continue to focus on in December and
beyond. First, my delegation appreciates the meeting
Australia held on Ebola (see S/PV.7318). Foreign
Minister Bishop's decision to chair the meeting helped
to communicate the seriousness of that ongoing crisis,
which has led to over 5,000 deaths. We are beginning
to see the effects of the international community's
collective response. Our efforts are saving lives. In
the past month, the average number of reported cases
per week in Liberia has fallen by one third. But just
because we are seeing signs of progress does not mean
that we can abandon the fight. We must continue our
efforts to contain the virus and our response needs to
be fluid, nimble and regional as well.

Going forward the United States believes four
points are especially important. First, the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
should help coordinate and better target the work of
multiple United Nations agencies, Member States and
organizations to optimize our collective response.
Secondly, donors need to tailor contributions to the
needs of the moment rather than what best suits our
capitals. Thirdly, we need more international health-
care workers to support national health responders
and we need to do a better job of protecting health-
care workers and other volunteers. Fourthly, we need
to invest more in preparing neighbouring countries to
prevent new outbreaks and to contain those outbreaks if
and when they occur.

We have now had more than two dozen meetings
on Ukraine this year in the Council and our continued
attention is clearly necessary. The recent report of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
showed that between 6 September and 18 November,
during the ceasefire, 957 people were killed in eastern
Ukraine. We are still waiting for Russia and the
separatists it supports to honour the joint commitments
made on 5 September in Minsk. The separatists have
taken advantage of the agreed pause in fighting to try to
expand their territory. On 2 November, separatists held
illegal elections in parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk
oblasts. The vote violated Ukraine's sovereignty and
defied the Minsk protocol. Minsk is the road map,
but for it to be successful, both sides must commit to
following it.

Looking ahead, we must also continue to watch
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The mandate
renewal adopted this month reaffirmed the Council's
willingness to support the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their efforts to sustain a safe and secure
environment with the assistance of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea
mission.

There were unprecedented moments in the Council
this month for which we must thank you, Mr. President,
as well as Foreign Minister Bishop and your entire
hardworking team. One example was that the Council
held its first ever session dedicated to policing (see S/PV.7317). United Nations police are central to
stopping conflicts and to building sustainable and
genuine peace. As the number of United Nations police
increases, we are also asking more and more of them.
We appreciated the session last week because it put a
bright light on police work and the challenges United
Nations police face. We look forward to following the
issue closely and hearing more from the field in the
months and years to come, and, of course, we are also
looking forward to following up with the high-level
panel on peacekeeping.
The United States also greatly appreciates Australia's
leadership in the international response to terrorism and
violent extremism. Helping our partners capably meet
the evolving threat of terrorism, including stemming
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and countering
violent extremism, is absolutely essential. In that vein,
we should heed the powerful warning issued by United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Prince
Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, at the meeting on 18 November
that "[t]he scale and violence ofISIL's brutality towards
civilians shreds every principle relevant to human
rights" (S/PV7314, p. 5).

The Council has recognized that tackling the ISIL
challenge will require using diverse tools, including
financial measures and sanctions, as we resolved in
August through the adoption of resolution 2170 (2014).
Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, adopted on
19 November, once again addressed the importance
of stopping all financial support for ISIL - support
that goes to funding terrorist acts and recruitment.
In the coming months, the Council should consider if
additional actions and measures are needed to ensure
that ISIL does not use oil, kidnapping for ransom,
banks, cultural property in which Iraq and Syria are so
rich, donations and other means of financing to support
itself.

Finally, this leads me to the humanitarian situation
in Syria. As we highlighted in the Council yesterday
(see S/PV.7324), the situation in Syria continues to
deteriorate. Millions are suffering due to the regime's
continued violence against civilians, including shelling
and aerial bombardments, and its systematic restrictions
and bureaucratic obstacles that keep life-sustaining
humanitarian aid from thousands struggling to
survive in besieged communities. Given the immense
challenges to reaching Syrians in need, it is imperative
that all United Nations agencies use the full authority
of resolution 2165 (2014) to deliver cross-border aid.
We need to continue efforts authorized in resolution
2165 (2014), and we look forward to engaging on the
mandate's renewal.

To our colleagues from Chad, we pledge our full
support as they take the reins for December.

