Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin
by extending my thanks to our briefers, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Said Djinnit, for their comprehensive briefings. Allow
me also to thank the Congolese authorities for their
hospitality during our visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I would like to thank representatives of
the Secretariat, especially the Security Council Affairs
Division and the Department of Safety and Security,
for the excellent arrangements made for the Security
Council visit. We also express our gratitude to our
colleagues from France, Bolivia and Equatorial Guinea
for the fruitful cooperation and our discussions.

The visit was very timely and extremely valuable.
The experience gained thanks to the trip to Kinshasa
leaves no doubt that the Congolese people want free and
fair elections, and they deserve it. Poland reiterates its
call on the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to organize a truly inclusive and transparent
electoral process. The upcoming presidential, national
and provincial legislative elections mark a historic
opportunity to initiate a period of peaceful transition
and constitute a move to another stage of needed
reforms. Building trust among all political and social
actors remains a precondition for the establishment
of an environment conducive to credible elections. In
that regard, it is important to ensure a comprehensive
political consensus on outstanding issues, mainly the
use of voting machines and the voter register. We
encourage the Government to pursue dialogue, fully
implement the confidence-building measures contained
in the Saint-Sylvestre agreement of 31 December 2016
and ensure a level playing field for all the parties.
Needless to say, respect for fundamental human rights,
including freedom of expression and freedom of
peaceful assembly, is crucial for a democratic transition
of power and the stability of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

At the same time, Poland encourages all political
actors, as well as the representatives of civil society,
to take ownership of the political process and truly
become involved in electoral preparations. In that
regard, Poland would also like to highlight the role
of women, who represent an extraordinary human
capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Fair
and safe participation in the ongoing political process
should be assured for them. They deserve a chance to
get more involved politically in the electoral process.
I was impressed by their enthusiasm and commitment
in that regard. I also want to take this opportunity to
underline the importance and visibility of the initiative
of the Congolese people. They can be especially proud
that one of their citizens, Dr. Denis Mukwege, shared
this year's Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to put an
end to the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war
and armed conflict.

Bearing in mind the security situation as well
as the increase in the activities of armed groups in
various provinces, we value the engagement of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in providing protection to civilians on the ground and
its efforts to mitigate the risks linked to the electoral
process. Poland would like to express its appreciation
of and full support for the joint work of Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui and Special Envoy Said
Djinnit, as well as the men and women of MONUSCO.
Having noted the Government's decision to fully fund
the electoral process, we encourage the authorities to
take advantage of MONUSCO's readiness to provide
technical and logistical support to the Independent
National Electoral Commission.

The Great Lakes region continue to face persistent
and significant political and security challenges. The
root causes of instability continue to plague the region.
While we appreciate the efforts that have been made
so far, Poland encourages all the signatories to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region to
demonstrate greater political will and accelerate the
implementation of that commitment. The political
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has a significant impact on the stability of Central
and sub-Saharan Africa. Strong cooperation between
the regional and international organizations involved
in support of the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be maintained as a
matter of priority. In conclusion, let me stress that the
forthcoming elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should represent a crucial step on the path
to lasting security and a better future for the Congolese
people and the entire Central African region.

