Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by congratulating you, Sir,
personally, as well as your delegation, for your leadership
of the Security Council the month of February.

As we take stock ofthe Council's work for February,
it has not been a simple straightforward month. There
have been some very positive developments, but there
have also been some very bitter moments, such as the
regrettable passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin. In
that regard, I would like to take this opportunity once
again to express our deepest condolences to Ambassador
Churkin's family, the Mission of the Russian Federation
and the Governnment and the people of Russia on
the loss of one of their most brilliant ambassadors.
Ambassador Churkin not only worked diligently to
defend his country's interests, but he also worked in
the context of very complicated negotiations so that
political dialogue might prevail. That is the case of the
ceasefire agreement in Syria, which we hope will be
accompanied by a political agreement that would be the
result of ongoing talks within the framework of United
Nations efforts.

On another note, one of the most significant
positive efforts from this month that we wish to point
out is the fact that the Security Council was able to
reach unanimous agreement on several fronts. That
was the case with the adoption of resolution 2340
(2017) on South Sudan, resolution 2341 (2017) on the
protection of critical infrastructure, resolution 2342
(2017) on the situation in Yemen, and resolution 2343
(2017) on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, which, I
repeat, were adopted unanimously by the Council,
and which were the result of dialogue and negotiation.
Everyone contributes to the negotiation of resolutions
in the General Assembly, adding to the text of such
resolutions. I believe that logic was applied here in the
cases I mentioned.

With respect to the issues raised by some Member
States here today, I wish to point out and join in the
proposal of one those Missions that open debates be
compiled and summarized with a View to having a
record of State participation in open debates convened
by the Security Council. That would increase the
transparency of its work.

Other Member States have referred to the
prerogative of the Secretary-General to appoint
Secretariat officials. We agree that no State can
undermine that prerogative and power of the Secretary-
General. However, at the same time, we call attention to
the declaration of Heads of State and Government of the
Group of 77 and China, which represents, as I believe
everyone knows, two-thirds of the membership of the
Organization. In that statement, the Group called for
continued efforts to revitalize the General Assembly, to
reform the Security Council, increasing - among other
things - the amount of representation of developing
countries, in particular in higher categories, and to
improve geographical representation in the Secretariat.
In that regard, all divisions that promote the increased
participation of members should be encouraged by the
Council and by the entire Organization in general.
In addition, I would like to highlight the leadership
of Japan in the transformation and reform of our
working methods. As a relatively new member of the
Council, we have benefited from a variety of decisions
that have allowed us to plan our participation in the
Council's work ahead of time.

We join the representative of Uruguay in voicing
concern over the lack of transparency ofthe Secretariat.
In several instances, access to some documentation was
not allowed. Ensuring that all information is available
to all members of the Council is essential to our ability,
as equal members, to make decisions.

