Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for having briefed us on the
situation in the Middle East within the framework of
the regular consideration of this item by the Security
Council. We also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representatives of Palestine and Israel, and
we take due note of their respective statements.

Since the Council's most recent meeting on this
important issue, many events have occurred. The most
meaningful of these are, in our view, the following.
First, there was the recent formation of a new Lebanese
Government. We hope that it will strive to put an end
to the country's internal political difficulties, so that
Lebanon can immediately undertake national
reconstruction. Then, there was the exchange of
prisoners and remains, which took place on 15 July
between Israel and Hizbullah. More than symbols,
those signs of detente and even rapprochement show
that dialogue is possible, just as peace is, if there is
goodwill on both sides. Therefore, the international
community should encourage this easing of tension,
which is undoubtedly a positive step towards peace.

With regard to the specific case of Syrian-
Lebanese relations, we are impatient to familiarize
ourselves with the report of the United Nations team of
experts on Lebanon, which should keep us abreast of

the progress made. Already, however, we must
welcome the positive attitudes of both countries
towards establishing diplomatic relations. Such an
event would be a historic turning point in the relations
between the two States. Such a normalization, so long
awaited by the international community, would
undoubtedly be a decisive step in settling the Lebanese
crisis, at least, it being understood that, if there is to be
a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East issue,
there must be a normalization of relations among all
the parties concerned.

Concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is
important that the Palestinian Authority and Israel
continue their negotiations, guided by the objectives
defined by the Annapolis process and the Quartet's
Road Map. The latest news that we have, which we
welcome, is of the meeting in Jerusalem between the
President of the Palestinian Authority and the President
of the State of Israel. We have always said that a
settlement of the dispute requires that the belligerent
parties fairly share duties, obligations and
responsibilities.

It is the duty of Israel to put an end to the
settlements policy and to any other activities that could
jeopardize the progress currently being made in the
bilateral negotiations. In the view of the Palestinian
side, the problem of land is the primary obstacle. At the
same time, Israel must take all possible measures to
fully lift the siege against Gaza and permit the
humanitarian issue to be resolved once and for all. On
the other hand, the Palestinian Authority must also
strive to honour its commitments aimed at
guaranteeing absolute security for Israel, particularly
as regards the firing of rockets against Israeli
populations.

It is clear that, while the sharing of
responsibilities regarding the Middle East is incumbent
primarily on the parties directly affected, the
international community must also do its part. First are
the countries of the region. Whether through individual
initiatives, such as those of Turkey, Qatar and Egypt, or
through the actions of regional organizations, such as
the Arab peace plan, their role is decisive, and the truce
currently in effect in Gaza is due to their involvement.
Burkina Faso welcomes and encourages their efforts.

As for the Security Council, it must maintain the
necessary pressure on the political leaders of Israel and
Palestine by reminding them of the need for strict
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations.

Finally, international organizations must continue
their assistance to the development of Palestine with a
view to the building of a viable State within the
framework of the agreement to establish the two States.

With respect to international cooperation, it may
be that the new organization, the Union for the
Mediterranean, whose members include some Middle
East States, could also make a contribution to the
settlement of the conflict.

One thing is certain: it is the expressed will of
Palestinian and Israeli officials to persevere and make
progress in the bilateral negotiations to achieve the
solution of two States living side by side in peace and
security, if possible by the end of this year. We
earnestly encourage them in that effort, convinced that,
ultimately, that is the only way to find a solution.

