Mr. Orozco (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, like previous speakers, I wish to thank
Mr. Joachim Rucker, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for presenting the report on the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) between 15 August and
31 October 2006. I also thank Ms. Sanda Raskovic-
Ivic, President of the Coordinating Centre of the
Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, for her
presentation. In addition, I welcome the presence of
Mr. Agim Ceku, Prime Minister of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/906),
which objectively describes the developments in the
Kosovo process during the period I have indicated,
presents us with important elements for consideration
in the definition of Kosovo's status. On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to highlight some positive
developments that have occurred on the ground.
Despite the difficulties that are still perceived, those
developments should be encouraged so as to provide
constructive support for the Kosovo process.

First, the effort made in 2006 by the Government
of Kosovo to implement the standards - particularly
the 13 priorities identified by the Contact Group - has
been commendable. As the Secretary-General's report
indicates, the progress made in standards
implementation strengthens Kosovo's institutions and
helps lay the groundwork for future development.

It is also relevant that, in this most recent period,
some significant events have taken place in the
economic sphere. I am referring in particular to the
progress made in developing mining and the power
generation associated with it, in addition to the
rehabilitation of a number of power generation
facilities. The international investors' conference for
Kosovo, held on 10 and 11 October, was also an
important step in attracting foreign investment.

As my delegations has stated on a number of
occasions, any political settlement that determines
Kosovo's status will be viable only if long-term socio-
economic stability is achieved. In that connection, we
urge Kosovo's economic actors to continue in the effort
to get its productive sectors working and to ensure
Kosovo's effective integration into its regional
environment.

Furthermore, it cannot be denied that there are
still barriers in Kosovo that are difficult to overcome.
The process related to future status is a dominant factor
in political life, as stated by Mr. Riicker. The feeling of
uncertainty helps to create instability. The parties
continue to express opposing positions that leave little
room for negotiation. That situation does not help to
create an appropriate context for reconciling all social
sectors and improving the conditions for reaching a
final settlement.

The Secretary-General indicated in his report that
incidents of violence involving Kosovo Serbs have
continued. It is also worrisome that Serb participation
in the main political institutions continues to be
practically non-existent. Likewise, according to the
figures provided by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, while the number of

06-6573]
minorities returning to Kosovo has remained constant,
it is still unsatisfactory.

The definition of Kosovo's future status must be
inclusive and not exclude any of the sectors that make
up society. In other words, the building of a multi-
ethnic society requires active participation by all
sectors involved. Without such a consensus, it will not
be possible to find a lasting solution, over and above
the legal identity this territory might adopt.

Once again, Peru wishes to express its support for
the political process aimed at finding a negotiated
solution to Kosovo's status. In that context, we support
the work carried out by Mr. Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, to define a status that will
promote development and progress for all the people of
Kosovo and strengthen stability in the region as a
whole.

