Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): I would like
to thank the Indonesian presidency for convening this
important debate. We also thank the International
Committee of the Red Cross for its briefing and
indispensable humanitarian work and the Center
for Civilians in Armed Conflict for its briefing and
important advocacy work.

At this critical moment, we must reflect not only
on our collective duty and responsibility to ensure
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, but also
consider real and practical solutions for addressing
the serious challenges we face in fulfilling that
sacred obligation. Failure to uphold international law,
including the very clear provisions of humanitarian law
crafted to protect civilians in times of war, and a failure
to implement Security Council resolutions relevant
to the protection of civilians, including children, has
enabled a fierce culture of impunity to grow and spread
as a source of shocking, serious breaches and pervasive
Violations of human rights that have caused immense
suffering, displacement, loss of life and injury, and
trauma for enormous numbers of innocent civilians.
It is unconscionable that 80 per cent of casualties in
conflicts today are civilians. Vulnerable men, women
and children around the world continue, and regrettably
will continue, to endure such injustice, indignities and
insecurity for as long as the international community
continues to hesitate to match its principled words
and commitments with serious action to stop those
violations. The role of the Security Council is central
in that regard.

While humanitarian action continues to be pursued
worldwide to treat the suffering caused by armed
conflicts, it cannot stop the bloodletting. We have seen
that over and over again in crises across the years, in
which the norms and rules for protecting civilians are
not only disregarded but are even more blatantly and
gravely breached through prolonged conflict and an
absence of accountability. Protecting innocent people
requires establishing enforcement measures that hold
perpetrators accountable within the full extent of the
law, including international criminal law. Without
consequences or costs, modern history has shown us
that these violations and war crimes will never cease.

Palestine is one of the most glaring cases facing
the international community. Time and again it has
been said that the Palestine question is a litmus test
for the international community, the credibility of the
Security Council and the rules-based order. That is
more true today than ever, and the stakes are high. For
decades now the Palestinian people have suffered grave
breaches of humanitarian law and massive human
rights violations as Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued to act with absolute impunity, in contempt of
the law and the Council's authority.

Our civilians, including the most vulnerable - children,
women, refugees, displaced and disabled persons, as
well as humanitarian and medical personnel - continue
to be directly, deliberately, systematically and violently
targeted by the occupying forces, as do civilian
structures, including homes, hospitals and schools.
Palestinian civilians continue to be killed, injured or
forcibly displaced on a daily basis. In the past year the
Israeli occupying forces have killed more than 300
civilians and injured more than 30,000 people, many
permanently disabled, with more than 140 amputees
in one year. Humanitarian assistance intended to
address protection needs continues to be impeded and
obstructed through access and movement restrictions
imposed by the occupation, most severely through
its inhumane, illegal and suffocating blockade of the
Gaza Strip. Even the protective presence of unarmed
civilian observers is denied, as we witnessed with
Israel's termination, earlier this year, of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron,

Our reality under this illegal and inhumane
occupation is one in which no one and nowhere are
safe and the security and well-being of our civilians are
under constant threat. And yet, our continuous pleas
for protection continue to go answered, deepening
the decades-long protection crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
consequences have been tragic and severe for our
people, for the prospects for a peaceful solution and for
the viability of multilateralism and the international
system. When we meet in the Chamber and reaffirm
the rules of protection and the laws of war and when
we speak of noble principles and commitments, yet do
nothing to uphold them, we must realize that someone,
somewhere - actually thousands, in so many places
around the world - suffers gravely because of
that negligence.

It is time to implement United Nations resolutions
and fulfil legal obligations, including the inviolable
obligation to respect and ensure respect for the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War in all circumstances. As we approach
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions
this August, let that be our solemn commitment and
objective. We urge the international community to shore
up the political will and courage to act immediately
and without selectivity to protect human lives and to
peacefully and justly resolve the conflicts plaguing our
world, including in Palestine.

