Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country, Sir, on
presiding over the Security Council this month and to
thank you for holding this debate. It clearly shows your
country's unfailing support for the Palestinian cause,
particularly given current circumstances. I would
also like to thank the Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, and Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.

The situation in the Middle East is worsening day
after day, month after month. Its deterioration in the
context of the future of the region is a great source of
concern. First and foremost, we are concerned about the
worsening situation in Palestine while the international
community is preoccupied with other issues. While the
other issues are important, they should not distract the
international community from the central issue in the
Middle East, that is, the Palestinian question. It is a
cause for all Arabs, all Muslims, who aspire to restoring
peace and harmony in the region.

The Kingdom of Morocco, whose King chairs the
Al-Quds Committee, is very concerned about what is
taking place in Palestine, particularly in Jerusalem,
which is the third most holy site in Islam. We condemn
all attacks against mosques, against the faithful and
against the legal status of the city itself. These attacks
fuel violence and extremism. The attempts to Judaize
the region, to erect settlements and expel Palestinians
hinders any peace effort.

The international community must assume its
responsibilities; it must find a way out of the current
stalemate and to bring Palestinians back from the
deadlock we have seen since the breakdown of the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. The international
community must spare no effort to bring the Israelis
and Palestinians to the negotiating table in order to
bring about the two-State solution, including the pre-
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital of
Palestine. The process must be carried out properly, in
order to build the necessary trust for the two States to
coexist in peace, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

My country commends France's efforts to salvage
the two-State solution, including its holding of a
ministerial meeting in that regard, during which the
Kingdom of Morocco restated its position regarding the
Palestinian question, as it relates to the setting up of an
independent Palestinian State within pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. As King Mohammed
VI, Head of the Al-Quds Committee, stated at the third
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Summit, hosted
by Turkey,

"We cannot but affirm our support for the appeal of
President Mahmoud Abbas to hold an international
conference to put an end to Israeli occupation 4 a
crucial step for stopping the tragedy in Palestine
and achieving equitable peace, based on a two-
State solution. We also support the French initiative
that seeks the resumption of negotiations between
Palestine and Israel."

