Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz: I have
many questions which basically concern the Force
Intervention Brigade and unmanned aerial vehicles.
The first training is fundamental, and during the
training we may have much more basic technology
because, for instance - and I will mention some
details - with regard to night vision, it is very difficult
to find some rebel groups or gangs with the equipment
we have. If we have the new technology, we will have
more night combat and that is much better for us. It is a
great advantage.

There is a variety of technology, from basic to high
tech. We need to know how to use it. At this moment, we
are organizing our structure to receive the equipment.
In New York, they are working on procurement and
the final contract. I need to find specialized people to
use the system in the best way. It is not complicated.
Sometimes from Headquarters it seems very complex,
but it is not. It is simple. I am sure that we are going
to have good results in favour of our mandates. We
are going to protect more civilians and better protect
our people, and we are going to have much more
information, not only for us, but for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole. It will be very useful for
everyone.

With regard to the Force Intervention Brigade,
I came to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
three weeks - less than one month - ago and it is
my personal opinion that the mandate of 2098 (2013)
is something new. It is the first time a more open
and stronger position has been taken with a Force
Intervention Brigade. That has generated much
speculations and many interpretations. I do not see
unanimous understanding about it. But, with regard to
the situation at this moment with the Force Intervention
Brigade, in Sake we have one battalion from Tanzania,
one battalion from South Africa that just arrived last
week, one special force company from Tanzania as
well, and we are waiting for the Malawians. We do not
have exact information at the moment, but we hope they
will be in place in late July.

The problem with the Force Intervention Brigade
is that it entails greater expectations, here and on the
ground. On the ground, the common citizen thinks
that we are going to solve all the problems, even public
security, but that is not true because one brigade will
not solve that problem. We need to protect civilians to
accomplish our mission with the 20,000 we have on the
ground.

With regard to the question concerning the rules
of engagement, in that environment it is not so easy to
have a clear target because we have more than 50 armed
groups. At this moment, we have only one in uniform
and in a clear position, but we have some 56 groups in
civilian dress within the population.

With regard to the rules of engagement, we need
to understand that peacekeeping operations follow the
same principles. Even with the new mandate, the Force
Intervention Brigade and more freedom to operate, we
are operating under the same principles. The use of
force follows the same rules and the same principles.
We do not have many ways to justify the use of force.
Therefore, it is not a problem to employ the Intervention
Brigade because all the troops, even the Intervention
Brigade, need to follow the same principles and we
have very clear guidelines to justify the use of force.

What may be of concern is artillery. Artillery is
something new because normally we are not in an
open field; rather we operate in very heavily populated
areas. But we have the means to employ artillery. We
have smoke grenades. We have ways to illuminate the
battle field. We need to be very careful with explosive
grenades. I have the staff and we follow the rules.

I sometimes see some sectors very concerned about
the protection of civilians. The protection of civilians
is the main task for everybody, even for us. The main
conditionality in our plans is the protection of civilians.
With regard to the Intervention Brigade, it is not a
problem. We have the rules of engagement, we are very
clear and it is not a problem.

There was one more question concerning how
the Security Council can obtain more up-to-date
information from the field. If we have more technology,
certainly the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
has the structure and will provide all the information
because we are connected in real time. In that regard,
it is not a problem. We are available in the missions for
video-teleconferences and to respond to questions, and
we do that daily for our commanders in the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations.

I would like to make one more point with regard to
the reference to the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda and the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC). The FARDC is the
national armed force. Everybody knows that we have a
complex situation. It is not a national problem. It is more
regional and has regional consequences because the
groups operate very close to the border and sometimes
interfere throughout the region. But, with regard to that
question, we have four mechanisms in place now. We
have the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the Southern African Development Community,
the African Union and the Peace and Security Council
framework. With the guarantors, the Secretary-General
and all of the countries around the lakes, we have very
good prospects for being able to deal with any problem.

From the military point of view, the protection of
civilians is our primary concern, and we treat all threats
against the population equally.

