Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Edmond Mulet,
for his excellent briefing on the Secretary-General's
semi-annual report (S/2010/466) and for all his untiring
efforts at the head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I should also like to
thank all the United Nations staff in Haiti for their
outstanding work in very difficult conditions. We owe
them all the support they require.
I also wish to thank the Permanent Representative
of Haiti for his presence here today. We welcome the
efforts of his Government to ensure political, economic
and social stability in his country.

Austria associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the representative of the European
Union. I wish to add the following points on behalf of
my delegation.

Since our last debate on Haiti in the Council (see S/PV.6303), much progress has been made on the
ground. We knew that the current period was going to
be one of high risk, in which the objectives of security
and protection would have to be pursued as vigorously
as the organization of the elections and the
reconstruction of the country. I dare say that these twin
objectives have met with success so far.

Austria wishes to emphasize in particular the
importance of the efforts of MINUSTAH in the areas
of the rule of law and the protection of civilians,
especially women and children. Austria welcomes the
measures taken by MINUSTAH, in close cooperation
with the Haitian National Police, to protect internally
displaced persons in the camps. The increase in police
staffing authorized by the Council in resolution 1927
(2010) has had the desired outcome. All of
MINUSTAH's operating procedures have been
reviewed in order to make them more effective in
addressing sexual violence, which we welcome.
Austria also recognizes MINUSTAH'S important
activities to assist the Government of Haiti in preparing
for and holding the presidential and legislative
elections, and in coordinating electoral assistance.

We recognize that, despite the significant
progress that has been made to date, much remains to
be done. We endorse the Secretary-General's
assessment that the police and military contingents of
MINUSTAH will need to be maintained at their current
level until an evaluation of the security situation can be
made following the inauguration of the new President
and Government. The elections must be conducted
credibly, fairly and legitimately in order to ensure the
further stabilization and reconstruction of the country.
Austria reiterates the importance of the
participation of Haitian women in the electoral process,
and hopes that it will continue to be encouraged and
promoted.

With respect to measures to protect the most
vulnerable, efforts must be pursued tirelessly and even
strengthened. We share the Secretary-General's opinion
that a solid protective environment must be established
in Haiti, and we hope that the needs of displaced
children and the fight against their exploitation and
trafficking will continue to be given special attention in
protection activities. In that respect, we should like to
know more about the protection of civilians strategy,
which we understand is being updated by MINUSTAH.
We would be grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for providing further information
on the activities he foresees for that strategy.

It will be important, in addition to the measures
already undertaken to combat sexual violence, to fine-
tune a comprehensive strategy to prevent sexual
violence and a package of support measures for the
victims. We therefore support the Secretary-General's
proposal that the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security be assisted in establishing police substations
assigned to assist the victims of sexual violence. It is
equally urgent to improve current conditions in Haitian
prisons in order to reduce the prison population and to
limit excessive pre-trial detention.

For its part, Austria has mobilized almost
$17 million in contributions and humanitarian
assistance for immediate aid and reconstruction. A
portion of that sum has been made available to the
United Nations family, the International Committee of
the Red Cross and humanitarian non-governmental
organizations in Austria. Our citizens have also
donated almost $45 million to the victims in Haiti. I
wish to conclude by assuring the Government and
people of Haiti that the international community will
remain with them in their effort to build the new Haiti
that is beginning to take shape.

