Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting. We wish, in particular, to thank the Permanent
Representative of Germany, Ambassador Kastrup, for
presenting the report entitled Design and
Implementation of Arms Embargoes and Travel and
Aviation Related Sanctions. We would also like to
thank the Permanent Observer of the Swiss
Confederation, Ambassador Staehelin, for presenting
the report entitled Targeted Financial Sanctions: A
Manaalfor Design and Implementation. We were also
pleased to welcome to the Council the State Secretary
of Sweden, Ambassador Hans Dahlgren, and we wish
to thank him for his Government's expressed
willingness to continue both processes. In the same
vein, we wish to express our appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall for his timely
suggestions for follow-up actions by the Council and
the Secretariat.

When the Council debated this matter in April of
last year, my delegation pointed out that, if the Security
Council is to maintain sanctions as a credible
instrument, we must take concrete steps to ensure that
we get sanctions right rather than impose flawed
regimes that may be either ineffective or
unenforceable. Indeed, over the past few years the
international community has paid increasing attention
to the issue of sanctions imposed by the Security
Council. The commentary has often been negative,
primarily because of the negative humanitarian effects
of comprehensive sanctions on civilian populations.

In part as a response to those criticisms, and also
in recognition that comprehensive sanctions are no
longer a tool acceptable to many of the members of the
Council, there has been a shift by the Council in its
approach to the design of sanctions to targeting
measures at the individual or individuals responsible
for the behaviour or policies condemned by the
international community, and at those elites or groups
who directly benefit from such behaviour or policies.
Indeed, a broad consensus has emerged in support of
sanctions that are designed to affect only those
individuals whose behaviour we wish to change.

Furthermore, the Council now recognizes the
need to consider fully the possible negative impact of
sanctions on the humanitarian condition of civilian
populations and on the economies of third countries.
We must now ensure that sanctions regimes have no
such unintended effects. Recent sanctions on Ethiopia
and Eritrea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and the Taliban
regime of Afghanistan have all been targeted. In
designing those sanctions the Council borrowed
extensively from the preliminary work of the Bonn-
Berlin and Interlaken processes, as well as from the
work of its own Working Group on General Issues on
Sanctions, which was established last April.
Implementation and monitoring of those sanctions have
also followed, to a large extent, the recommendations
contained in these two reports. It is a testament to the
value of the recommendations contained therein that
even before they were finalized, the Council had
already begun to pay heed to them.

The two reports that are the results of the Bonn-
Berlin and Interlaken processes provide us with a set of
modalities to not only design but also to implement and
monitor targeted sanctions covering most of the
regimes on arms embargoes, travel and aviation-related
sanctions, and financial sanctions. My delegation is
pleased to have had the opportunity to participate in
both meetings of the processes. We fully appreciate the
efforts of the Governments of Germany and of the
Swiss Confederation in providing the resources for
these two important undertakings on targeted sanctions,
and for spearheading a dialogue with civil society and
academic experts. We believe that the manuals - if
fully utilized by the Security Council, the Secretariat
and Member States - will help to make the use of
sanctions a more effective tool of the Council in
enforcing its decisions. It will also allow for a more
speedy and efficient response as the need arises.

My delegation has also subscribed to the premise
that for sanctions to be effective, they must be
implemented within a prescribed time frame and be
subject to close monitoring and periodic review in
order to ensure their continued usefulness and validity,
as well as to evaluate their impact on vulnerable
populations and neighbouring States. However, while
the Council has begun to design sanctions accordingly,
their design, implementation and monitoring have not
yet been streamlined. It is in this context that the
results of the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes can
provide useful tools for the Security Council, if we use
the guidelines provided in the manuals.

We therefore hope that the procedures and
recommendations - particularly those on arms
embargoes, travel and aviation-related sanctions -
will be carefully studied by all the sanctions
committees, because arms embargoes are perhaps the
most common measure used by the Security Council in
seeking to maintain international peace and security.
They are also one of the most frequently violated of
sanctions regimes. As we have seen from past
experiences, arms embargoes affect a number of actors
in the financing, sale and trafficking in arms. In the
same vein, we believe that the recommendations on
financial sanctions could also be very usefully applied
in the implementation resolution 1373 (2001).

In order to derive maximum benefit from the
recommendations, it is important for the Council to
adopt a new and comprehensive approach, and to be
consistent in its implementation and monitoring. It will
be recalled that the Working Group established by the
Council under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Anwarul Chowdhury of Bangladesh to develop general
recommendations on how to improve the effectiveness
of United Nations sanctions was asked to examine a
number of issues, including the working methods of
sanctions committees and inter-committee
coordination; the capacity of the United Nations
Secretariat to effectively monitor the implementation
of sanctions; coordination within the United Nations
system and coordination with regional and other
international organizations; the design of sanctions
resolutions, including the conditions for the
maintaining or lifting of sanctions; assessment reports
and the ongoing evaluation of sanctions; monitoring
and enforcement; the unintended impact of sanctions;
humanitarian exemptions; targeted sanctions; and
assisting Member States in implementing sanctions.

The Working Group undertook an extensive
review over a period of several months. Its work
benefited from inputs by experts on all of the issues
covered. However, the report of the Group has been
before the Council for several months, but so far we
have failed to take action on it. The observations and
recommendations contained in the reports that came
out of the Bonn-Berlin and Interlaken processes have
again drawn the Council's attention to the imperative
that the Council must streamline its work on the
design, implementation and monitoring of sanctions.
Our debate highlights the importance of the Council's
acting on the Working Group's report and adopting,
without delay, the recommendations contained therein.

The Bonn-Berlin and Interlaken processes, taken
together with the recommendations the Council now
has before it, will provide the necessary tools to ensure
better implementation of the Council's current and
future sanctions measures. We must also build on the
useful work done by the monitoring mechanisms and
panels of experts. We also look forward to the follow-
up to be carried out by the Government of Sweden to,
inter alia, examine how to achieve more coherent and
effective enactment of Security Council resolutions in
national legislation.

In conclusion, I wish to recall that - as we
alluded to in our statement last April - in addition to
reform and policy-making, improving the effectiveness
of sanctions requires the enhancement of internal
institutional mechanisms within the United Nations
system, including the development of a more effective
monitoring capacity within the Secretariat, adequate
staffing, streamlining of procedures and the
harmonization of the guidelines and working methods
of the sanctions committees, visits by representatives
of the sanctions committees, technical expertise and
support, and improved cooperation with regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
international financial institutions.

We believe that the Security Council must work
with the General Assembly to ensure that the
Secretariat receives the necessary budgetary support in
order to assist the work of the Council's committees on
sanctions.

I wish to thank you again, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting and for allowing us to
exchange views on this important matter, which assists
the Council in carrying out its mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

