Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I also thank Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo and Mr. Rajasingham for
their briefings today.

Let me start by welcoming the news that, over the
weekend, the final tract of Da'esh-held territory was
liberated by the Syrian Democratic Forces. That is a
huge testament to the courage and commitment of the
Forces and the work of the Global Coalition against
Da'esh. The liberation ofDa'esh-held areas is not the end
of the fight against the group, however. Da'esh retains
significant organizational and economic capability with
which to pursue its dangerous and pervasive ideology.
We remain committed to the enduring defeat of Da'esh
in the region and globally.

Other serious challenge remain, including the huge
humanitarian challenge faced by the Al-Hol camp
for internally displaced persons (IDPs) following the
large influx of people displaced from Al-Baghouz.
We commend United Nations efforts to scale up its
response. The United Kingdom stands ready to provide
further support. During this financial year, the United
Kingdom has allocated more than £40 million to
address basic life-saving needs across north-east Syria,
where the Al-Hol camp is located. United Kingdom-
funded partners are doing all that they can to support
those affected by providing vital services, including
health care and shelter. But the threat of a humanitarian
disaster continues to loom in Idlib, where according
to reports frequent shelling and air strikes by the
regime and its backers have caused the deaths of more
than 90 people and the displacement of 72,000 more
since February.

We continue to support Turkey's ongoing efforts
to prevent a reckless military offensive by the Syrian
regime in north-west Syria. We call on Russia and Iran,
as Astana guarantors, together with Turkey, to ensure
that the ceasefire is respected. But the threat to the
Syrian people and the stability of Syria is not just in
the regime's actions. It is in its failure to take the steps
needed to address the immense challenges to peace
and stability.

The Syrian economy has shrunk by more than
60 per cent since the start of the conflict, while the
Syrian pound has depreciated against the United States
dollar by more than 90 per cent. Six out of 10 Syrians
now live in extreme poverty. More than 13 million
Syrians are in need of humanitarian assistance. More
than 11 million persons have been displaced, and
approximately 400,000 have been killed. Up to 100,000
persons have been detained or have disappeared.

The conflict and the crisis in Syria will not end
unless the root causes of the conflict are addressed.
There will be no stability without the creation of a
safe environment. Refugees will not return without
credible assurances for their safety. Radicalization
and unrest will not end without action being taken to
resolve failures of governance, including the lack of
provision of basic services, economic opportunity and
representative institutions.

The Security Council unanimously set out a
comprehensive mechanism in resolution 2254 (2015) to
deliver an alternative, inclusive and representative way
forward. Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and his team
continue to command our full support in seeking to find
a solution to the conflict. As has already been said today,
the United Kingdom, together with others, remains
committed to addressing the humanitarian needs of the
people of Syria. At the Brussels Conference, the United
Kingdom pledged £400 million - or $530 million - and
we have mobilized £2.81 billion to the Syrian crisis since
2012. That is more than $3.7 billion and represents our
largest humanitarian response ever. We and others have
indicated on numerous occasions our readiness to assist
Syria with reconstruction should there be a negotiated
political settlement.

Yet the Al-Assad regime continues to refuse to
change its behaviour and follows the course of action
that gave rise to the conflict in the first place. It
continues to seize the assets and property of citizens
and engage in widespread and arbitrary arrests. It
continues to provide limited or no basic services to
those in need and interfere with United Nations efforts
to fill that gap, including by stalling desperately needed
aid convoys to the Rukban IDP camp. The Syrian
regime continues to spread lies and disinformation
while failing to uphold its responsibilities under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. It continues to refuse
to engage in United Nations efforts under resolution
2254 (2015). No progress can be made without a change
in attitude and behaviour by the Syrian regime. It is
time for a Government in Syria that will do what is
right for its people.

