Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I thank
Special Representative Jan Kubis for his informative
briefing today. I would further like to express my
highest respect to all the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
deep commitment and dedication to their challenging
assignment. 1 also thank Ambassador Tanin for his
participation and for his statement.
Afghanistan has traveled a long and difficult
path leading up to the current three significant
transitions - political, economic and security. The
smooth transfer of power in a peaceful and transparent
manner is essential to a successful political transition,
which will serve as a foundation for the other two
transitions. In that regard, I wish to commend the
Government and the people of Afghanistan for the
tangible progress made towards the presidential and
provincial elections to be held in 2014. Among the other
concrete steps taken, the enactment of the two critical
electoral legal frameworks has particular significance
for conducting credible and inclusive elections.
We also hope that the current intensive discussions
among numerous political parties will create a good
environment for the process towards a fair Afghan-led
election, and look forward to seeing the outcome of
the nomination process of candidates. I would like to
express Japan's serious intention to join in the efforts of
the international community to lend its support in this
process through the ELECT II programme.

While improvements have been made, the security
situation continues to be of concern. In order to
encourage the full participation of all eligible voters,
security challenges must be properly addressed.
Japan encourages the Government of Afghanistan to
take appropriate risk-mitigation measures based on a
realistic security assessment.

Over the longer term, an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process, backed by good-neighbourly
relations, is the most important task for the legitimate
Afghan Government. In that regard, Japan welcomes
the recent summit meeting between Afghan President
Karzai and Pakistani Prime Minister Sharif. It was
encouraging to hear the positive messages from the
Pakistani leader regarding his support for the ongoing
peace process, which were followed by the release of
additional Taliban members. I would like to stress once
again Japan's continuous support for Afghan-led peace
and stability.

In order to ensure smooth and successful political
and economic transitions, the timely implementation of
the commitments in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework is of paramount importance. The senior
officials meeting in Kabul on 3 July provided us
with a valuable opportunity to assess the status of
commitments and refocus our efforts towards a stable
and prosperous Afghanistan. Japan expects the Afghan
Government to redouble its efforts, especially in the
areas of anti-corruption, public finance, the rule of law
and women's rights.
As Japan has repeatedly expressed, the key is
mutuality. While the international community is
expected to provide Afghanistan with credibility and
predictability in terms of its future assistance, the
Afghan Government is strongly encouraged to further
its own efforts to improve governance and implement
faithfully its growth strategy. Japan will continue to be
engaged in the follow-up process until the final goal of
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is met by
both Afghanistan and its international partners.

Turning to the security situation, Japan condemns
in the strongest terms the brutal terrorist attacks that
have caused the tragic loss of innocent lives all over
the country, including assaults against international aid
agencies, as well as diplomatic facilities. As a strong
supporter of the protection and empowerment of women
in Afghanistan in various fields, Japan expresses
its serious concerns about the recent intimidation
and targeted killings of female Afghan Government
officials and public figures.

We welcome the Security Council press statement
(SC/ 11122) on the attack on the United States Consulate
in Herat last Friday and I join my colleagues in
condemning any acts of violence and expressing our
determination to fight terrorism.

The security transition is broadly on track and
we must not let any terrorist act divert it from its
path. As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/535), despite this difficult security environment,
we have witnessed the increased competence and
confidence of the Afghan National Security Forces in
conducting most operations. Challenges continue to
exist, but the international community must remain
united alongside Afghanistan in combating by all
means the threats posed by any illegal armed groups.

