Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to commend the United Kingdom on
assuming the responsibilities of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March, as well as to
congratulate Togo for its very successful presidency in
February. I would also like to thank the United
Kingdom for convening this open debate on the
situation in Somalia, and to welcome the presence at
this important meeting of His Excellency Under
Secretary of State Henry Bellingham. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement, and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Augustine Mahiga for his briefing.

I would like to reiterate our strong support for the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia in its
efforts to overcome difficulties, achieve reconciliation
and build a secure, stable, united, democratic and
prosperous nation. We note the holding last month in
Garowe of the United Nations-facilitated second
Somali National Consultative Constitutional
Conference, which agreed on a set of Principles for
finalizing the draft constitution and ending the
transitional process by August 2012.

As Somalia moves towards the end of the
transition, additional steps should be taken to protect
the security and political gains of the past few years, as
well as to ensure that all efforts ultimately contribute to
the delivery of the road map. We believe that continued
international assistance to the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia to implement the end of the
transition is necessary to bring unity, peace and
stability to Somalia.

Azerbaijan supports the work of the United
Nations in that country. We commend the efforts of the
African Union, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the troop-contributing countries for
their valuable support for the people and the
Government of Somalia. We also commend the
contribution of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in favour of achieving peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia and mobilizing assistance to
meet the urgent needs of the people affected by the
humanitarian crisis in the country.

Like other members of the Council, Azerbaijan
welcomed the international London conference held on
23 February 2012, which demonstrated the
international community's political will and
determination to support Somalia and its people. It is
important to use the momentum generated by the
conference and build on the agreement achieved in
London to continue pursuing a comprehensive strategy
for the establishment of peace and stability in Somalia.
We must continue to approach the complex situation in
the country with care and sensitivity, on the basis of a
comprehensive strategy aimed at addressing the
political, humanitarian, economic and security
problems in the country through the collaborative
efforts.

Somalis should take over responsibility for
providing their own security and developing their own
justice system in order to deal with threats to their
security. It is essential that political, security and
institutional reforms conform to the pace of military
gains. The Transitional Federal Government should be
consistently supported so that it can become fully
operational in the areas under its control. The measures
taken by the Government to develop outreach activities
in the recently recovered areas should be further
encouraged.

Azerbaijan welcomes the commitment made at
the London conference for renewed international action
to address the threat posed by terrorist attacks from
Somali armed opposition groups. It is encouraging that
a combination of measures, including the efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, actions
by naval forces and the imprisonment of many
suspected or convicted pirates, has contributed to the
decline in the number of successful piracy-related
attacks. However, further effective countermeasures
and strengthened international cooperation remain
crucial against the backdrop of the ongoing threat
posed by piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia and the increased incidents of attempted
attacks. In that regard, we note the commitments made
at the London conference on new efforts to repress
piracy.

The long-awaited durable peace in Somalia
requires the economic recovery of the country, which is
suffering from the grave consequences of the two-
decade war and instability. It is important to expand the
existing stabilization plans in Somalia to new sectors,
to increase international support to areas of stability,
including through a new stability fund, and to
encourage further efforts to address Somalia's long-
term reconstruction and economic development.
Azerbaijan welcomes the initiative of the Government
of Turkey to host a conference in Istanbul in April,
focused on the economic development of Somalia.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia is a matter
of serious concern. We stress the importance of lasting
support to Somalia in that regard, as well as the need to
redouble efforts to find long-term solutions for
internally displaced persons.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that,
whatever the measures being taken and assistance
being provided to support Somalia, respect for and a
strong commitment to its sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity are crucial
and must constitute an absolute priority and
indispensable prerequisite for building a secure, stable
and prosperous Somalia.

