Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I too wish to join my
colleagues in thanking Under-Secretaries-General
Guehenno and Gambari for their informative briefings
on the latest developments in the Middle East, focusing
on the situation in southern Lebanon.

The Middle East has seen continuing
deterioration over the past several months. The attacks
by Hizbollah across the Blue Line, the abduction of the
two Israeli soldiers and the ensuing developments have
further destabilized the already fragile situation in the
region, which is extremely worrying.

Japan strongly condemns the attacks by
Hizbollah, which are a blatant breach of relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as the abduction
of the Israeli soldiers.We call for the immediate and
unconditional release of the soldiers.
Japan is deeply concerned that these
developments of the past few days will have a negative
impact on the efforts for peace in the region as a
whole. We therefore call upon all parties to exercise
maximum self-restraint in order to avoid further
deterioration of the situation.

Japan acknowledges the legitimate security
concerns of Israel. Having said that, we strongly urge
Israel to refrain from excessive use of force and, in
particular, from actions that endanger the civilian
population and the infrastructure, as was the case with
the Israeli military operations of 13 July, which caused
many civilian casualties and the destruction of airport
facilities in Lebanon.

Japan concurs in the belief that political stability
in Lebanon is critical to peace and stability in the
Middle East. We therefore commend and support the
efforts of the Lebanese Government towards full
sovereignty and the expansion of political
independence. We recognize that the disarming and
disbanding of Hizbollah is a matter of crucial
importance that directly relates to the expansion of
control by the Government of Lebanon over all of its
territory.

The recent events underscore the importance of
achieving those goals. We hope that the Government of
Lebanon will commit itself to a continuous, sustained
effort to reach these goals, and we call on the
Government to make every effort to secure the release
of the Israeli soldiers.

It is our view that overcoming the present crisis
in the region requires the international community to
continue its cooperation in tandem. From that
perspective, Japan welcomes the decision of the
Secretary-General to dispatch a team led by his Special
Political Adviser, Mr. Vijay Nambiar, to the Middle
East to help defuse the current major crisis in the
region.

In conclusion, let me note that Prime Minister
Koizumi has been on a visit to Israel, Palestine and
Jordan from 11 July to today. The Prime Minister made
the following remarks in a joint media conference with
Israeli Prime Minister Olmert after their meeting.

"I realize that it is an extremely hard time
for the Israeli people, who are trying to cope with
the incident that occurred on Il2 July], in
addition to the difficult situation regarding the
Gaza Strip, which has continued for quite some
time. It is of greater importance, however, to have
a rational reaction based on a far-sighted
recognition of the importance of achieving
coexistence and mutual prosperity in the medium
and long term, rather than taking an eye-for-an-
eye approach."

Japan strongly hopes that the leaders in the region
will employ wisdom and judgement in addressing the
current critical situation.

