Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): |would like to begin by congratulating the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its presidency of the Council for the month of January, its first month as a non-permanent Council member. We also welcome the beginning Council term of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as a representative country from the Latin America and the Caribbean region. Finally, we also welcome the other incoming Council members - the Niger, Estonia and Tunisia. As we commemorate 75 years of operation of the United Nations, this is a moment to pause and reflect on the Organization we want. Given the constant sources of tension in the Middle East, in particular the conflict between the State of Israel and the State of Palestine, which is mired in a permanent paralysis that promotes extremism and instability in the area, we must take clear, concrete and sustainable measures in the short, medium and long term that will help achieve a definitive political solution - never military - to the long and complex conflict between the two States. The Security Council has spent decades discussing the situation in the Middle East without achieving the results desired by the Palestinians, Israel or the international community. The lack of consensus, including on previously agreed parameters, only increases the complexity of the conflict. As we mark our seventy-fifth year, this is undoubtedly one of the Organization's greatest failures. As established by the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council has the primary responsibility of maintaining international peace and security and improving its work in the area of conflict prevention, while taking into account human rights considerations. That is why we urge the Council members to take concrete and sustainable action to promote dialogue and peace in the Middle East. War cannot be fought through more wars. Peace is built through dialogue, solidarity and international cooperation. It is time for action and it is time for the members of the Security Council to assume their responsibilities under the Charter. As the famous saying goes, insanity is doing the same thing over and over again, but expecting different results. Time is running out. The conflict continues to escalate. Now is the time to find definitive solutions. We must be familiar with history in order to understand the mistakes of the past and avoid repeating them. That is why Costa Rica reiterates its strong support for a negotiated and definitive solution to the conflict - one that is reached peacefully and is legally binding on all parties. We know that we cannot or should not work in isolation. We must work together in a coordinated manner and in pursuit of shared objectives in order to deal with the crises, in particular the humanitarian crises, that require an urgent response. In that regard, Costa Rica warmly welcomes the renewal of paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 2165 (2014), which will ensure that humanitarian assistance, including medical and surgical supplies, reaches people in need throughout Syria. We underline, however, that humanitarian aid should have no conditions or limitations whatsoever as long as it is in line with the basic principles of independence, impartiality, neutrality and humanity. Inthe view of Costa Rica, blockades on the provision of humanitarian and medical assistance to civilians constitute a flagrant violation of State obligations under international law. That is why we deplore the fact that the recent extension of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement has curtailed humanitarian assistance operations, which, above all, must ensure human dignity. We recall that nearly 27 years have passed since the Oslo Accords were signed to open up a path to peace, yet the lack of political will has left them at a standstill. As stipulated in resolution 2334 (2016), Israel's establishment of settlements in Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and an impediment to the two-State solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. We therefore call upon the State of Israel to cease all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. We urge the State of Israel and the State of Palestine to resume, as soon as possible, negotiations that should lead to the establishment of a fully sovereign PalestinianState, on the basis of the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. Similarly, we call for calm and restraint and on the parties to refrain from provocative actions and the use of inflammatory rhetoric. We reject and condemn the disproportionate use of force, including the firing of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices, by Palestinian militants in Gaza against civilians in Israel and the use of lethal force by Israel against Palestinians. The only solution to the conflict is dialogue and the political will of the parties, with the acceptance of their mutual right to exist. Costa Rica reiterates its unwavering commitment to multilateralism, peaceful conflict resolution, mediation and dialogue, as fundamental tools for achieving peace. Costa Rica will remain committed to building peace in the Middle East and will support all efforts aimed at achieving the noble objective that its people demand and deserve.
