Mr. Ajumogobia (Nigeria): I would also like to
begin by thanking the United Kingdom for convening
this important meeting to address the challenges facing
Sudan as it enters the most delicate phase of its tragic
history of conflict. Your decision, Mr. President, to
focus the United Kingdom's presidency of the Council
on the Sudan is both timely and compelling. It
highlights your country's genuine commitment to
peace in the Sudan.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful remarks and tireless efforts to promote peace
in the Sudan. I also wish to express my appreciation to
His Excellency Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, and to Mr. Pagan Amum,
Secretary General of the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM), for their heartwarming and
encouraging posture. I must of course also thank
President Mbeki for his briefing and his tireless efforts
as Chairperson of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel.

This meeting, which is taking place just days
after the second meeting of the Sudan Consultative
Forum in Addis Ababa and less than two months after
the high-level summit on the Sudan held here in New
York, complements the series of recent efforts to keep
international attention focused on the Sudan. The core
message that emerged from both meetings, which is
being reinforced today, is that the international
community must sustain the momentum required to
anchor perhaps the most crucial component of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), that is, the
referendum in Southern Sudan and the referendum in
the Abyei region under the Abyei Protocol. A corollary
message is that the responsibility for achieving these
important outcomes is a collective one that falls
primarily to the parties to the CPA themselves - the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement and the National
Congress Party - but also to bilateral partners,
neighbouring countries, regional organizations and the
international community, and in particular the Council.

The Sudan is unquestionably at a critical
crossroads. On 9 January 2011, less than two months
from now, the people of Southern Sudan and Abyei are
to choose whether to remain part of a united Sudan or
whether independence will be their preference. There is
naturally much apprehension as to what lies ahead.
Several assessments and forecasts seem to indicate that
the people of Southern Sudan will go to the polls on
9 January 2011 and that the vote will take place in
Southern Sudan notwithstanding the delays in meeting
some pre-referendum benchmarks.

That unfortunately raises the prospect of
unilateral as opposed to mutual action, and has thus
served to heighten tensions amid questions about the
adequacy of the time left to organize credible polls. On
the other hand, there is the fear of renewed conflict
should the referendum be unilaterally postponed or the
CPA expire, thereby compromising the basis for
interaction and dialogue between the North and South.
This is the dilemma that faces the Council.

But neither the Sudan nor the international
community can afford a renewed conflict, which would
destabilize the region and undo the substantial progress
that has been achieved in the country since 2005. We
therefore deplore the growing state of insecurity and
heightened tension along the disputed North-South
border following recent bombings in the area. We urge
the SPLA and the Sudanese Army to cease all military
activities and stay committed to the permanent
ceasefire agreement.

At this critical moment, neither the postponement
of the referendum nor the unilateral declaration of
independence would serve the cause of international
peace and security. As we approach the scheduled date,

the parties - and indeed all of us - must therefore
redouble efforts and commit to the full implementation
of the CPA, particularly with regard to the timely
conduct of free, fair and credible referendums. The
parties themselves have an obligation to seek a
peaceful, equitable and mutually beneficial
coexistence, no matter the outcome of the referendums.

To realize this goal, the people of the Sudan must
work together, with the international community
providing requisite support, to address the following
issues urgently. First, there are significant political,
technical, security and logistical challenges to
overcome in order to hold two free, peaceful and
credible referendums in Southern Sudan and Abyei. As
with the April 2010 elections, civic education, the
registration and mobilization of voters, the provision of
security and preparing for international monitoring, as
agreed in the CPA, are important issues that should be
addressed. In this regard, I commend the Secretary-
General for appointing former President Benjamin
Mkapa as head of the international monitoring panel
for the referendums. I also commend United Nations
agencies for the measures they have put in place to
support the successful conduct of the referendums,
with more than 60 per cent of staff and logistics
already deployed.

To bolster confidence in the process, the parties
should utilize the remaining period before the vote to
address the core issues that fuel the uncertainty about
the referendums. Issues of insecurity and
disagreements on the workings, composition and
funding of the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission should be addressed. The parties should
also ensure that the registration process, which -
happily - commenced yesterday, proceeds peacefully
and in a manner that assures the integrity of the
process. We must, however, emphasize that given the
limited time available for the preparations, the failure
by some donors to fulfil their pledges is one of the
impediments to the conduct of credible referendums on
9 January 2011.

Secondly, contingency planning at the country
and international levels is necessary to guarantee
stability, protect civilians and forestall violence. All
stakeholders, including the United Nations, civil
society groups and the parties, are urged to integrate
the various contingency plans with practical
implementation strategies. There is a need for greater
coordination and the involvement of local communities
in the planning and implementation of the contingency
arrangements. The arrangements should specifically
address the fate of Southern Sudanese in the North and
Northern Sudanese in the South, as well as potential
internal displacements.

Thirdly, a framework agreement on post-
referendum arrangements should be concluded on
issues such as border demarcation, citizenship and
residency, natural resources, oil and economic
cooperation, grazing rights and security. In Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, the popular consultations
provided for by the CPA should be supported through
adequate funding. In Abyei, the Referendum
Commission should be established in accordance with
the Abyei Referendum Act of December 2009.

Nigeria believes that progress on these issues
before the referendums is not only desirable but also
necessary to obviate the prospect of post-referendum
conflict. We therefore welcome the consultative
process and the commencement of negotiations
between the National Congress Party and the Sudanese
People's Liberation Movement on post-referendum
arrangements, facilitated by the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel for the Sudan. The
negotiations should now move from procedures to
substantive outcomes.

Fourthly, the ultimate decision on the future of
the Sudan lies with the Sudanese people. They and they
alone should determine the structure and shape of their
country. Nevertheless, whatever the outcome of the
referendums, the Sudan has reached a point of no
return. The ongoing process of State formation and
institution building in Southern Sudan will remain a
daunting task and will require international assistance.
In nurturing peace in the Sudan, we have an obligation
to balance the options before us by giving equal
emphasis to both the principle of referendum on self-
determination and that of making unity attractive.
Above all, we must demonstrate our neutrality and
allow the people of the Sudan to freely determine their
own future.

Fifthly and finally, Nigeria believes that a
comprehensive peace agreement in Darfur is necessary
for sustainable peace and development in the Sudan,
and it should be pursued with renewed vigour. We
therefore fully support the Doha peace talks and
commend the multi-strand efforts of the African Union-
United Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur. We

commend his efforts in facilitating the improvement of
the relations between the Sudan and its neighbours, in
particular Chad and Libya. We were pleased to learn
that the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) is back
in Doha to discuss the conditions under which it can
resume negotiations. Our expectation is that JEM. and
the Abdul Wahid faction of the Sudan Liberation Army
will unfreeze their boycott and fully rejoin the Doha
talks.

Nigeria commends the extensive support of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) for the Darfur internal dialogue
process and welcomes the new political and security
strategy for Darfur. We believe that early recovery and
development initiatives would also meaningfully
contribute to the efforts to find lasting solutions to the
conflict there.

The United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), has a critical
role to play in providing security and the logistical
support required to ensure the success of the
referendums. We urge the parties to remove all
restrictions on the movement of UNMIS personnel. We
also urge donors to fully resource UNMIS and to
address the capability deficit created by the withdrawal
of six UNMIS utility helicopters. If UNMIS is to fully
discharge its protection of civilians mandate during the
referendums, it would be necessary for the Mission to
undertake preventive deployments in flashpoint areas
such as Abyei, Unity state, Upper Nile and Western Bar
El Ghazal.

Nigeria has been and will remain a reliable,
active partner in the efforts to resolve the Sudan's
long-standing conflict. Through the Abuja peace
conferences, Nigeria helped facilitate the Darfur Peace
Agreement. Today, our peacekeeping forces are among
those deployed in UNMIS and UNAMID, facing the
daily challenges of maintaining peace and security in
the country. We remain absolutely committed to the
completion of the peace process in the Sudan.

With indications that the preparations are finally
under way, the international community should be
unrelenting in supporting the process. The United
Nations should lead the effort to secure the firm
commitment of all parties to respecting the outcome of
a credible referendum on Southern Sudan.

Last April's elections saw our fears come to
naught in the Sudan. As we therefore resolve to lend
our strong support to the CPA commitment of all the
parties to holding the referendum on the Southern
Sudan in January, as planned, let us do everything we
can to contribute to the achievement of that critical and
crucial milestone.

