Mr. Rycroi't (United Kingdom): Iwould like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. Eight months
ago he issued an urgent wake-up call to the world as
the threat of famine and the threat of millions starving
to death loomed large over the people of Somalia,
South Sudan, north-eastern Nigeria and Yemen. Today,
thanks to his call to action and the global efforts that
followed, famine has been kept at bay. And yet that is
no cause for celebration. As the Secretary-General said
in his briefing, the absence of famine is not the absence
of need. Hunger by any other name is still hunger. In
each of the countries I just mentioned, the need remains
colossal - overwhelming, in fact - and even greater
than it was in February.

In Somalia, more than 3 million people are going
to bed hungry. The same can be said for more than
5 million in north-eastern Nigeria. In South Sudan,
there are literally more people without food than with.
More than half of the population - more than 6 million
people - are severely food insecure. And in Yemen, as
we heard earlier this week, more than 17 million people
are now food insecure, nearly 7 million of whom are
just one step away from famine.

If only to deepen the tragedy further, in all four
of those countries the impact falls most acutely on
women, girls and children. As the Council well knows,
the long-term solution to all those crises is ending and
preventing conflict, but long-term fixes alone are no
good when hunger kills in the short-term. We need aid
to reach people in need quickly, and as the Council, we
need to find the political will necessary to overcome
the barriers that too often prevent that from happening.
We need only look to South Sudan, where fighters from
each side accuse civilians of feeding or being fed by the
enemy. Access restrictions, bureaucratic impediments
and attacks on humanitarian workers continue to
delay the delivery of lifesaving assistance, with more
than 1,600 access incidents reported since the start
of 2016 - that is, the delivery of food being denied
to those most in need, at least twice a day, for nearly
two years.

In north-east Nigeria it is a similar story, with
aid agencies unable to access many of those in need
due to continuing fighting between Boko Haram and
Government forces. As a priority, the Government of
Nigeria must protect civilians and provide unimpeded
humanitarian access. In parallel, the Government
should set out clear steps for ending the conflict that
do not depend on military measures alone. Sustainable
peace can only be achieved by addressing the root
causes of the violence.

In Yemen, the gravest humanitarian situation
today, food is the biggest weapon and lack of food
is the biggest killer. The Council is being very clear
this week about the need for increased commercial
and humanitarian access into and across Yemen,
including through increased capacity at all Yemeni
ports, particularly Al Hudaydah. We also need to
see public-sector salaries paid regularly across the
country, starting with the health, water, sanitation and
waste-management sectors to stem cholera and preserve
essential Government services.

It is only in Somalia that drought is partially
responsible for the situation. Even there, the war
remains the principal trigger of and contributor to the
unfolding humanitarian tragedy. Access restrictions are
again a central cause of the crisis, with impediments to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance at the federal
and state levels, as well as hefty, illicit fees that limit
reach and increase delivery costs.
In conclusion, what we are witnessing in all of
those countries is the return of hunger as a weapon
of war. The destruction of farms, livestock herds and
markets, the blocks on humanitarian aid and access for
commercial goods are all deliberate tactics to decrease
people's access to adequate nutrition and health care.
We need to recognize that it is happening as a result of
political decisions. So in turn, the Council must bring
its own political pressure to bear on those responsible
and hold them to account. We have the power and duty
to influence their behaviour in the right direction. It is
time to say that enough is enough.

