Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to thank Cote d'lvoire
for having organized this briefing in a timely fashion. I
also wish to thank all speakers for their briefings.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to
emphasize the following three points: first, the need
for an integrated and coordinated approach to the issue
of the Sahel; secondly, the need to combat climate
change, water stress and other root causes of conflict,
in keeping with the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel; and, thirdly, the need to build a lasting peace in
the region through an approach that includes women
and young people.

First, regarding the need for an integrated and
coordinated approach in the context of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, I would like
to recall that the shock waves of the instability in the
Sahel reach far beyond the region, even to the shores of
Europe. Real, long-term solutions are crucial in order
to respond to this issue. That is why the Kingdom of
the Netherlands truly appreciates the positive approach
of the Support Plan, which focuses on opportunities
more than difficulties. Consistency and coordination
are crucial to acting in the six priority areas of the Plan.

We support the efforts of the Special Adviser,
Ibrahim Thiaw, and his team to ensure the consistent
implementation of the Strategy and the Support Plan.
It is particularly important to bolster coordination
and consistency among development and security
stakeholders. The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
welcomes the recent Group of Five for the Sahel
conference in Niamey, as well as the donor conference
in Nouakchott, focusing on the development pillars of
the Group of Five for the Sahel.

During those meetings, local and international
stakeholders underscored the importance of taking
into consideration the link between security and
development in building a lasting peace in the Sahel.
Gaining the confidence of local populations, fully
respecting human rights and strengthening national
judicial systems in this regard are absolutely crucial
undertakings. We would also underscore that an
integrated approach is necessary not only at the
regional level but also at the national and local levels.
In that context, we would particularly encourage the
Secretary-General to continue work on the drafting of
an integrated strategic framework for Mali, as stipulated
in the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

My second point is on combating climate change,
water stress and other root causes of conflicts. It
is right that the Support Plan focuses as a priority
on strengthening resilience and the management of
climate-related security risks. The Sahel is one of the
regions in the world worst affected by the pernicious
effects of climate change and water stress. Climate
change knows no borders, and, to counter it, we need to
also take that approach. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has always been in favour of a joint approach in terms
of risk assessment and risk management strategies, as
can be seen in the statements made by the President of
the Council on, inter alia, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, and the mandate
of MINUSMA.

During the Arria Formula meeting on water, peace
and security held in October, the instrument that was
presented was aimed at using such risk assessments to
develop responses that take into consideration conflicts
and climate in Mali and elsewhere. A key role has
been accorded the Special Adviser, Mr. Thiaw, and his
team, in translating such assessments into programmes
that take account of conflicts and climate in order to
strengthen resilience in the region.

Thirdly, we commend the inclusive approach of
the support plan vis-a-vis women and young people.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the close
link between the Support Plan and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. As we have already
underscored, the programme is a prevention tool par
excellence. Ensuring lasting means of subsistence is
crucial to build a lasting peace.

It is often women and children who pay the heaviest
price during conflict, and this is particularly true in the
Sahel, which has the youngest population in the world.
Women and young people therefore must be effectively

involved in the implementation of the Support Plan and
have a voice in the decisions taken regarding them.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
expresses its support for the Special Adviser,
Mr. Thiaw, in the implementation of the Support Plan
and its six priorities. We urge the Council to continue
to support these efforts in order to make possible the
full implementation of the Plan through a consistent
and inclusive approach that is focused on the root cause
of the problem.

