Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I cannot
help but note the emblematic side of the fact that the
first meeting of the Security Council in which Ukraine
is takinig part since its election as one of this body's
non-permanent members for the next two years is
devoted to the topic of improving the Council's working
methods, the very hallmark of Ukraine's electoral
campaign. In looking ahead this important issue will be
one of the major priorities of Ukraine's non-permanent
membership ofthe Council during the period 2016-2017.

Ukraine has always been a staunch supporter of
increasing transparency in the Council's activities and
enhancing its interaction with the wider membership of
the United Nations and the bodies of the Organization.
In that respect, we commend the Spanish presidency of
the Security Council for inviting the President of the
General Assembly to address the Council at its annual
debate on working methods, for the first time in the
past eight years.

In our electoral campaign we made a strong case
for transforming the Council into a body, open and
fully accessible to all States, as well as promoting, as a
matter of principle, broad and constructive cooperation
with each and every State Member. The United Nations
membership can rest assured that we will deliver on that
pledge in the next two years. It is through permanent
dialogue, consultation and accessibility to all interested
delegations that Ukraine will maintain its close contacts
with other States, taking into account their legitimate
interests in the day-to-day work of the Council.

Next year an important cluster of the Council's
working methods will come under the scrutiny of the
world community as the United Nations family elects a
new Secretary-General. As an incoming non-permanent
member of the Council, Ukraine is fully cognizant
of its responsibility to contribute to the proper
implementation of General Assembly resolution 69/321,
which provides that the process of the selection of the
Secretary-General shall be guided by the principles of
transparency and inclusiveness.

Bearing in mind that the Council's chief
responsibility lies in the maintenance of international
peace and security, the issue of conflict prevention must
feature more prominently in the Council's work. That is
of particular importance to countries not represented on
the Council that are facing clear and imminent threats
to their security. Therefore, preventive diplomacy must
become a staple of the Council's work.
Interacting with troop- and police-contributing
countries is of particular interest to Ukraine, as an active
participant in United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
Noting some positive changes in that area, we believe
that holding more regular and timely consultations
with such countries, both during the elaboration of
United Nations peace missions and mandates and
throughout the entire life cycle, is crucially important
in the ultimate success of those missions. We strongly
support the idea that contributing countries must have
a stronger voice in the overall decision-making process
in the Council.

External aggression against Ukraine made my
country and many others take a closer look at the
Council's working methods. What became even more
crystal clear was the direct linkage between ensuring
the effective functioning of the Council and genuine
commitment on the part of each and every of its
members - the permanent ones in the first place - to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

In that light, an area of a particular concern for us
is the use of the veto in the Security Council. In our
opinion, that instrument has long outlived its utility
and now has a detrimental impact on the Council's
performance. We therefore welcome and support the
French and Mexican proposal on suspending the use
of the veto in cases of mass atrocities, as well as the
code of conduct put forward by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group. We encourage all
Security Council members to give due consideration to
those initiatives.

Further steps towards the eventual elimination of
the veto could be taken in the direction of the non-use of
the veto when considering cases of aggression against
a United Nations State Member. Blocking the Council's
action under such circumstances would run contrary to
the purposes and principles of the Charter. However,
being realists, we realize that the veto will remain with
us for at least the foreseeable future. In that regard, we
propose that, if the veto is used, the permanent member
resorting to it have to explain the reasons for such
action, in particular with regard to its consistency with
the Charter of the United Nations.

We also believe that there is an urgent need to
ensure the proper implementation of paragraph 3 of
Article 27 of the Charter, which obliges a party to a
dispute to abstain from voting.

In making our contribution to achieving one of the
presidency's goals of reducing the overall length of the
debate, I will conclude with a final remark. In its future
work in the Security Council, Ukraine will strive to
enhance the openness and transparency of the Council
with the goal of improving its efficiency and restoring
its credibility, which has been severely undermined
recently.

