Mr. Spoerri: The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) is honoured to brief the Security
Council once again on this very important subject and
would like to thank Portugal, as President of the
Council, for the invitation.

Among the many different views that may be
expressed here today by the various actors concerned
with the protection of civilians in armed conflict, there
is surely at least one common theme, which is that the
reality on the ground has not kept pace with the
considerable normative progress achieved in recent
years. The undeniable reality is that civilians continue
to be the main victims of armed conflict, due to
indiscriminate attacks or targeted violence. Hundreds
of thousands of women, men and children bear the
brunt of conflicts that are in many cases protracted and

increasingly complex in both their causes and
consequences.

Since the ICRC briefed the Council one year ago,
we have noted a number of ongoing and emerging
concerns related to the protection of civilians that
confront us in our daily work in armed conflicts and
other situations of violence around the world. I will
mention three of them here.

First, events in North Africa, the Middle East and
elsewhere have confirmed that violence against health-
care facilities and personnel is one of the most serious
yet neglected humanitarian issues of the day. In some
cases, ambulances or hospitals are directly targeted,
killing or wounding medical staff and patients. In many
cases, health workers are harassed or threatened by
fighters sometimes seeking to obstruct treatment for
their wounded enemies or demanding supplies.
Ambulances are deliberately blocked from accessing
wounded people or held up for hours at checkpoints.
Each incident effectively denies the right of wounded
and sick people to health care. Yet, beyond the direct
impact of attacks on medical infrastructure or workers,
there are immeasurable longer-term repercussions on
entire communities with war-related or chronic health
problems.

The ICRC is so concerned by the far-reaching
and profound humanitarian consequences of threats to
the provision of health care in armed conflicts and
other situations of violence that it recently launched a
multi-year project and communication campaign on the
issue.

Secondly, the so-called Arab Spring has also
helped to highlight the extreme vulnerability of
migrants living in or crossing through countries
affected by armed violence. These migrants are
extremely vulnerable to abuse and exploitation by all
sides to a conflict, ranging from illegal confiscation of
their belongings to sexual exploitation or even torture.
In some cases, they are made the scapegoat for causing
or exacerbating the conflict.

Thirdly, events over the past year have
underscored concerns related to the conduct of
hostilities, particularly in urban settings. Military
operations conducted in densely populated urban areas,
often using heavy or highly explosive weapons, have
had devastating humanitarian consequences for civilian
populations. This situation has further highlighted the
need for strict interpretation and rigorous application
of such key notions as distinction, military objectives,
the principle of proportionality and precaution.

The overarching challenge presented by these
issues is to achieve consistent respect for international
humanitarian law by States and non-State actors in
international and domestic armed conflicts, irrespective
of the reasons for going to war. Coupled with this is the
need to enhance accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law both by parties to
conflict and by individual perpetrators, be it at the
national level or by referral to the International
Criminal Court. Indeed, the Secretary-General included
these issues in the five core challenges first set out in
his 2009 report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2009/277).

Working to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law is at the heart of the ICRC's mandate
and mission. That is reflected in our impartial, neutral
and independent approach. Of course, principled
humanitarian action is nothing more than an empty
mantra unless it is translated into a meaningful
response on the ground, and the many different actors
involved in protection work have many different
approaches. For the ICRC, a meaningful response
essentially requires an approach that is needs-based,
has proximity to the beneficiaries, and entails
engagement with all stakeholders, thereby gaining the
widest possible acceptance and respect, and thus the
widest possible humanitarian access. This approach
also helps to ensure the safety of our staff. Protection,
for us, goes together with assistance, and one may
facilitate the other.

Crucially, if the ICRC's approach is to be
effective and credible, it must remain consistently
distinct from any kind of political process or decision,
be they peace processes, political negotiations,
Security Council mandates, the human rights agendas
of various organizations, military or peace operations,
or judicial investigations and prosecutions. At the same
time, the ICRC respects the sovereignty of States and
contributes to national capacity-building, for example
by supporting authorities in incorporating international
humanitarian law into national legislation and into
army training manuals, by advising on rules of
engagement in order to limit risks for civilian
populations and prevent abuses, or by helping existing
structures to continue functioning. In so doing, the
ICRC contributes to strengthening accountability for
violations.

In recent crises, such as those in Cote d'Ivoire,
Libya and Yemen, the ICRC has managed to gain and
maintain access to people affected by adhering strictly
to this approach. Likewise, in protracted armed
conflicts - Afghanistan is just one example - the
perception of the ICRC's work as impartial, neutral and
independent has been absolutely crucial to achieving
dialogue with parties on all sides of the conflict, and
thus to obtaining humanitarian access to those in need.
In this regard, all measures that effectively hamper
contact by humanitarian agencies with organized
non-State armed groups are a cause for concern. Under
international humanitarian law, the ICRC must be
allowed to offer its services to any party to an armed
conflict.

The success of protection, which is ultimately
manifested in the prevention of abuses occurring in the
first place, is notoriously hard to measure. It is
generally not possible to know how much suffering has
been prevented in any given armed conflict or how
many more abuses might have been committed without
the efforts of all the various protection actors. Yet the
difficulty of measuring success should never serve as
an excuse or obviate the need for accountability. When
protection fails, we have all witnessed the terrible
consequences * for health-care workers, migrants and
the countless women, men and children suffering in the
face of conflict.

Ultimate responsibility for the protection of
civilians clearly lies with States, both on their own
territory and in their military operations in other
contexts. Little can be achieved without the requisite
political will. But other actors - including non-State
armed groups, which are also bound by international
humanitarian law, military forces and humanitarian
organizations - also have important roles to play.
Indeed, all of us here today must help to ensure, in our
different ways, that normative achievements are felt
where they matter, not in the debating chamber, but on
the ground, so that they make a real difference for
people in the midst of war or other situations of
violence.

