Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
important briefing and for his exemplary commitment
to sustainable peace. I would also like to thank the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Dan
Neculaescu, and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Smail Chergui, for their
particularly enlightening briefings.

As the French Minister of State stressed yesterday
in the General Assembly, recent years have seen
significant progress within the United Nations in
terms of dealing with crises and in the United Nations
approach to them (see A/72/PV.84). We are a long way
from the days when the United Nations was involved
in crises only through peacekeeping operations. The
entire conflict cycle is taken into account today, in a pr
evention-maintenance-peacebuilding continuum. The
crisis situations to which the Security Council must
respond have changed in nature and are increasingly
asymmetrical, transnational and multidimensional.
Many conflicts and civil wars are rooted in development
and governance fragilities, the very same that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development seeks to address.

We must therefore adopt a cross-cutting and
integrated approach that over time combines security,
humanitarian, political and development actions,
human rights promotion and the fight against climate
change and environmental degradation, by bringing
together all partners in a common approach. In that
context, what role should the Security Council play? I
see three main roles for the Council.

First, the Council must strengthen its preventive
action. The United Nations was born out of the
objective of prevention. For too long, this aspect has
been neglected. The Security Council must be in a
better position to anticipate crisis risks through an
early-warning system, so as to improve the Council's
collective ability to act in advance of crises. Otherwise,
we will be forced to manage crises, at a much higher
human and financial cost.

The first steps taken by the Secretary-General
are in the right direction - for instance, the setting
up of the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
and a rethinking of communication on the concept of
prevention as a useful tool before and after conflicts.
France fully supports the Secretary-General's initiatives
in that regard.

Regional organizations have an essential role to
play. That was the case of the Economic Community
of West African States in the Gambia, for example,
with success, as President Barrow showed yesterday
(see A/72/PV.83). The same should also be the case
in Burundi, where, unfortunately, the East African
Community's mediation work is being hampered by
the Government's refusal to engage in a constructive
dialogue with the opposition and international partners.

We must also enable the most vulnerable countries
to develop their own capacities, so that they are
able to deal upstream with the fragilities that fuel
crises-bycombatingclimatechangeandenvironmental
degradation; by fighting unemployment, particularly
among young people; by remedying the lack of public
services and public infrastructure; by establishing
inclusive governance and effective, accountable and
accessible institutions; by promoting a judicial system
that gives everyone, without discrimination, access to
quality justice; by ensuring respect for human rights;
and by reducing tensions over natural resources. To
ensure lasting peace, we must ensure that no one is left
behind, as per our commitment under Agenda 2030.

Secondly, when prevention fails and the spiral
of violence sets in, it is our responsibility to stop the
escalation and to intervene. That is what France has
done at the request of its partners in Mali and the
Central African Republic. In that context, peacekeeping
operations remain a central tool of the Security
Council to promote the return to peace. France will
remain committed - with strength, consistency and
conviction - to supporting peacekeeping operations.
It is because these operations are inseparable from
the original ambitions of the United Nations that our
collective credibility depends on them and the reform
work initiated by the Secretary-General must be
fully supported.

For peacekeeping operations to be effective, the
Council must ensure that they have well-calibrated
mandates that are part of a clear political strategy, with
defined priorities and timetables. France is committed
to that goal in the drafting of mandates, in particular on
peacekeeping operations for which it is a penholder, in
close coordination with troop-contributing countries.
That requirement is all the more important in the case
of multidimensional mandates, which, in addition to
their need to adapt to particularly complex conflicts,
must also build a bridge between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding by promoting the treatment of the root
causes of crises.

Finally, the Security Council must ensure a
successful transition from peacekeeping operations to
peacebuilding and sustainability. That approach was
pursued in Cote d'Ivoire, working closely with the
Ivorian authorities to enable a gradual withdrawal of
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. The
presence of Cote d'Ivoire in the Security Council today
is an undeniable symbol of that success.

More recently, in Liberia, the peacebuilding plan
developed with the support of the Peacebuilding
Commission also facilitated a successful transition.
The Commission demonstrated the invaluable support
it can provide to the Security Council through its
expertise and its role in facilitating coordination
and exchange among all of its partners. France fully
supports strengthening the Peacebuilding Support
Office and bolstering the Peacebuilding Fund, which
must be able to preserve what makes it most valuable,
that is, its flexibility and ability to react. As a token
of its commitment, France contributed to the Fund
last year after several years of not doing so. We have
also decided to focus our development assistance to
fragile countries and countries emerging from conflict.
A French fund for resilience and peace has raised up
to €100 million a year to that end, and will see its
resources double by 2020. It is therefore a significant
commitment for my country.

While the demand for conflict prevention and
the links between peace and development have
become apparent, it is now up to the international
community - that is to say all of us - to translate
this determination into action for lasting peace.
Ensuring lasting peace requires an effective peace and
security architecture, a development system adapted
to new challenges and based on an Organization with
renewed management - a United Nations capable of
facing the challenges of the twenty-first century. These
three reforms go hand in hand; we cannot consider
them separately. The Secretary-General can count on
France's determined support in this endeavour.

France will contribute actively to the debates
for the effective implementation of lasting peace
in a constructive spirit. It will continue to pursue
a firm policy in this area, whether on the ground or
as part of its responsibilities at the United Nations,
in order to take - with the Members of the United
Nations - multilateral action in the service of peace
and security.

