Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): As you correctly
observed, Sir, the representative of Angola spoke on our
behalf when he congratulated you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. It is indeed our distinct pleasure to see you
presiding over the deliberations on this important agenda
item. Lesotho and other Southern African Development
Community (SADC) countries will continue to devote
their efforts to bring peace to Angola, knowing that
stability in Angola is essential for the process of
development and democratization of our subregion. I
should like also to associate myself with previous
speakers in extending my delegation's congratulations to
your predecessor for the remarkable way in which he
steered the work of the Council during the month of July.

A few weeks ago the Council issued a statement in
which it condemned the mistreatment of the personnel of
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations
working in areas controlled by UNITA. That
condemnation followed the joint statement by the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) and
representatives of the three observer States - Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America.
Despite strenuous efforts by the troika and by Maitre
Blondin Beye, UNITA has failed to remove the remaining
obstacles to the final implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol.

My delegation has read and noted with deep concern
the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola, from which it is clear that
the Angolan peace process is being derailed and that if
decisive action is not taken, it will be doomed to failure.
We are disappointed that, in the less than six months
since the swearing in of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation, which we hailed as a step in the
right direction, the Angolan people' s legitimate aspirations
to peace have once again been shattered due to UNITA's
failure to fully comply with the Council's resolutions and
with its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. We are
particularly concerned that tensions in northern Angola
are rapidly spreading to the central and southern
provinces, thus posing a serious threat to the peace
process.

The situation has become even more disturbing due
to constant failures by UNITA to submit information on

 

the strength and location of its security detachments and so-
called mining police; its failure to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and the staff of non-
governmental organizations, all of which are essential to the
peace process. There can be no doubt that the international
community has become increasingly impatient with
UNITA's intransigence and unwillingness to meet its
obligations. Key outstanding issues include the
normalization of State administration throughout the
country, the transformation of radio Vorgan into a non-
partisan station and the total transformation of UNITA into
a political party.

There is no doubt that since the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol in 1994, this Council and, through it, the
international community have come a long way and have
invested heavily in bringing peace to Angola. Over the
years, we have stressed the importance of the expeditious
implementation of the various outstanding tasks under the
Lusaka Protocol. We have pleaded with UNITA and waited
for it to comply with its obligations. All of this has been in
vain, and our appeals have fallen on deaf ears, resulting in
our deep frustration over the delayed progress in the peace
process.

At this critical time for the peace process in Angola,
the international community and the Security Council must
demonstrate their determination and their commitment to
the Angolan peace process by sending a firm and
unequivocal message to UNITA that no further
procrastination can be tolerated. The time has now come for
the Council to oblige UNITA to comply fully and urgently
with its commitments and with Council resolutions.
Decisive action must be taken to ensure that UNITA stops
its delaying tactics and cooperates fully with the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola. The freedom of
movement and safety of MONUA and other international
personnel must be ensured; UNITA should stop laying
mines and restricting MONUA's verification activities.

It is for these reasons that we welcome the draft
resolution before the Council today, which in our view
addresses some of these issues. It calls upon UNITA to
provide detailed and credible information on the strength of
its armed personnel not previously reported to the United
Nations in order that they may be verified, disarmed and
demobilized. We trust that UNITA will heed this call to
stop restoring its military capabilities. In addition, the draft
resolution makes it clear that further and more drastic
action will be taken if necessary to bring peace to Angola.
My delegation confirms its readiness to support the
imposition of additional measures if UNITA continues its
intransigence.

Most important, the draft resolution is directed to
Member States, which are to adopt measures necessary to
restrict the movements of UNITA personnel. The
measures envisaged in the draft resolution cannot succeed
without the cooperation of States. We therefore urge all
Member States to implement these measures and to
redouble their efforts to comply with earlier measures
imposed by the Council.

My delegation would also like to affirm its support
for the Secretary-General's proposal that United Nations
military units remain in the country until the end of
October 1997. We share the view that a meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi would be a clear
signal of the commitment of both leaders to advance the
peace process, and we thus urge the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to encourage the parties to meet as soon as
possible.

I conclude by conveying our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his informative report. I also extend
my delegation's sincere thanks and congratulations to
Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, to the members of the
troika and to the personnel of MONUA for their
unwavering support and devotion to the Angolan peace
process. Our gratitude goes also to the international
community for its valuable support, assisting the people
of Angola as they strive to attain long-lasting peace.

