Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): Madam President, let me join
others in welcoming you to this debate and in thanking
you for your leadership. Also, let me commend your
country for the choice of topic for our discussion today.

I should like in addition to thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her tireless efforts and her contribution to the task
of protecting the rights and welfare of children. The
growing culture of cooperation on this issue between
State actors, the United Nations and other relevant
agencies is a credit to Ms. Coomaraswamy's
leadership. Working together to devise and implement
time-bound action plans for the rehabilitation and
reintegration of children affected by armed conflict,
these actors make an important contribution to the task
of protecting the rights and welfare of that vulnerable

group .

Children are not only victims of armed conflicts;
they also suffer the worst effects of their debilitating
consequences. Defenceless and powerless, children are
killed and maimed and are used and abused in these
situations, as we heard this morning in the compelling
account of Ms. Manju Gurung. We commend her for
her courage in telling her story before the Security
Council.

Where they survive, their future is often marked
by neglect, rejection and even ostracism. We are
convinced that, so long as there is armed conflict, the
international community must take appropriate
measures to protect the most vulnerable groups, of
which children constitute a significant component. Our
interventions must aim at preventing their involvement
or use in armed conflicts in violation of international
law.
One cannot overstate the need for the Council to
continue to pay attention to the issue of children and
armed conflict. Indeed, over the past decade the
Council has demonstrated its commitment to
improving the plight of such children, beginning with
its landmark resolution 1261 (1999) and most recently
through resolution 1882 (2009). Resolution 1621
(2005), which created the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, provides
another key mechanism that has allowed the Council to
give practical expression to the protection of children
in armed conflict.

We are pleased that resolution 1882 (2009) has
extended the reach of the Secretary-General's reporting
framework to cover additional violations and to
address conflict situations not on the Council's agenda.
That resolution also broadened the conceptual scope of
the issue to include killing, maiming and rape and
other sexual violence inflicted on children in these
circumstances. Fittingly, the issue of children and
armed conflict has become more deeply embedded in
the business of the Council.

We applaud the progress that has been achieved
in the adoption of appropriate instruments and the
establishment of relevant institutional frameworks
related to children and armed conflict. Those countries
that have willingly submitted themselves to United
Nations support and strategies are to be commended. In
addition, the N'Djamena Declaration on child soldiers,
signed last week by Nigeria and five other countries,
demonstrates the commitment to tackling this issue.

While these successes should be recognized, it is
clear that much work remains to be done. Nigeria is
concerned that persistent violators cited in the annexes
of the Secretary-General's reports for at least five years
have not received the Council's attention with a view
to ensuring their accountability.

In our View, the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict should be encouraged to continue to
monitor, assess, consult and report objectively on the
range of issues affecting children in armed conflict.
The Council should take steps to ensure that
substantive administrative support is provided to the
Working Group to enhance its capacity to discharge its
mandate. There is also need for coordination among the
Working Group, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the relevant sanctions committees to ensure that
the recommendations of the sanctions committees
adequately respond to the protection imperatives of
armed conflicts.

For its part, the Council should be seen to
facilitate progress. It should be more responsive to the
conclusions and recommendations of the Working
Group, and it should use its considerable authority to
ensure that violators of children in armed conflict are
held to account.

As a troop-contributing country, Nigeria supports
the inclusion of specific provisions for the protection
of children in the mandates of all United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. We also
support the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to develop and implement appropriate
training programmes and material for all United
Nations peacekeepers. Support should also be given for
the integration of this successful strategy into the work
of the Department of Political Affairs in its political
missions. We believe that this will not only prepare
the missions to better handle child-specific issues that
are inevitable in conflict and post-conflict situations,
but will also help to establish best practices for
emulation by the international community.

We welcome the Secretary-General's suggestion to
make the provision of peacekeeping support to national
forces that may be committing serious human rights
violations conditional on compliance with international
law. We hope that this will propel the integration of
child protection measures into all medium- and long-
term peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategies.

The Council should continue to send a strong a
clear warning that abuses and violations against
children in armed conflict situations will not go
unpunished.

Finally, we endorse the draft presidential
statement to be issued at the end of this debate.

