The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

I join the other Council members in thanking
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of
Sweden and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) at its ninth session, for his statement. I am
delighted to see Sweden at the helm of the PBC and am
confident that under Ambassador Skoog's leadership
we will achieve further progress in the Commission's
work. I would also like to thank Ambassador Patriota
of Brazil for his outstanding leadership of the PBC at
its eighth session. His statement and report (S/2015/174)
outline many important issues that will continue to
dominate our discussions. My appreciation goes to the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its unstinting support
for and cooperation with the PBC.

The challenges facing international peace and
security today are enormously demanding in terms
of political attention and the need for resources.
Since its establishment, the PBC has demonstrated
its contribution particularly in terms of its support
for institution-building and strengthening national
resilience in times of peace, as well as in providing
advice and accompaniment to countries dealing with
political difficulties in troubled times.

As a member of both the Security Council and
the PBC concurrently, Malaysia has assumed an
informal coordinating role between both bodies in
order to facilitate better mutual understanding and
relations. Today's discussion underscores the need for
strengthening strategic partnerships in both bodies in
order to deal with, other things, issues such as transitions
and the emerging gaps between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and the engagement of international or
regional actors in preventing countries emerging from
conflict from relapsing into it.

At the same time, the review of the peacebuilding
architecture now under way presents a timely
opportunity for the members of the Commission and
the wider United Nations membership to take stock and
deliberate further on measures aimed at improving the
Organization's peacebuilding architecture. We believe
that the review of the peacebuilding architecture and
its outcome should also take into consideration other
review processes, namely, the high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, and the outcome of the United Nations peace
operations review. Malaysia believes that the outcome

of those three processes is highly important to the I new resume my functions as President of the
United Nations system. The reviews must be mutually Council.

reinforcim7 ifthe are to have the desired im act. . . .
° y P There are no more names inscribed on the list of

We have followed closely the views of Council speakers.
membersontheneedforasharperfocusinpeacebuilding
efforts and in the expertise and financial support
required. We look forward to the informal interactive
dialogue on that subject later today.

The meeting ruse at 12.10p.m.
