Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (Spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, and
your delegation on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent
Representative of Malaysia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011). I also thank Mr. Kobler for
his important briefing and congratulate him on his
appointment to the post of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya. I wish him every success in
his functions and assure him and his team of our full
support to ensure peace and security in Libya and to
create a Government of national accord that can enable
Libyans to tackle the challenges threatening their
country and the future of all Libyans.
The efforts of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) have paved the way as much as
possible for a rapprochement of the different factions in
Libya. They also led to the political agreement signed
by the majority of parties in July. The agreement enjoys
broad popular support throughout Libya and has been
approved by a majority of the members of the House
of Representatives and the General National Congress.
It will now to be submitted to vote by the two parties.
While the negotiations that took place were sufficient,
due to the stubbornness of certain positions as well as
to certain threats, they did not lead to consensus when
the agreement was signed five months ago.

Hundreds of thousands of Libyan refugees are
subjected to humiliation far from their homes. There are
also just as many internally displaced persons in Libya,
their homes destroyed. Millions of people throughout
the country fear for their lives and their property. It is
no longer morally acceptable to leave the future of the
Libyan people in the hands of those who seek to take
advantage of their positions, functions and weapons in
order to perpetrate the suffering of the Libyan people
both in and outside Libya. It is no longer acceptable
to remain passive before those who continue to protect
their own interests and who attempt to incite hatred and
resentment following the agreement by putting forth
new illusory proposals that complicate the political
situation with the unique goal of sabotaging the results
of the dialogue. Those individuals are attempting to
encourage some citizens to undermine the efforts
of the United Nations. The absurd attempts to create
divisions carried out by some individuals in order to
sabotage the agreement will simply lead to ongoing
bloodletting among brothers, a weakening of the army
and a strengthening of Daesh's position and its spread
in neighbouring countries, in Europe and in other
countries of the world.

The time has come to sign the Skhirat agreement.
We hope that the agreement will be signed within the
established time frame, namely, by 16 December. The
Libyan people hope that the Security Council will
support the implementation of the agreement and act as
guarantor. We hope that the Council will authorize all
necessary measures to be taken against those would act
as spoilers of the agreement or threaten the Government
of national unity and prevent it from doing its work in
Tripoli.

We warmly welcome the meeting to be held in
Rome two days from now. We hope that it will offer the
international community the opportunity to endorse
the results of the Skhirat dialogue and that it will put an
end to the tactic of sabotaging the process. It should be a
moment to support the aspirations of the Libyan people
to peace, security, stability and economic recovery
under the guidance of a Government representing
all citizens in the framework of transparency and
accountability.

I take this opportunity to assure the Security
Council that no Libyan Government can be effective if
armed groups remain in Tripoli. The Libyan State can
hardly endure if the Government is not headquartered
in the capital, which can be secured only when
armed groups return to their homes and when those
from Tripoli itself are disarmed and their members
integrated into Libyan State institutions, pursuant to
relevant legislation and their own resolve. There are
some 10,000 police officers in Tripoli who are fully
capable of ensuring security in the capital if they are
equipped with small arms and light weapons and enjoy
the support of the international community. They are
entirely ready and able to shoulder their responsibility
to protect the Government of national unity.

Combatting terrorism is the responsibility of
all Libyans - even more so than it is that of the
international community. Terrorism in Libya is no
longer the exclusive fruit of extremism arising from
an erroneous interpretation of religion. Terrorism is
now a lucrative job that attracts criminals, particularly
from neighbouring countries. There are thousands of
unemployed in Tunisia and Egypt who would seek
to enter Libya illegally to join Daesh and its sleeper
cells in Libya in exchange for food and housing, and
hope to be very well remunerated if Daesh is able to
seize the productive oil fields. Libyan experts believe
that this could happen next summer if a power-sharing
agreement cannot be reached in Libya.

The delay in the formation of a Government
of national unity cannot serve as a pretext for the
international community to fail to support the Libyan
army. Indeed, the international community should
do its utmost to ensure that all those who believe in
democracy can join the army. Armies can win wars
only if they have a strong, supportive Government
behind them. They cannot combat terrorism without
stable and sufficient financial resources and a reliable
and legal source of weapons and munitions. Armies
can be effective only if they are disciplined and subject
to military and civilian law, and if they are deployed
throughout the country. The army must protect all
borders and be respected by the civilian population.
These are the aspirations of the Libyan people. We hope
that the international community will help us to meet
them as soon as possible.
I have nothing to add to what I have said with respect
to the sanctions Committee. I should like to reaffirm
nonetheless that we must strengthen cooperation and
information exchanges between the Committee and the
Libyan Mission to the United Nations.

