Mr. Salarzai (Afghanistan): Afghanistan thanks
Minister of Foreign Affairs Pavlo Klimkin of Ukraine
and his delegation for convening today's debate on the
protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. We are pleased to see so many countries
participating in today's discussion, which reflects the
importance of the topic under consideration.

Infrastructure provides a key component for the
normal and effective functioning of society, enabling
citizens' access to fundamental services, such as food,
water, shelter, adequate health care, transportation
facilities and economic opportunities - each of
which are critically important for the stability of
any environment. An attack that damages a nation's
infrastructure in essence does irreparable harm to the
very social fabric of society. The protection of physical
and social infrastructure should therefore comprise a
key component of any strategy for ensuring peaceful
and stable societies.

Terrorism and violent extremism constitute
dominant factors of instability in the current
international landscape, bringing untold suffering and
devastation on peoples and communities. As evident in
the case of my country, Afghanistan, and many other
countries where terrorists operate, extremist forces
have gone to great lengths to advance their vicious
agenda i wreaking havoc, undermining the rule oflaw
and terrorizing populations. They openly target many
kinds of infrastructure to amplify the effects of their
barbarity and to attract global media attention.

Afghanistan has been a primary victim of global
terrorism for over two decades - long before the start
of the international community's engagement in our
country in 2001. Today, our people remain defiant in
the face of a multitude of terrorist groups, such as the
Taliban, the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida, Da'esh, J amaat
Dawah, Lashkar i Jhangvi , the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan and other foreign terrorist fighters,
all of which are symbiotically linked to one another,
come from abroad and receive, inter alia, political,
ideological, moral and material support. Aside from
targeting our security forces and those of international
partner countries present in Afghanistan, extremists are
attacking our political and legal institutions; mosques
and schools; health and medical facilities; and other soft
targets, such as non-governmental organizations, which
are working to improve the lives of ordinary Afghans.

Just last week, in the continuation of their carnage,
a suicide bomber conducted an attack on our Supreme
Court, the highest judicial institution in our country,
killing 21 people and wounding close to 50 others. The
victims included several female judges, prosecutors
and court employees who were simply returning home
to their families after a hard day's work.

Last month, on 11 January, the Taliban carried out
an attack on our Parliament, resulting in more than 120
people dead, with many more left severely maimed
or injured. That act of barbarism was widely viewed
as an attack on the infrastructure of our democracy,
which is among the most significant achievements of
Afghanistan since 2001.

In August of last year, extremists attacked the
American University in Kabul, which is seen as a
beacon of hope for a better future among our educated
and talented youth. Sixteen people were tragically
killed in that attack.

Moreover, there are many cases of local hospitals,
clinics and international humanitarian relief agencies
coming under attack or otherwise being negatively
affected by the activities of extremist groups. A few
days ago, Da'esh militants in northern Jowzjan province
killed six members of the personnel of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in northern
Afghanistan. The ICRC convoy was attacked while
travelling to distribute aid to a storm-stricken area.

The overall security environment has only
complicated humanitarian conditions for our people, to
the point where 9.3 million people, mainly women and
children, are in dire need of immediate humanitarian
assistance. This figure marks a notable increase from
last year. We reiterate our call on the international
community to support the 2017 humanitarian
response plan of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Terrorists also pose a threat to economic and
development infrastructure projects, in which we
have invested heavily. We are currently working to
implement 18 cooperation and investment projects
in the areas of energy, transport and trade and the
commercial and labour sectors. Once completed, those
projects will benefit the prosperity of Afghanistan and
our wider region.

The ongoing cycle of violence in Afghanistan
is not, by any means, a homegrown phenomenon. Its
roots lie elsewhere, outside Afghanistan, emanating
from a strategic plan crafted from within our region
to advance an ill-fated political agenda that serves
no one, defies international law and constitutes a
blatant violation of the very spirit and tenets of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the relevant
counter-terrorism resolutions of the General Assembly
and Security Council. We believe the fight against
international terrorism stands at a crossroads. At this
critical juncture, a refined global effort is needed
to combat this menace with greater precision and
accuracy. In that context, we welcome the efforts of
the Secretary-General to strengthen the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture, including his decision
to establsih an office for counter-terrorism and to
appoint an Under-Secretary General to head that office.

Despite the difficult security environment in
Afghanistan, we are a nation that is making steady
progress towards lasting stability and self-reliance.
The National Unity Government is working, in greater
cohesion and coordination, on tackling a difficult set of
challenges facing our people. In that effort, our security
forces are serving valiantly to enhance security, while
defending and protecting our sovereignty, infrastructure
and people against terrorism and violent extremism.

In conclusion, we believe today's meeting
marks an important step forward in devising a more
effective United Nations approach to protecting
critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks. As the
principal organ of the United Nations responsible for
the maintenance of peace and security, we hope the
Security Council will continue to give due focus and
attention to this important matter.

