Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
latest report (S/2013/72) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his detailed presentation
of that report. We welcome the participation today of
the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacic', and of
Mr. Hashim Thaci.

We welcome the fact that the report of the Secretary-
General underlines the positive role that the United
Nations continues to play in Kosovo though UNMIK,
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, and collaborating with other international
actors. Argentina voted in favour of resolution 1244
(1999) when we were member of the Security Council,
and believes that it should continue to serve as the
international legal basis for achieving a general solution
in Kosovo through a fertile political process and fair
and specific negotiations.

We cannot fail to welcome the high-level dialogue
process between the parties, under the auspices of the
European Union, which held its seventh meeting in
Brusselsjust two days ago. We trust that the willingness
to engage in constructive dialogue shown by Belgrade
and Pristina will contribute to the stabilization of the

situation and the political resolution of the contentious
issues.

We welcome the commitment and decision of both
parties to promote dialogue as an import factor for
building confidence. The efforts of Serbia to promote
dialogue and the normalization of relations deserve
special recognition. We urge both parties to continue in
that spirit, in keeping with resolution 1244 (1999), and
hope for a successful outcome of the meeting to be held
on 2 April. In that respect, we endorse the Secretary-
General's assertion in his report that the resumption
of talks is in itself a clear signal that both parties are
resolved to maintain peaceful dialogue and overcome
the scars of the conflict of the past.

In this context, we believe it crucial that UNMIK
continue carrying out its mandate and the important
role it plays in complement to dialogue so as to
guarantee the effective exchange of information and the
presentation of reports to the Council. We support the
role of UNMIK and its contribution to stabilizing the
region, as well as the cooperation between UNMIK, the
Kosovo Force and European Union Rule ofLaw Mission
in Kosovo, maintaining a status-neutral position under
the auspices of the United Nations.

Argentina has been following closely the financial
situation of the United Nations administrative office
in Mitrovica. It is unacceptable that a lack of funds
is having an adverse impact on its mandate. As the
Secretary-General is right to point out, the situation in
northern Mitrovica calls for coordinated attention and
action in order to ensure that the difficult problems are
resolved in good faith so as to avoid future tensions.

This is why, given the important work of UNMIK
to ensure coordination and cooperation between
international actors with regard to northern Mitrovica
within their respective mandates, there is a need to
find practical solutions, prevent tension and ensure
that its administration continues carrying out conflict
prevention, mediation and facilitation functions. We
therefore call on UNMIK to continue to be granted the
necessary resources to avoid a negative impact on the
valuable work it carries out, which deserves our full
recognition.

We are concerned that, despite progress in the high-
level dialogue, serious incidents and tension continue
to occur on the ground, especially in the north. It is
therefore crucial for the high-level dialogue to have a
positive impact on the ground. We cannot but agree with
the Secretary-General that, in addition to the political
process, it is equally important for sustained efforts to
be made to promote reconciliation and increase trust
between the communities of Kosovo.

For Argentina, strengthening the respect for
the human rights of all communities in Kosovo is of
fundamental importance, as is bringing an end to acts
of intolerance and guaranteeing the swift return of
internally displaced persons. In our view, it is of the
utmost importance to ensure full respect for the human
rights of displaced persons returning to their places
of origin, so that they may access and exercise their
substantive rights and not fall victim to various forms
of violence or discrimination, in particular in cases
of undocumented returnees, who remain stateless.
We therefore assign great importance to the technical
assistance that UNMIK can provide in this context.

It is equally essential to strengthen policies aimed
at ending the discrimination suffered by various
communities, such as the Roma, Ashkali and small
Egyptian communities. The protection of cultural and
religious heritage must continue to be a priority for
UNMIK. While progress has been made in this area,
we remain concerned by the occurrence of vandalism
and religious intolerance, which should be firmly and
effectively condemned.

We also support and follow closely the work of the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force created in
2011 to investigate reports of the inhumane treatment
of people and human organ trafficking in Kosovo.
We reaffirm the importance of tackling impunity and
ensuring accountability in a framework of cooperation
with the United Nations. It is important to underscore
the role of EULEX and UNMIK in investigating the
crimes committed during the armed conflict, with a
view to ending the impunity that persists to this day.

I should like to conclude by once again highlighting
the crucial importance of UNMIK's work in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
We commend Special Representative Farid Zarif for
his efforts. We trust that the political dialogue that
is now under way will contribute to stability and
reconciliation, facilitate consensual solutions and
strengthen confidence among Kosovo's community,
thereby making possible peaceful progress and lasting
prosperity.

