Mr. O'Brien: Every time I have briefed the
Council, I have described the horrors of a brutal conflict
characterized by the complete failure to protect civilians,
which has generated gargantuan levels of suffering for
most civilians. Truth be told, words are not adequate to
depict the grim and gruesome reality facing the people
of Syria today. We have seen the hopes of ordinary
Syrians for an end to their nightmare raised and then
dashed time and again as the Government, non-State
armed groups and terrorist groups have relentlessly
continued on a military path that has further devastated
cities, towns, communities and families. As the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights recently
said, "The number of war crimes already committed
surpasses our worst nightmares".

The fighting and violence have escalated across
several parts of the country over the last few weeks,
resulting in Widespread civilian deaths, injury and
displacement. Strikes, by all sides, continue to be
launched on and from heavily populated areas from the
air and the ground without regard for civilian presence.
Attacks on other civilian infrastructure remain an
almost daily occurrence in some areas. A recent World
Health Organization (WHO) report indicated that
health care is attacked in Syria more than in any other
place on Earth.

The undeniable fact is that today, in many places,
civilians in Syria are as much at risk as they have
ever been, owing to the parties' continued blatant
disregard for international humanitarian law, whose
primary and overarching principle, as advocated by but
also supposedly enforced by the Security Council, is
the obligation to protect civilians from the effects of
armed conflict.

I am deeply alarmed by the disturbing developments
in and around Aleppo city. Hundreds of mortars,
missiles and projectiles were launched on both eastern
and western Aleppo in past weeks, resulting in scores of
deaths and hundreds of injuries. Since 7 July, civilian,
humanitarian and commercial movements in and out of
eastern Aleppo City have come to a halt. Castello Road,
the last remaining access route in and out of the east
of the city, as I alerted the Council in my two previous
briefings, where an estimated 250,000 to 275,000
people reside, has now been cut off due to the fighting.

The United Nations and our partners prepositioned
stocks in sad but all too real anticipation of such
developments, and food in east Aleppo is expected to
run out by the middle of next month. While medical
supplies are available for a longer period, I am
extremely worried about the continuing attacks on
medical facilities in eastern Aleppo, such as that on a
hospital in Alma'adi neighbourhood, which has now
been hit three times in the last month alone.

Indeed, over the last 48 hours, we have received
reports, which are in the process of being verified, of
attacks on or near several facilities in Aleppo City and
in the countryside. Such attacks have a devastating
multiplier effect * not only killing people and
destroying facilities, but leaving thousands unable to
get even basic care at a time when they need it most.

I cannot stress enough how critical the situation is
for those trapped in eastern Aleppo city. That population
is at serious risk of besiegement as the fighting closes
in and their access to basic necessities runs out. Our
highest priority is to ensure access through both cross-
line or cross-border operations, under the existing

resolutions of the Security Council, so that we can
replenish stocks and ensure people's access to the basic
necessities of life. The international community simply
cannot let eastern Aleppo city become yet another, and
by far the largest, besieged area. This is medieval and
shameful. We must not allow this to happen, but the
clock is ticking. I urgently call upon the parties and
those with influence to act now to establish a weekly,
48-hour humanitarian pause for eastern Aleppo city so
that the United Nations and partners have safe, regular
and sustained access to the quarter ofa million people
trapped behind the front lines. This must be a full
United Nations call - not just from me as the United
Nations humanitarian chief - it must come from the
Security Council.

I am equally alarmed by reports of deteriorating
humanitarian conditions and urgent medical evacuation
needs in Madaya, Fo'ah, Zabadani and Kefraya,
where more than 62,000 people are and continue to
be besieged. Despite the approvals granted by the
Government of Syria over the past three months for the
United Nations and humanitarian partners to provide
assistance to besieged civilians in the four towns, the
United Nations and partners have not been able to
access the towns because of tension among parties to
the agreement, heavy aerial bombardment in Idlib and
shelling on Fo'ah and Kefraya. We should all remember
the disturbing images of starving children in Madaya
earlier this year, many of whom died even after aid
was finally allowed in. Let me be clear: we will see
such images again unless the parties enable immediate
and unconditional humanitarian deliveries to the four
towns. This is no hollow warning; this is highly likely
to occur again unless the Council enforces access.

Urgent medical evacuations must also be
immediately available where needed. The current tit-
for-tat arrangement, which has led to children dying
in one of the towns because there is no equally sick
child in another location to evacuate at exactly the same
time, should be a shameful blot on the conscience of the
parties and those who support them. In any event, such
a callous tit-for-tat arrangement is not in compliance
with international humanitarian law. The only measure
for humanitarian access and action is to meet needs,
not reciprocity. I call on all parties to allow the sick and
wounded to exit the four towns and all other besieged
areas to get the medical care they need to survive,
and put an end to the tit-for-tat approach. Medical
evacuations are not a question of politics or military
advantage, but of basic humanity.

I have highlighted Aleppo city and the four towns
today, but members will find similar conditions in
many more places: the tens of thousands trapped and
exposed to fighting in Menbij with no humanitarian
support; or the reports of dozens of civilians killed
in strikes in Tokhar, in rural Aleppo; the continued
bombardment of Douma, Darayya and Khan El-Shieh,
in rural Damascus; and relentless attacks by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant on the besieged parts of
Deir ez-Zor city. I am also gravely concerned about the
situation at the berm along the Jordanian border, where
the number of people seeking shelter from the fighting
inside Syria increased exponentially in recent months.
The vast majority of those stranded are children,
women and elderly people, as well as those in need of
medical care, including hundreds of pregnant women.
It is baking hot, totally arid - a no-man's land of a
barely living hell.

The fact is that across Syria approximately
5.5 million people are in need in hard-to-reach and
besieged areas with little physical protection and
limited access to basic life-saving assistance. Of that
number, some 590,000 people remain totally trapped
in besieged areas. IfI may, let me take a moment to
describe what it is actually like to live in those areas.

Most of those people are completely desperate
for an escape from the constant fighting, shelling and
snipers that engulf their lives. Parents have no food
for their near-starving children. Malnutrition is so
severe that children die as a result. There is no running
water or electricity. Prices for the little commodities
that reach those areas are dozens of times higher than
in neighbouring communities, and thus simply not
affordable for those already reduced to nothing. They
are places with little education, and where sexual
violence, child recruitment and early marriage are
commonplace. Imagine a place where a pregnant woman
cannot give birth safely because she cannot receive the
necessary painkillers or the care that is needed. They
are places where those fortunate enough to find care all
too often die in their beds when their medical facility
is hit. And yes, in Syria, there are unspeakable sexual
crimes against children - it is abhorrent and on our
collective watch.

When you look beyond the numbers, Mr. President,
that is the reality that people are facing in those areas
day in and day out. It is not the fighters or those at
checkpoints who are suffering and dying in such ways.
It is the civilian population, the most vulnerable,
children, women, disabled persons and the elderly.
Those are indisputable facts, and they speak for
themselves. Surely none of us, no one here, is immune
to those horrors, which constitute daily life for so many
of our fellow human beings who just happen to have
been Syrian in Syria when their world exploded around
them over five years ago.

The life-or-death situation in many parts of the
country is exactly why we press from every possible
angle to get regular and sustained access to all besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. It is true that some progress
has been made this year. Overall, we have now reached
over 1 million people in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. We have reached each besieged area at least once
this year, including 400,000 of the 590,000 people,
including as well through ongoing airdrops to 110,000
people in Deir ez-Zor city. Significant progress was
made on approvals by the Government of Syria for
the July inter-agency convoy plan, with 34 out of 35
locations approved for convoys, including, for the
first time, all requested besieged areas with the full
package of assistance. Those breakthroughs, however
incremental, are proof that, when there is enough
political will, it is really possible to reach people in
desperate need of life-saving assistance. I thank those
with influence on the parties for bringing their weight
to bear on the issue, especially recent initiatives by
the United States and the Russian Federation, not least
the Russian Federation's Ambassador and his team
in Damascus.

At the same time, we have to recognize the
enormous access challenges still in front of us. The
escalation of fighting and insecurity continues to
further constrain access. Beyond Aleppo and the four
towns, we have seen that very clearly in July, as even
with Government of Syria approvals we have been
unable to reach many other locations, such as Darayya
and Duma, due to bombing and shelling and fighting
along key access roads. The United Nations and partner
cross-border operations from Turkey and Jordan have
also been affected by insecurity along border areas and
key access routes, thus affecting our ability to reach
tens of thousands of people.

Arbitrary restrictions and obstructions continue to
limit or obstruct where we deliver aid, to whom and
how often. Notwithstanding the high level of approvals
for the July inter-agency convoy plan, the Syrian
authorities only authorized us to deliver to 75 per cent
of the population estimated by the United Nations to
be in those areas. The team on the ground continues
to press for the delivery of aid based on independent
United Nations needs assessments, as called for by the
Security Council in its resolutions
Even when approvals are granted and the large
amount of paperwork is completed, permits given by
the Government centrally do not always translate down
to their security forces. In particular, despite repeated
calls for the free passage of all medicines and surgical
equipment in aid convoys, from the Council and others,
medical and surgical items continue to be excluded
or removed from midwifery kits, paediatric kits, and
diarrheal-disease sets, depriving thousands of people
each month - I repeat: midwifery kits, paediatric kits,
and diarrheal-disease sets. This deliberate denial of
essential medicine and surgical equipment undermines
the very basis of humanitarian action. Meanwhile, some
non-State armed groups have also attacked, threatened
and refused to cooperate with humanitarian workers.
And sustained United Nations access to areas under the
control of ISIL, such as parts of the Raqqah and Deir
ez-Zor governorates, remains extremely limited.

Throughout Syria, United Nations agencies and
partners from non-governmental organizations continue
their tireless efforts to meet the urgent humanitarian
needs of the Syrian population, often at great personal
risk. We saw that first-hand on 29 June, when during
a convoy to Irbin and Zamalka, one of the drivers of a
supply truck was shot in the chest, and another round
struck an armoured vehicle. I would like to recognize
the bravery of those who risk their lives every time they
cross conflict lines and borders or enter active conflict
areas to provide much needed life-saving assistance to
those in need and remind those who sometimes carp
that gaining the Government of Syria's permission is
the only way to mitigate these live and present mortal
dangers to our brave United Nations colleagues and
their partners, many of them local Syrians. Collectively,
through these efforts, we are reaching millions ofpeople
per month through regular programming, cross-border
and cross-line activities, as well as air operations. It
is vital that all humanitarian organizations, personnel
and other assets - wherever they are based, wherever
they are operating, or however they deliver assistance
in Syria - be provided all necessary protection by all
parties to the conflict, as afforded under international
humanitarian law.

Let me be frank - we need to urgently regain the
momentum on protection and access. The momentum
created in the first half of the year and since the
creation of the International Syria Support Group's
humanitarian task force must be the platform for a
step change in the protection and access situation for
civilians into the second half of this year. That must
include, first, a restoration and consolidation of the
cessation of hostilities and an end to indiscriminate
attacks that recklessly kill and injure civilians. It is
well within the power of all parties and those who back
them to minimize civilian casualties and avoid further
crimes and atrocities. They must do so. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure are not pawns to be sacrificed,
but are specially protected under international law.

Secondly, it must include all necessary action from
the parties and their supporters to ensure safe, sustained,
unhindered and unconditional access. That must
include humanitarian truces and pauses in the fighting,
so that we can reach those civilians trapped behind the
front lines and that they can reach life-saving services
not available in their areas. Better still, of course, is for
all the fighting to stop.

Thirdly, it must include an immediate end to
the sieges that still collectively punish hundreds of
thousands of civilians mercilessly. Anything less than
the full lifting of the sieges will never be enough, and
we cannot pretend otherwise.

I will close by repeating what I and my colleagues
have said many times. The crisis must end with a
political solution, not a military victory. But we should
make no mistake as to the current humanitarian
trajectory; despite some sentiment and even rhetoric
within the international community, the available
protection space is shrinking, humanitarian conditions
are worsening and the level of despair is rising. Those
cannot and must not become accepted trends to which
the international community seemingly resigns itself
as the search for a political solution continues. The
international community has shown unity of purpose
before and must show it again before it is too late and
we face the prospect of losing another generation of
Syrians to conflict and misery.

