The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the
commencement of the inter-Malian negotiation
process in Algiers on 16 July 2014, in line with
its resolutions 2100 (2013) and 2164 (2014), the
statement by its President (S/PRST/2014/2), its
previous press statements, as well as the 18 June
2013 Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement, which
aims to achieve a comprehensive peace agreement
ending the crisis.

"The Security Council commends the
facilitation role played by Algeria, at the request
of the Malian authorities, in the launching of
these formal peace talks and in convening the
Government of Mali and the signatory and
adherent armed groups of the Ouagadougou
Agreement. The Security Council also commends
the close coordination between Algeria, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States mediation team, the European Union
and other regional and international partners,
and encourages them to continue these important
efforts.

"The Security Council commends the parties
for the constructive dialogue and discussions held
in Algiers between 16 and 24 July 2014, leading
to the consensual adoption of the road map
("Feuille de route des ne'gociations dans le cadre du processus d'Alger") by the parties. The Security
Council calls on the parties to fully comply with the
commitments outlined in the road map, including
by engaging in the comprehensive peace talks in
Algiers scheduled to begin on 17 August 2014. The
Security Council underscores the importance of
an inclusive and credible negotiation process open
to all communities of the north of Mali, with the
goal of securing a durable political resolution to the
crisis and long-term peace and stability throughout
the country, respecting the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Malian State.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the fragile security situation in the North
of Mali and calls on all parties to immediately
and fully respect the ceasefire agreement signed
on 23 May 2014, as well as the declaration of the
cessation of hostilities signed in Algiers on 24 July
2014. The Security Council reiterates its demand
on all armed groups in Mali to cease hostilities
immediately, as well as to reject the recourse to
violence.

"The Security Council calls on all the parties
to implement all agreed confidence-building
measures and reiterates its call to accelerate the
cantonment of the armed groups as a practical
step leading to an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process in the
context of a comprehensive peace settlement. The
Security Council welcomes the establishment of the
joint commission under the auspices of MINUSMA
to facilitate the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement and the declaration of the cessation of
hostilities. The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to further enable MINUSMA
to reach its full operational capacity as soon as
possible, especially in the context of the new force
laydown in the north of Mali.

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for the key role and active engagement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali,
including his good offices and close coordination
with the international community, towards the
restoration of peace and security throughout the
national territory of Mali."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l4/15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
