Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French): Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. Your outstanding qualities as an experienced
diplomat guarantee the success of the Council's work.

I should like also to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of the Sultanate of Oman, for
the exemplary manner in which he presided over the work
of the Council last month.

Allow me also, Mr. President, to convey to you my
delegation's thanks for convening this meeting on the
question of consultations between members of the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries.

In addition, I want to thank the authors of the letter
of 8 December 1995 for their initiative, which my
delegation fully endorses.

The issue before us today is of particular
significance to my country, which has contributed to
many peace-keeping operations since the 1960s, and
continues to do so.

In the past few years there has been an
unprecedented expansion of peace-keeping operations,
requiring an increasing number of troops. The personnel
involved in these operations find themselves at greater
and greater risk because the nature of the operations has
changed and they now entail new and varied tasks. This
development means increased responsibilities not only for
the Security Council and the Secretariat of the United
Nations but also for countries non-members of the
Council, which are called upon more often. Though they
are accountable at the national level both for the security
of personnel provided for peace-keeping operations and
for the costs involved, countries non-members of the
Council that contribute troops do not take part in the
decisions affecting these operations. Consequently, these
countries feel rather frustrated. They have legitimate
grounds for asking for a redefinition of the nature of their
relationship with the members of the Security Council.

The presidential statement of the Security Council
dated 4 November 1994 responds in part to this request,
in that it provides for the possibility of meetings between
troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and the
members of the Council for the purpose of facilitating

 

exchanges of information and views before the Council
takes a decision on the extension, modification or
termination of the mandate of any given operation. These
meetings supplement those already organized by the
Secretariat, which are attended by troop-contributing
countries and by a force commander or a special
representative of the Secretary-General.

When these measures were introduced, my country
welcomed them. However, in practice, their limitations and
omissions have shown up. The meetings held so far with
the Secretariat and members of the Council have consisted
primarily of a statement by the troop-contributing countries
of their concerns about issues related to the main aspects of
peace-keeping operations, without any real dialogue
between those countries and the members of the Security
Council. Moreover, the meetings confine themselves to
operations already under way; they do not relate to
operations that are being considered. In some cases the time
available before the Council's adoption of a decision is
insufficient. Lastly, the meetings are not held automatically.

Associating itself fully with the statement made this
morning by Ambassador Cerdenas of Argentina, my
delegation believes that these inadequacies could be
overcome through the adoption of the following measures.

The meetings could be institutionalized, so that they
would take place periodically and regularly.

The meetings should allow for more direct contact
between Council members and troop-contributing countries
that are non-members of the Council and should focus on
important issues relating, in particular, to the mandate of an
operation, its implementation and its renewal and, in more
general terms, to the planning, management and
coordination of the operation throughout its duration.

These discussions could be held within a subsidiary
organ, or several such bodies, set up by the Security
Council under Article 29 of the Charter.

Consultations should also be held with potential troop-
contributing countries on operations that the Security
Council is considering setting up.

Within this new framework of institutionalized and
focused consultations, the Secretariat could be encouraged
to provide the maximum possible information and,
particularly, to submit reports on the difficult situations
encountered by some operations.

The effective participation of troop-contributing
countries in Security Council decisions on the
establishment of peace-keeping operations, their mandate
and their implementation will to a great extent determine
the success of the Organization in the area of peace-
keeping - an area in which the Organization must
continue its efforts. The implementation of these
proposals, with which a large number of troop-
contributing countries agree, would help to strengthen the
confidence of countries non-members of the Council in
the Council's actions and would thereby help ensure those
countries' willingness to participate, or to continue to
participate, in peace-keeping operations.

In addition, the establishment of this new mechanism
for exchanges between the Security Council and non-
members would allow for more informed decision-making
and better conduct of all aspects of the operations and
would not infringe upon the Council's prerogatives in this
area.

