Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing and to recognize his efforts in carrying
out his important responsibilities in the past few years.
We congratulate Mr. Zahir Tanin on his appointment
to replace Mr. Zarif and wish him every success in
his new role. We also welcome the fact that at this
meeting we are hearing directly from the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and from
Mr. Hashim Thaci.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would
like to emphasize once again that the resolution 1244
(1999) is still the internationaljudicial basis in force for
achieving a solution within the context of the political
negotiations on the future of Kosovo, conducted with
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Serbia. We reiterate our
support for the implementation of the 19 April 2013 First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We
have always stressed the importance of the Brussels
dialogue between Serbia and the local and provincial
authorities in Kosovo in which both parties are
working to arrive at a mutually agreed-on settlement.
The results include the integration of the judiciary
and civilian protection personnel, the creation of new
administrative boundary line crossing points and the
harmonization of vehicle insurance policies. Other key
issues are the establishment of an association of Serb
municipalities, the Interministerial Commission for
Return and implementation of the strategic objectives
outlined by the Minister for Communities and Return.
In that regard, the return of Serb Kosovan citizens
should be facilitated by ensuring an atmosphere of
security, ethnic and religious tolerance and respect for
their economic and property rights, as well as for their
freedom of movement.

Promoting and respecting human rights in Kosovo
requires the full implementation of the relevant
international norms to prevent discrimination of
minorities and displaced persons. Although the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/579) refers
to a slight decrease in incidents related to religious
sites as compared the report of the previous quarter
(S/2015/303), parties must work with determination to
avoid situations of this kind, which have an impact on
reconciliation among the different communities living
in Kosovo.

Cooperation among local leaders, especially
between the mayors of North and South Mitrovica, is
a positive element in strengthening relations among
the various communities. That serves to illustrate
once again that citizens constitute a key element in
generating trust, and we therefore welcome initiatives
in the regard. The reconciliatiaon process also requires
the continues work of the Working Group on Missing
Persons, with a view to clarifying the fate of the
thousands who went missing during the conflict.

We welcome the fact that the necessary measures
have been adopted to set up the specialist court
responsible for investigating accusations of war crimes
and crimes against humanity that were said to have
been committed during the armed conflict in Kosovo.
We hope that that court can be begin its work without
any further delay. There can be no impunity for such
crimes, and delivering justice is a positive step in
achieving peace and reconciliation.

We note with satisfaction the efforts made with the
support of the European Union as part of the second
Rule of Law Compact, in order to resolve problems of
accountability, corruption, crimes committed against
ethnic groups, organized crime, gender discrimination,
discrimination based on the grounds of ethnicity,
developing a sytem for the protection of witnesses and
pending claims regarding property.

The United Nations has played a fundamental role
in Kosovo, especially through UNMIK by promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights. That
work has been complemented through the cooperation
mechanism of the international security force in
Kosovo and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo. We believe that each ofthose missions - based
on their respective mandates - should continue to
play a proactive, complementary role with a view
to finding a sustainable, just, lasting and mutually
acceptable solution to the question of Kosovo. For, as
we have pointed out, direct dialogue among the parties
is essential.

We believe that there must be support for the
process of voluntary returns of Serbs displaced from
their homes in Kosovo, with strict adherence to the
Brussels agreement of 2013. It is noteworthy that the
report indicates that the rate of returns has continued
to decrease - a trend we hope will be reversed. We
welcome the establishment of the Interministerial
Commission for Return and the implementation of the
strategic objectives as established by the Ministry for
Communities and Return.

In line with our established position, our country
condemns and categorically rejects terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We note with concern the
growing radicalization ofyoung people and the increase
in extremism, which has led to the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters in countries of the Middle East
and Africa. We therefore urge the systematic, concrete
continuation of the efforts begun in Kosovo to combat
this scourge, while also addressing the root causes.

In conclusion, we once again call on all parties
to redouble their efforts in the search for a peaceful,
just and lasting political solution within the framework
of international law, including full observance of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels agreements of
2013.

