Ms. L¢j (Denmark): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated

with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated

countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the countries
belonging to the European Economic Area align
themselves with this statement.

Let me start by expressing the gratitude of the
European Union to Special Representative Lakhdar
Brahimi for his briefing today and for his outstanding
work to promote the process of peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan.

The European Union welcomes the outcome of
the Emergency Loya Jirga and the election of the head
of State, Mr. Hamid Karzai. The Emergency Loya Jirga
process, including the regional and district-level
elections, demonstrated eagerness for involvement in
the democratization process of Afghans throughout the
country. We especially welcome that women
represented a strong voice in the process.

The European Union strongly deplores the tragic
assassination of the Vice-President of the transitional
Government of Afghanistan, Haji Abdul Qadir, on 6
July 2002. We urge the transitional Government of
Afghanistan to conduct a thorough investigation of the
assassination, and we call upon the Afghan people not
to let this tragic event disrupt the restoration of
Afghanistan or undermine the peace process.

While much has been achieved in the first six
months since the Bonn meeting, significant challenges
remain. One relates to the lack of security, which
continues to be a primary concern for both the Afghan
people and the international organizations working in
Afghanistan. As a contribution to ensuring security,
member States of the European Union continue to play
a key role in the deployment of the International
Security Assistance Force.

Another important challenge is making the newly
established institutions work in an efficient manner and
to expand their influence to the provinces. The
transitional Government of Afghanistan has a main
responsibility for ensuring progress on these and many
other important issues during the second stage of the
Bonn process. The European Union will continue its
political and financial support to enable the transitional
Government to play its role.

The European Union has recently appointed
Mr. Francesc Vendrell, as the next European Union
Special Representative for Afghanistan, to succeed
Mr. Klaus-Peter Klaiber. His appointment is the sign of
our sustained support for the political process and the
reconstruction of Afghanistan.

The overall goal of the European Union's
cooperation with Afghanistan is the full
implementation of the Bonn Agreement. The end goal
should be the establishment of a broad-based, gender-
sensitive, multi-ethnic and fully representative
Government. Accepting human rights and the rule of
law as a guiding principle is a fundamental demand on
any Government. The Afghan parties have declared
their intention in this regard in the Bonn Agreement.
Afghanistan has ratified the main international human
rights instruments.

The European Union has a long-term commitment
to assist in the creation of an Afghan State that respects
human rights, including women's rights and the rule of
law. We support the efforts on the ground by the United
Nations high representative for human rights.

The Bonn Agreement called on the international
community and relevant agencies, especially the
United Nations, to assist the Afghan Interim
Administration and its successors in tackling the
production and processing of drugs. The European
Union welcomes the steps Afghanistan has taken so far
in this respect and remains committed to working with
Afghanistan to combat this serious problem. The next
step in the Bonn Agreement is the establishment of a
constitutional commission. The European Union calls
on the transitional Government of Afghanistan to give
sufficient impetus to the work of the commission once
it is established. Work will soon be initiated in
preparation for the elections scheduled for 2004. We
welcome the Special Representative's information
about close United Nations involvement in the election
preparations.

The European Community and its member States
are committed to contributing substantially to the
development of Afghanistan. More than 500 million
euros have already been programmed for disbursement
in 2002. The European Union will continue to remind
international donors of the urgent need to deliver the
development assistance already pledged. The European
Union will encourage the allocation of development aid
in a way that will strengthen the role of the central
Government, while at the same time ensuring that a
visible peace dividend soon reaches the population as a
whole. The national development budget will soon be
presented by the Afghan Administration. The European
Union strongly encourages all donors to provide
assistance within that framework. We note this year's
lack of funds for recurrent costs, and urge donors to
consider ways to fill the gap, in particular by rapid
disbursement of funds already pledged.

The European Union welcomes the return of a
large number of refugees to Afghanistan. At the same
time, we are concerned that the returnees have not
received the international support they need to ensure
their sustainable reintegration. It is crucial for the
international community to step up efforts, including
by supporting local communities. At the same time, the
various Afghan parties must ensure that humanitarian
assistance can be safely and effectively delivered.

Just over six months ago, the foundation of the
transition process was laid in Bonn. A few months is
not much time, after more than 23 years of warfare and
strife, but events have proven that, when the Afghan
people's thirst for peace is coupled with resolve and
with the convergence of neighbouring countries and
other international partners, a lot can be achieved.
Despite the enormity and complexity of the challenges,
there is now, at last, a real chance for the Afghan
people and the international community to bring life
back to normal in Afghanistan.

