Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank the briefers for their comprehensive depiction of
the dire situation of migrants and refugees in Libya.
We also appreciate our French colleagues' efforts to
initiate today's briefing.

This month alone we have had as many as three
Council meetings on Libya, including with regard to
the situation of migrants. The frequency and intensity
of these deliberations are a clear indication of the
need to ensure that more attention is paid to this grave
humanitarian problem, which is aggravated by gross
violations of human rights. Hundreds of thousands of
migrants and refugees are enduring abuse and detention
in inhumane conditions. It is particularly alarming that
migrants trying to reach Europe via North Africa are
being sold at modern-day slave auctions by smugglers
in Libya. As the Secretary-General indicated in his
statement last week (see S/PV.8111), slavery has no
place in our world. Such actions are among the most
egregious abuses of human rights today and may
amount to crimes against humanity.

Kazakhstanjoins the call to see that the situation is
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice as
soon as possible. My delegation welcomes the Libyan
authorities' confirmation that they will be conducting
investigations aimed at officially prosecuting and
punishing all those involved in such heinous crimes.
This crisis will also require strict monitoring and
implementing of appropriate measures by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the International Organization for Migration, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and
Member States if we are to bring the operations of these

smugglers and criminal gangs to a halt.

We will therefore need even more determined
international cooperation than we have now in order
to clamp down on traffickers and smugglers and
establish a concerted policy on migration. Along with
that, we must increase all the possible opportunities
for legal immigration and the full implementation of
international conventions and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. At the same time, we must work to
reach a settlement of the situation in Libya as quickly
as possible through political reconciliation. Investment
in development will help to reduce the migration flows
across the country.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan joins the United
Nations and others in vehemently condemning these
reprehensible activities and working to end such
human indignities.

