Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset, through you, Sir, to
thank the Chairmen of the three counter-terrorism
sanctions Committees. We express our deep
appreciation for their efforts.

The briefings we have heard demonstrate how far
the work of the Committees has come and give us a
sense of future plans and many of the Committees'
concerns, most of which we understand. In that
context, Libya wishes to reiterate the following points.

We appreciate the positive developments in
counter-terrorism efforts and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, under the leadership
of Mr. Smith; the work being undertaken to ensure
transparency, compliance with and adherence to
resolution 1373 (2001); the preliminary review, annual
reports on the implementation of the resolution, and the
regional visits to developed and developing countries
alike; and cooperation with the other subsidiary organs
of the Security Council and several regional
organizations.

We also welcome the efforts to build national
capacity in developing countries. In that connection,
we hope that there will be further progress in the
technical assistance provided by the United Nations in
place of bilateral assistance. We especially welcome
efforts to implement all the objectives and provisions
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the work being carried out by various
United Nations bodies and agencies.

Over the past few years, our efforts have focused
on a particular objective of the Strategy, that of
preventing and fighting terrorism. We understand that
preventing terrorism calls for ever more effective
measures. My country believes that blocking the
financing of terrorism requires special attention and
even more comprehensive measures. Refugee status
should go hand in hand with protective measures that
guarantee true enjoyment of the relevant rights in the
noble humanitarian context of that status.

Moreover, it is time to strengthen efforts to attain
other strategic objectives and elements and to rectify
the circumstances that facilitate the proliferation of that

phenomenon and that strengthen its root causes, while
respecting human rights for all. We must put an end to
an occupation that remains at the root of many acts of
violence and much tension. We cannot put an end to
such acts by accusing an entire civilization or by
denying some people their right to fight against
occupation or by applying double standards and
selectivity and neglecting international law. All those
practices are condemned daily worldwide.

With regard to the 1267 Committee, we
appreciate the Committee's efforts to improve its
working methods, in particular in the context of the
two important Security Council resolutions 1452
(2002) and 1822 (2008). We are glad that there has
been some progress in reviewing the names on the
consolidated list and we hope that that review will
clearly establish the credibility of the sanctions lists.
The Chairman's briefing indicated that many people on
the list are still under sanctions even though they have
died - which prevents the family of the deceased from
claiming their inheritance. Moreover, a number of
those on the list should not be there at all. There are at
least 56 persons whose names, nationality, date, place
of birth and all other relevant identifiers are not
present, which naturally makes it difficult for States to
implement the sanctions and which might lead to
sanctions being applied against an innocent person
solely because of a similar name, in the absence of
other identifiers. We must rectify that situation as soon
as possible in the Committee by ensuring that all other
identifiers are added and that unsubstantiated names
are deleted from the list.

Resolution 1730 (2006) provides for focal points
to receive de-listing requests, which we believe was an
important step forward towards transparency in the
sanctions regimes. However, further measures of that
type are needed to guarantee greater transparency,
fairness and clarity in such measures.

I would like to reiterate the importance of
exceptions under resolution 1452 (2002). These
exceptions cover the impact of sanctions on the
families of listed persons and address humanitarian
circumstances to ensure that sanctions do not constitute
collective punishment by affecting the families of
persons on the list. In other words, those sanctions
should not deprive the family by freezing assets and by
depriving them of income. Thus, it is important that the
Committee speedily review requests for exceptions.

Turning now to the 1540 Committee, my country
is aware of the great dangers posed to international
peace and security by weapons of mass destruction -
biological, chemical and nuclear weapons, their
delivery vehicles and all related materials. The
international community has based its response on
multilateral legal instruments, but those instruments
have not attained the required universality and are not
respected by all States in the world. Thus, they are
unfortunately insufficient.

Here, Libya has reflected in practical national
measures its position on the complete elimination of
weapons of mass destruction and remains convinced
that their complete elimination is the best guarantee to
prevent non-State actors from gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction. We believe that
disarmament and non-proliferation are two mutually
supportive processes and that both must advance in
parallel for the best results.

Resolution 1540 (2004) sets out obligations for
all countries with regard to non-proliferation. Recently,
we have noted progress in that context. Libya was
among the reporting countries to submit the required
information and we call on all countries to honour their
commitments. We are pleased to note progress in the
Committee's work 4 its adoption of a programme of
work for the coming year and the establishment of
working groups to help carry out that programme. We
also appreciate its efforts to conduct a comprehensive
review of the resolution's implementation, to identify
gaps and provide assistance to Member States.

In conclusion, we also support the counter-
terrorism efforts of the Security Council Committees,
and all efforts to achieve the international community's
objectives with regard to eliminating all aspects and
manifestations of terrorism so as to ensure global peace
and security.

