Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sandra Honore for introducing the
Secretary-General's report before us (S/2014/617) and
for her assessment of the situation in Haiti.

We agree that national dialogue remains of
utmost importance to stabilizing the situation in
the country. Since the conclusion of the El Rancho
Accord, the Haitian leadership has taken a number of
important measures for its implementation, including
the modernization of public administration and the
creation of an open Government. An administrative
tribunal has been established, and a number of laws
adopted by Parliament have come into force. The
powers of governors and mayors of key cities have
been temporarily extended. The duties of a minister
of communications with political parties have been
defined. We believe that the parliamentary and local
elections will prove to be the main indicators of the
fruitfulness of national dialogue.

It is therefore regrettable, as confirmed by the
report of the Secretary-General, that some important
steps necessary for the conduct of elections this
year have not yet been taken. The balance of power
emerging in Port-au-Prince remains fragile; as a result,
the overall domestic situation remains complex and
often unpredictable. The lack of agreement between the
executive and legislative branches threatens to block
the electoral process. We call on all political forces in
Haiti to overcome their remaining differences and to
ensure the holding of fair, just and transparent elections
as soon as possible. The normal functioning of State
bodies is urgently needed for the further stabilization of
the situation in the country, the genuine development of
democratic institutions, and the creation of conditions
conducive to sustainable socioeconomic development.

The security situation in Haiti is gradually
returning to normal. The professionalism of the
Haitian National Police has grown. We hope that the
goal set by the Government to increase the number
of police officers to 15,000 by 2016, with the support
of the international community, will be achieved. We
note the significant contribution of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to this
process. Assistance in training the Haitian police force
is one of the central tasks of its mandate.

Additional efforts are required to improve the
Haitian justice system. The entire legal and justice
system - from the police to corrections - must be
made to operate in a balanced and effective manner. We
also note the positive trends in the humanitarian field.
The country continues to face complex challenges
in rectifying the socioeconomic situation, resettling
internally displaced persons, ensuring food security
and fighting cholera. We welcome the steps taken by
the Government of Haiti in these areas, with the support
of the international community, including through the
United Nations funds and programmes.

We share the opinion of the Secretary-General
regarding the need to extend the Mission's mandate
until 15 October 2015. At the same time, we believe
that in the medium and long terms, MINUSTAH will
continue to transfer responsibility for maintaining
law and order to the growing Haitian National Police.
We stand ready to consider the Secretary-General's
proposals on the gradual drawdown of the military
component of MINUSTAH and other possible ideas
during the drafting of the resolution on this issue. In
that regard, key factors are the security situation on
the ground, as well as the capacity of national forces to
uphold law and order during the elections.

In conclusion, we emphasize once again that the
leading role in resolving the complex problems facing
the country should be played by the Government of Haiti
itself. At the same time, the international community
must continue to provide effective support to Haiti. In
this context, we note the efforts of both MINUSTAH
and regional organizations.

