Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their presence.

I also wish to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his statement and for the work that he and his team are
doing. We appreciate his work as the head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), in cooperation with the other
international presences, first and foremost, of course,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX).

A year ago almost to the day, Kosovo adopted its
Constitution. At that time, we called on the Kosovo
authorities to rapidly implement all the provisions of
the Constitution, which is exemplary in its adherence
to European standards and values. The new authorities
in Kosovo have honoured their commitments, in
particular by adopting several laws essential to
strengthening the rule of law and to the participation of
minorities. In particular, the Government's strong
commitment to decentralization is a key decision in
favour of the progressive building of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo. The protection of the rights of minorities is a
priority for the European Union, which will ensure the
fulfilment of the commitments undertaken by the
authorities in that area.

Despite some outbreaks of violence fanned by
extremist elements often linked to criminal groups, the
security situation in Kosovo has been remarkably
stable in recent months. The population and all
communities have thereby indicated their firm
dedication to peace and stability.

Internationally, 60 States now recognize Kosovo.
We also welcome Kosovo's accession to membership
of the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank, a move that is essential to the economic
development of the country. Such developments will
contribute to the emergence of a new State on the
international stage and to stability throughout the
Balkans.

The deployment of EULEX was completed on
6 April. As it has progressed, the inhabitants of Kosovo
have come to see that, despite the negative propaganda
spread by certain extremist groups, the European
Mission is acting for the benefit of the entire
population and all communities.

Pursuant to the reconfiguration of the
international presence decided by the Secretary-
General and endorsed by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44), EULEX is now responsible for all
operational tasks in the rule of law sector that
previously fell to UNMIK. The reconfiguration is in no
way synonymous with a reduction of the international
presence in Kosovo. On the contrary, it represents a
robust step and testimony to the ongoing commitment
of the international community.

As it does for all United Nations missions, the
Security Council will have to consider the evolution of
UNMIK's mandate. In that respect, we believe that the
proposals made by Mr. Zannier and by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2009/300) are quite
appropriate.

Acting within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) and under the overall authority of the United
Nations, EULEX works in coordination with the other
components of the international presence, in particular
UNMIK, which continues to play a useful role. I wish
to recall the importance that France attaches to the due
cooperation of the Kosovo authorities with the United
Nations.

The European Union, for its part, has followed
the dialogue launched by the Secretary-General with
all parties concerned on the reconfiguration of the
international presence. The dialogue is key to stability
in the region. We are well aware of the difficulties
involved. The profound differences between the Serb
and Kosovar authorities will not be settled overnight,
but that should not prevent us from seeking together,
through dialogue, practical solutions to the concrete
problems that affect the lives of all the Kosovo
communities.

We listened carefully to the statements made by
Mr. Jeremie and Mr. Hyseni. We were pleased to note
that, despite their ongoing differences, they have a
shared interest in preserving the conditions for a
common future within Europe. We therefore encourage
Belgrade and Pristina to renew direct dialogue as soon
as possible.

France particularly wishes to tell Mr. Jeremie
that, in supporting the European initiatives to
contribute to stability in the region, he will help to
establish conditions for a common future for the West
Balkans. That was the message that French President
Sarkozy conveyed to President Tadic' during the latter's
recent visit to Paris. At the same time, at a recent
meeting of its General Affairs and External Relations
Council, the European Union took another step forward
by deciding to accelerate the process of visa
liberalization for all the Balkan countries.

To Mr. Hyseni, we naturally wish to reiterate the
support expressed by our President for Prime Minister
Thaci during his visit to Paris, and to convey to him
that it is through tangible progress towards a state of
law and respect for neighbouring minorities and
through an effort to forge bonds of friendship with
Kosovo's neighbours that his country will advance
down the road to European integration.

The European Union is fully cognizant of its
responsibilities for overcoming obstacles to a stable
and prosperous future for the West Balkans. In that
spirit, we will strive in the months to come to proceed
towards a common future for Serbs and Kosovars in
the framework of the European Union.

