Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and for his able
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). His work on the issue under
consideration has particular value at this time. Today,
I would like to touch on three reasons why. The first
reason relates to the ongoing P5+1 talks, the second to
troubling signs of sanctions violations, and the third to
the important roles of the Committee and the Panel of
Experts, which is set to begin work on its next report,
the details of which will be essential.

On the nuclear talks with the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the Security Council has a clear stake in the
outcome. The Council has imposed four rounds of
sanctions in response to Iran's failure to adhere to its
nuclear obligations. Any deal with Iran must squarely
address the many Security Council resolutions on
that matter. That is a key principle of the joint plan of
action. It is critical that all Member States continue
to fully implement the sanctions on Iran. The full
implementation of the sanction regime will support the
diplomacy and limit Iran's illicit smuggling of arms,
funds and technology.

In that regard, we find the recent indications
of serious violations of United Nations sanctions
troubling. Earlier this month, Israel announced that it
had stopped a massive shipment of rockets, mortars
and ammunition that Iran was smuggling to Gaza
militants. We call on the Committee, with the support
of the Panel, to investigate all aspects of that incident.
The Committee should also be prepared to impose real
consequences, such as possible sanctions designations,
on those responsible.

At the same time, reports that Iran sought to
transfer arms to Iraq, in violation of resolution 1737
(2006), are alarming. We note that the Iraqi authorities
have committed publicly to fully respecting all relevant
resolutions, which is welcome. In that connection, we
encourage the Committee and the Panel, in cooperation
with the Iraqi authorities, to investigate those reports
and affirm full compliance with resolution 1737 (2006).

That leads me to my last point on the important
roles of the Committee and the Panel. As a rule, if
and when violations such as those mentioned above
occur, the Council's Iran Sanctions Committee has the
responsibility to tighten enforcement. We look to the
Committee to step up efforts to help States implement
the sanctions and to be ready to respond to all reports of
sanctions non-compliance. In addition, it is essential the
the Panel continue its full travel schedule and continue
to raise awareness about the sanctions.
In that context, as the Panel begins its work to draft
its next annual report, we encourage it to present as
much information as possible on sanctions compliance.
We commend the Panel for its independent reporting
and urge it to continue its cooperation with Member
States and the Committee. The Committee needs to
know the names of violators and their methods. We
also encourage the Panel to ensure that its report has
specific and implementable recommendations that
can tangibly improve sanctions implementation. The
Panel's recent recommendations, which were specific in
nature, enabled the Committee to engage in productive
discussions and assess how best to move forward.

The United States looks forward to continung its
work with the Committee as we address the challenges
and issues raised here today. Monitoring implementation,
a quick response to violations and cooperation with the
Panel are fundamental to the success of the sanctions
and to supporting our negotiators as they seek a
comprehensive solution.

