Mr. Minton (United States): I thank Mr. Prendergast
for his briefing at a very important time in the
development of democratic institutions in Guinea-Bissau.
We welcome today's Secretariat briefing and the recent
release of the Secretary-General's latest report on Guinea-
Bissau. They indeed highlight a situation where timely
United Nations and international intervention have made
a difference in resolving conflict and restoring order.

During most meetings in this Chamber, the Council
focuses on situations where law and order are threatened

 

and where the prospects for peace remain very dim indeed.
Fortunately, today, in the case of Guinea-Bissau, peace has
been restored, free and fair national elections have been
conducted, and efforts are under way, with the assistance of
the United Nations, to promote national reconciliation and
to foster a favourable climate for economic development.
These positive developments merit our special recognition
and attention. They set an impressive standard of success.

The United States Government commends the people
of Guinea-Bissau for their commitment to peace and for
their efforts to work together to build a stronger society.
My Government also commends the United Nations
personnel serving with the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), under the
very able and insightful leadership of the Secretary-
General's Representative, Mr. Samuel Nana-Sinkam, for
their efforts to strengthen democratic values, to promote the
rule of law and to encourage the protection of human rights
in Guinea-Bissau. The United Nations mission in Guinea-
Bissau represents a good example of the critical role that
the United Nations can play in conflict resolution and in
post-conflict institution-building.

Of course, there is much work that remains to be
done. With the successful conclusion of the presidential
run-off election on 16 January, the new Government of
President Yala and Prime Minister Caetano N'chama can
now begin to develop and implement programmes designed
to further democracy and promote economic growth. These
tasks will not be easy, as I have said; many challenges still
lie ahead. In particular, we would like to emphasize that
members of the Council and of the United Nations will
have to support vigorously efforts made by the Government
of Guinea-Bissau to redefine the role of the military in the
country in accordance with the rule of law and democracy.
As a member of the group of friends of Guinea-Bissau, the
United States stands ready to do what it can to help in this
regard.

As a matter of policy and in conformity with our own
domestic legislative requirements, we suspended direct
bilateral assistance to the Government of Guinea-Bissau at
the time of the May 1999 coup. However, in the wake of
the November and January elections in that country, which
were conducted - in our view - in a free, fair and
transparent manner, we are now reviewing ways in which
to recommence our bilateral assistance efforts. We hope to
be able to provide trade and investment promotion support
once remaining legal impediments have been removed, and
to help on demining programmes as well.

The international community would react very
negatively, in our View, should Guinea-Bissau return to
military rule under any guise. Guinea-Bissau is just
beginning to recover from civil conflict. It needs peace,
reconstruction and development. Nothing could hinder
that more than renewed military intervention in
governance, and we do not expect to see this.

The people of Guinea-Bissau need and deserve the
support of the international community. Thanks to
international encouragement and intervention, Guinea-
Bissau has taken the first critical steps towards re-
establishment of a society based on national reconciliation
and democratic values. We must continue to support these
efforts.

We welcome the Secretary-General's recent decision
to extend the mandate of UNOGBIS for one additional
year, through 31 March 2001. In a fragile subregion
fraught with many challenges and interlocking crises, the
United Nations must continue to play a key role in
assisting the Government and the people of Guinea-Bissau
to continue building a strong foundation for peace.

