Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
presentation of the report (S/2014/773) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I also welcome the participation of
Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaci.

Argentina would like to emphasize the fundamental
role the United Nations plays in Kosovo through
UNMIK in promoting security, stability and respect
for human rights, as well as in its cooperation with
the International Security Force in Kosovo and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
maintaining a neutral position with regard to the statute
and under the auspices of the United Nations. I should
point out that in 1999, when Argentina was also a
member of the Security Council, we voted in favour of
resolution 1244 (1999), and we believe it continues to
form the international juridical foundation for Kosovo's
efforts to achieve a comprehensive settlement through a
political process and negotiations.

Regarding the security situation, we deplore
the serious incidents that have occurred near the
administrative border, although the situation has
generally remained stable. However, we are concerned
about the fact that we continue to see incidents
affecting Serbian Kosovars, particularly in Peje/
Pee, in the western part of Kosovo. We condemn the
repeated acts of vandalism in cemeteries and Serbian
Orthodox church property. We note that the response of
the Kosovo police to crimes against ethnic minorities
continues to improve, and we urge that measures be
taken to ensure that such acts do not recur.

We welcome the progress that Serbia has made in
reforming Serb institutions and in taking steps towards
integration with the European Union. We call on the
parties to resume their European Union-facilitated
high-level dialogue, and we would like to emphasize
the significant progress that has been made in
implementing the historic agreement of 19 April 2013.
We urge the parties to continue their efforts and build
on that progress. We would also like to stress the
importance of UNMIK's work, which we believe is
critical to ensuring maximum support for the political
process and focusing particular attention on matters
related to the 19 April agreement.

We highlight the progress that has made in
integrating personnel from the Serbian Ministry of the
Interior into the Kosovo police, a very sensitive area of
the agreement. We call on the parties to continue on the
path of dialogue and implementation of the agreement
in order to make progress on the related issue of the

judicial and rule-of-law issues. We encourage all those
with an international presence on the ground to continue
to work together in accordance with their mandates to
consolidate the achievements that have been made and
resolve outstanding issues.

Argentina believes it is critical that we work to
ensure full respect for the human rights of displaced
persons and minorities, regardless of their origins,
so that they can enjoy their substantive rights and
are not subject to discrimination. We also continue
to be concerned about the low numbers of voluntary
returnees to Kosovo since their displacement in 1999.
We call on the competent authorities to continue
to work and implement measures to resolve these
outstanding issues, which impede the return and full
reintegration of internally displaced persons. The work
being undertaken by the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the Danish Refugee Council and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
with the support and cooperation of UNMIK, is of the
greatest importance in that regard.
We also note the establishment by the Serbian
Government's Office for Kosovo and Metohija of a new
consultative body, including the United Nations and
the Kosovo Minister of Communities and Returns. We
must also continue to prioritize the tasks to resolve the
other legacies the conflict, including the outstanding
cases of 1,690 missing persons. In that connection, we
stress the need to repatriate the remains of those found
in a mass grave discover in Rudnica on 13 October.
UNMIK must pursue and enhance its efforts to identify
the fate of missing persons, and redouble its efforts and
cooperation to ensure that no violation of human rights
enjoys impunity.

We highlight the work of UNMIK in support of the
rule of law, especially through its collaboration with all
relevant interested parties with respect to the principal
problems on the ground. There is also the need to ensure
that the international presences in Kosovo continue to
strengthen their mutual cooperation as they seek to
establish conditions appropriate to the implementation
of the agreement of 19 April 2013. We commend the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to promote security, stability and respect for
human rights in Kosovo, in accordance with resolution

1244 (1999).

