Mr. Ntonga (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC).

As this is the first time we take the floor during
your presidency of the Security Council, Sir, allow
me at the outset to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency for the month of January. I also thank you
for convening this open debate at a critical time for the
Palestinian people. May I also take this opportunity
to congratualte the new members of the Council on
their assuming membership of this organ. I welcome
the constructive ideas they have offered for finding a
resolution to the long-standing Palestinian question.
I would also like to express gratitude to Assistant
Secretary General ad interim Jens Toyberg-Frandzen
for his insightful briefing.

SADC aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

SADC wishes to take this opportunity to reaffirm
and support the Palestinian people's legitimate national
aspirations and inalienable rights, including to self-
determination and freedom, in their independent State
of Palestine based on the two-State solution.

It is regrettable that the Security Council has once
again let down the Palestinian people by failing to
uphold its responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations during the voting on Palestine on 30 December
2014 (see S/PV.7354). The result of the recent voting
on the draft resolution on the independence of
Palestine (S/2014/9l6) demonstrated that members of
the Security Council are divided on the need for the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities despite apparent
consensus within the Council itself and overwhelming
international consensus that the status quo is not
sustainable.

The draft resolution demanding an end to the
Israeli occupation of the occupied territories by 2017
was in line with the United Nations proposal on the
two-State solution based on the pre-l967 borders.
Despite Security Council consensus on the matter and
declarations around the globe calling for an end to the
47-year Israeli military occupation and oppression of
the Palestinian people, the Security Council remains
paralysed and unable to act to ease their suffering. A
draft resolution delineating a time frame to end Israeli
occupation would have restored hope to the Palestinian
people that their oppression would soon come to an end.
The recent accession by the State of Palestine to several
international conventions and treaties, including
the Rome Statute, is a testimony of the Palestinian
leadership's commitment to international law.

It is regrettable that the Security Council is failing
to meaningfully contribute to a peaceful solution
in the Middle East even as the situation continues to
deteriorate and threaten the stability of the region and
global peace and security.

Israel, the occupying Power, undermines all peace
efforts supported by some within the Council, under the
guise of the right to self-defense. The occupying Power
also continues to escalate settlement construction,
in violation of various United Nations resolutions,
including those adopted by the Council. SADC
condemns the occupying Power's flagrant, systematic
violations of international law in the occupied territory.
We reiterate our call to the Security Council to play a
more active role to encourage the resumption of peace
talks. SADC supports negotiations towards a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
leading to the restoration of the Palestinian people's
legitimate right to establish an independent State
coexisting peacefully with the State of Israel.

The recent wave of motions by numerous European
Parliaments to recognize the Palestinian State is
affirmation that international consensus demands an
end to the occupation of Palestinian land. SADC urges
the Security Council to honour its Charter obligations by
acting resolutely to end the suffering of the Palestinian
people and ending the decades-long injustice at the
hands of the occupying Power.

SADC reaffirms its unflinching support and long-
standing solidarity with the Palestinian people in the
quest to realize their inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations for freedom, justice, dignity and
peace.

We wish to conclude by expressing our support for
the initiative by the Russian Federation to convene a
meeting of all parties to the Syrian conflict. We hope
that the dialogue will contribute to finding a solution to
that conflict.

