Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate the delegation
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and on its
outstanding leadership at the helm of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), of which you, Sir, are the Chair. We also
welcome the presence of and the timely presentations
by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, and the representative of the
Office of Strategy and Policy of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Mr. Joseph
Ballard. We also appreciate the concept note circulated
by your delegation, Mr. President, which serves as our
guide for today's debate.
I also associate myself with the statements to be
made by the delegation of Spain as Chair of the Group
of Friends of the 1540 Committee and the delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as Chair of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

There can be no doubt that terrorism is one of the
main challenges facing the world today. Likewise,
the use of weapons of mass destruction, especially by
non-State actors, and the threat that their proliferation
poses to international peace and security are a priority
issue for us all.

In recent years, the face and the methods of
terrorism have changed. Furthermore, advances in
the area of science, technology and international
trade, which in many ways have improved our daily
lives, have brought with them a series of new threats
to security through their potential use as instruments
by radical groups and individuals who seek to wreak
havoc on civilization. Sadly, many recent examples
show that the threat of terrorism knows no borders and
that no country or region is immune to attack. Hence
it is imperative that all Member States comply with
our obligation to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, their delivery systems and related
materials so as to prevent their acquisition by non-State
actors, and ensure that States have the resources and
the capacity necessary to do so.

For my delegation, resolution 1540 (2004) has
pride of place in the international non-proliferation
regime. We would like to emphasize in particular the
preventive and cooperative nature of that important
resolution. The aim since its adoption has been the
establishment of an instrument to strengthen the
approach to non-proliferation commitments without
directly affecting Member States' compliance with
their obligations with respect to the other pillars
of disarmament, including the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.

We fully agree with the concept note prepared
for today's debate, which stresses the importance of
resolution 1540 (2004) as a platform for cooperation, but
which also warns that it would be counterproductive for
that spirit of cooperation to be turned into a coercive or
punitive mechanism.

We also recognize the need to strengthen the
international non-proliferation framework in general,
and resolution 1540 (2004) in particular, as well
as the need to adapt them to the reality of the threat
that they seek to prevent. We believe that the recent
comprehensive review process of resolution 1540
(2004). The adoption ofresolution 2325 (2016) achieved
that delicate balance, taking into account the evolving
nature of the risk of proliferation, the technological
advances and new obligations to address the threat,
while recognizing the importance of providing States
with the resources and capacity necessary to achieve
the full implementation of the resolution.

We also noted that the review process recognized
the important role of the Expert Group Meeting on the
Development of a Training Module on the International
Legal Framework against Chemical, Biological,
Radiological and Nuclear Terrorism and the importance
of regional organizations in the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Universal, comprehensive and
balanced implementation of the resolution is possible
only if all Member States play a central role, and
have the resources to do so. Regional organizations
are ideal partners for that, having the knowledge of
the specificities and realities of each of their member
States, as well as of the region as a whole. We welcome
the role played in our own region by the Organization
of American States and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean.

Guatemala is aware of the significance of this
important resolution and is committed to complying
with its obligations in this area. We have also made
additional commitments by requesting technical
assistance from the Committee so as to develop a
national action plan for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), and also have several ongoing legislative
processes under way. Following the initial visit to my
country by several members of the Committee's Group
of Experts to begin formulating the national action plan
in Guatemala, efforts are continuing at the national
level with various Government entities to work on the
main elements of the Plan.

Finally, we recall that the only guarantee for
preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and preventing them from falling into the
hands of non-State actors is that they no longer exist.
We therefore welcome the conference currently under
way to negotiate a legally binding instrument banning
nuclear weapons, leading to their total elimination.
We are convinced that a ban on those deadly weapons
will bring us closer to the goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons.

