Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would like
to thank Argentina for convening this open debate on
the very important issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and for submitting a concept note on the
topic (S/2013/447, annex).

On this World Humanitarian Day and the
tenth anniversary of the attack on United Nations
headquarters in Iraq, we pay tribute to all of those who
have lost their lives in the humanitarian effort.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their contributions to the discussion.

Over the years, a comprehensive legal framework
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been established. The key obligations are contained in
the relevant instruments of international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law.

The significant development of international
norms and standards on the protection of civilians and
the Council's engagement have given rise to increased
attention to the issue. However, efforts to ensure a
peaceful, just and prosperous world have not always
been consistent or successful. Civilians continue to pay
the highest price in the wake of armed conflict and to
suffer from inadequate protection and discriminatory
treatment in many parts of the world.

The challenges to civilian protection are vast. But
the main obstacles relate primarily to the frequent
failure of parties to conflict to comply with their
obligations under existing legal rules. It is imperative
that all parties to armed conflict strictly abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law.

The most challenging problems are inaction and
the neglect of civilian suffering, along with a prevailing
atmosphere of impunity and lack of accountability. The
best deterrent is, undoubtedly, ensuring a speedy end to
impunity and holding to account those responsible for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community.

Ending impunity is also essential to ensuring
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation and
to upholding the rights and interests of Victims and the
well-being of society at large.

When national authorities fail to take the steps
necessary to ensure accountability, the international
community should play a more proactive role in order
to ensure an appropriate response, including through
the establishment of ad hoc tribunals, international
commissions ofinquiry and fact-finding missions.

It is also essential to emphasize the role of the
relevant humanitarian mandates in ensuring that all
armed conflict situations receive the due attention of the
international community. Commitments to protection
efforts must be free of selectivity and politically
motivated approaches and preferences.

As stated at the recent Global Conference
on Reclaiming the Protection of Civilians under
International Humanitarian Law, held in Oslo, States
should use their leverage, individually or collectively,
to raise the political costs of non-compliance with
international humanitarian law - for instance, through
exerting diplomatic pressure, by publicly denouncing
non-compliance or by naming and shaming parties
operating in Violation of their international obligations.

That approach should equally be applied in situations
involving national authorities that are unwilling
to investigate and prosecute serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Furthermore, conflict resolution initiatives considered
by the Security Council and regional arrangements must
ensure that peace and justice work together effectively.

It is important that the Council, Member States
and regional organizations ensure that mediators and
envoys in mediation, peace and preventive diplomacy
processes contribute to ensuring accountability,
including by encouraging the parties concerned to
envisage transnational justice and reparation clauses in
peace agreements. It is essential that peace efforts and
peace agreements under no circumstances encourage the
acceptance of situations achieved by the unlawful use
of force and other egregious Violations of international
law, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and ethnic cleansing. Particular consideration
must be given to implications for the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts aggravated by population
displacements and foreign military occupation.

It is important that the right of return, along with
increased attention to its practical implementation
and concrete measures aimed at overcoming obstacles
that prevent return, be applied by the international
community with more consistency and adherence to
principles.

Parties to armed conflicts should take all the
necessary measures to ensure rapid and unimpeded
access by humanitarian actors to all those in need of
protection and assistance. All efforts to that end must
at all times be undertaken in line with the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and basic
humanitarian principles.

It is also important that the Security Council
maintain its focus on the protection of civilians.
Azerbaijan will continue to support systematic
discussions on the topic.

In conclusion, I would like to again commend the
initiative of Argentina to convene this open debate and
to advance this significant theme in the work of the
Security Council.

