Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a special pleasure for my country to participate
in this open debate organized by the presidency of
the Security Council under the leadership of the
representative of Lithuania, whom we thank for this
opportunity.

My country firmly believes that the existence of
a set of common values and principles forms the basis
of harmonious coexistence. Under those premises, we
consider the rule of law as a pillar of governance and
of peaceful coexistence among citizens and nations.
That is why we defend the equality of citizens before
the law and the sovereign equality of States as set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that
a strong State with effective institutions is crucial
in order to promote the development of a country,
not only guaranteeing security for its citizens and
ensuring respect for sovereignty but also preventing
abuses by certain economic parties to the detriment
of the majority of the population. We reiterate our
traditional commitment to the rule of law at both the
national and the international levels, two areas that are
equally important and complementary. There can be no
progress if one of them is ignored.

We feel that it is also crucial to establish the root
causes of conflicts, and we reject any effort to link
them to poverty, perversely imputing responsibility
to poor countries, forgetting the fact that those who
manufacture weapons in industrialized countries are
part of the problem and that they aggravate the problem
through their financial and logistical support as well as
with the shipment of weapons of all calibres to groups
of combatants. Looking for the roots of conflicts solely
in internal factors is absurd and hypocritical, because it
seeks to avoid recognizing that the use of force without
express authorization by the Security Council is one of
the main sources of conflicts in the world.

My delegation believes that it is essential to
make a very clear distinction between violence and
conflict situations, as was pointed out clearly by the
delegations of Brazil and Nicaragua during the debate
on sustainable development goals. While violence
can be the result of individual actions without any
connection to international relations, conflicts and
wars can be the result of political decisions- which
implies that different types of response are required
to the two situations. While conflicts and wars can be
tackled through collective actions, strictly based on
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
violence is a matter that comes under the purview of
the authorities of each country and is subject to national
legislation.

Consequently, the maintenance of international
peace and security necessarily involves strengthening
regional support for democracy. By strengthening the
sovereign decisions of peoples and their legitimately
constituted Governments, the possibility of violence
is diminished. In that regard, I should point out the
existence of the democracy clause agreed to by the
Heads of State of the Union of South American Nations,
which seeks to guarantee democracy in the region.

My delegation continues to attach particular
importance to the development of the rule of law at the
international level. In that respect, we have the utmost
faith in the work done by the General Assembly, the
role of which cannot be and should not be replaced by
committees of eminent individuals or by international
forums outside the General Assembly, which is the
highest legislative body of the Organization and the
only international forum with sufficient authority to
lead the process of development and strengthen the
rule of law. In accordance with that value, we cannot
accept that officials of the Secretariat might claim to be
supervisors of the implementation of the rule of law at
the national level, nor can we accept the establishment
of a single model that would be imposed on the entire
world or the linking of compliance with the supposed
parameters ofthe rule of law to international assistance
for the development of poor countries.

We believe it is crucial to promote the reform of the
Security Council, an organ with an outdated structure
that maintains unacceptable privileges for certain
States to the detriment of others. We must conclude
negotiations on the matter and proceed to Security
Council reform, thereby making the actions of that
body more democratic and transparent.

My country vigorously rejects the extraterritorial
application of national laws, spying on Heads of State
or Government, the application of unilateral measures,
the practice of selective assassinations, as well as the
use or the threat of the use of force without express
authorization from the Security Council.
For Ecuador, the gradual universalization of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court is a
huge step in favour of the rule of law at the international
level.

