Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset,
Austria would like to thank the Croatian presidency of
the Security Council for this very timely and important
initiative.

We express our solidarity and deep sympathy
with the victims of the recent terrorist attacks in
Mumbai and their families. These heinous attacks
amply demonstrate the need for a multilateral approach
and confirm the pivotal role of the United Nations at
the centre of our joint counter-terrorism efforts, as was
stressed this morning by the Secretary-General in his
statement.

Austria aligns itself with the statement of the
French presidency on behalf of the European Union. I
will thus limit my intervention to highlighting three
points to which Austria attaches particular importance.

First, respect for human rights and the rule of law
is a fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism.
Effective counter-terrorism measures and the
protection of human rights are not conflicting goals,
but complementary and mutually reinforcing. On the
one hand, the development of an effective and rule of
law-based national system of law enforcement and
criminal justice is an essential element in preventing
terrorist acts and in bringing terrorists to justice. On
the other hand, we all must ensure that any measures
taken to combat terrorism comply with our obligations
under international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law.

We welcome the steps taken by the Security
Council and its subsidiary bodies in this regard,
including the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, under the able chairmanship of Croatia,
and its Executive Directorate in addressing human
rights aspects of counter-terrorism in the context of
resolution 1373 (2001), as well as the efforts of the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), ably chaired by Belgium, and its
Monitoring Team to strengthen the procedures for
listing and de-listing individuals and entities, in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

I would like to remind the Council of the report
of Austrian initiative on the Security Council and the
rule of law. As recommended in that report, it is
important that the Security Council be proactive in
further improving fair and clear procedures to protect
the rights of individuals affected by its decisions.

My second point is that, in order to succeed, our
counter-terrorism efforts require an integrated,
balanced and multidimensional approach, covering a
broad range of both hard and soft measures. For
instance, it is essential to strengthen coordination and
cooperation in combating crimes that are connected
with terrorism, such as organized crime, human
trafficking, drugs trafficking and the illicit arms trade.
At the same time, we must redouble our efforts to
address the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism and promote a culture of peace, mutual
respect and tolerance, including through dialogue
among religions and civilizations.

Combating the incitement of terrorist acts,
radicalization and recruitment of terrorists, especially
through the Internet, remains one of our key
challenges. In that regard, we stress the need for full
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). Finally, we
must further encourage active involvement of civil
society, including the media, victims' organizations and
the private sector in the fight against terrorism.

Third, and finally, as was explicitly recognized in
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
capacity-building is a core element of the global
counter-terrorism effort. Many States lack the legal and
organizational framework to effectively combat
terrorism. Our key challenge is to support States by
providing technical assistance to strengthen their
capacity to prevent, to protect their citizens from and
to respond to, terrorist attacks. In this context, Austria
calls on the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to intensify
their very important efforts in facilitating assistance,
and on the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime - which has so far
provided technical assistance to more than 150 States -
to further enhance its successful activities to develop
the capacity of States.

Let me say once again that Austria warmly
welcomes this open debate and the adoption of a
presidential statement today. That will send a strong
message to the world that we all stand united to
overcome the global threat of terrorism.

