Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We also would like to
thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his valuable
and sobering briefing, as well as for his comprehensive
report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). We would also like to take this
opportunity to commend the Prosecutor for his
outstanding work.

Slovakia is deeply concerned about the serious
crimes and gross violations of human rights in Darfur,
and especially about the systematic pattern of targeting
civilians, including women and children. We also
strongly deplore the ongoing deliberate attacks against

United Nations personnel, African Union staff and a
number of relief workers in the region. In that regard,
we would like to underline the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan to bring an end to crimes in
Darfur and to not allow impunity. We would like to
reiterate our view that bringing to justice the
perpetrators of those horrible crimes and abuses should
be an integral component of a comprehensive solution
for Darfur. We also believe that it will be hard, if not
impossible, to achieve lasting peace in Darfur without
addressing impunity.

We note with concern the observation that the
Government of the Sudan has refused to cooperate with
the ICC and has failed to execute the arrest warrants
issued against Ahmad Muhammad Harun and Ali
Kushayb. We wish to underline that the Government's
lack of cooperation with the ICC is unacceptable. In
our View, it is also totally unacceptable that Mr. Harun
continues to serve as Sudan's Minister of State for
Humanitarian Affairs, with authority over the refugee
camps that were created as a direct consequence of his
allegedly criminal activities in Darfur. It is shocking
that he also controls the flow of humanitarian aid in
Darfur. Moreover, we agree with the observation that
his presence in the Government creates the impression
that the Government of the Sudan is protecting the
indictees, or even supporting the horrible crimes.

We would therefore like to emphasize that under
resolution 1593 (2005) all States, including the Sudan,
must cooperate fully with, and provide any necessary
assistance to, the ICC and its Prosecutor. In that regard,
we call on the Government of the Sudan to accept the
ICC's jurisdiction and to start effective cooperation
with it, including by arresting those two individuals
and surrendering them to the ICC.

Finally, we agree with Mr. Moreno-Ocampo and
previous speakers that the Security Council must send
a strong and unanimous message to all perpetrators that
it will not tolerate impunity and disregard for
international legal obligations. We would like to
express our support for the proposal to adopt a clear
Security Council statement in that regard.

