The President: At this stage, I wish to make a
brief statement in my national capacity.

I would like to join others in thanking
Ambassador Konuzin for his highly informative and
comprehensive presentation, in congratulating him for
his assumption of the chairmanship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and in wishing
him every success in his undertaking. I would also like
to welcome the presence here of the newly appointed
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
Ambassador Javier Ruperez, to whom I wish every
success in his work.

As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by Ambassador van den Berg of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, I will
confine myself only to a few brief comments.

Following the adoption of resolution 1535 (2004),
through which the CTED was established, the CTC has
now entered into a transitional phase that will end at
the moment the CTED becomes fully operational. It is
of the utmost importance that the CTC continue to
work at the same pace throughout that period, while
also continuing to adapt itself to the new dynamics of
the global fight against terrorism.

As the CTC's ability to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) remains an
essential prerequisite to effectively combating
terrorism, we note with concern that many States are
still facing significant difficulties in fully
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). One relevant
indicator in that respect is the continuously increasing
number of States that are late in submitting their
reports. It is for that reason that we believe that
effectively addressing countries' assistance needs -
including through a more practically oriented dialogue
with both the donor community and interested
States - should be one of the Committee's top
priorities.

We recognize the importance of strengthening
cooperation and coordination between the CTC and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as with other United Nations bodies. We
welcome the active approach adopted by the new
Chairman of the CTC in that regard. For Romania's
part, I would like to assure Ambassador Konuzin of our
full readiness to discuss, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), possible synergies between our two
Committees. Given the fact that the 1540 Committee is
still in the process of launching its activities, such a
step could be considered at a later stage.

Last, but definitely not least, I would like to
express my delegation's full support for the work
Ambassador Ruperez has already undertaken in putting
in place the new structure. We stand ready to bring our
active contribution to the finalization of the
organizational plan of the Executive Directorate of the
CTC and to its timely endorsement by the Council.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Netherlands. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

