Mr. Chikoti (Angola): At the outset, I should like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March, and to thank Germany for its brilliant
presidency during the month of February.

I join preceding speakers in thanking and
expressing my appreciation, on behalf of the
Government of Angola, to the chief weapons inspector,
Mr. Blix, and to the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr.
ElBaradei, for their work, competence and
professionalism, as demonstrated in the reports
presented to the Council this morning.

Today, we are laying yet another brick in
constructing a world free from threats to international
peace and security. Millions around the world are
carefully following these proceedings, placing their
trust, faith and confidence in the Security Council's
ability to exercise prudence and justice in the
fulfilment of its mandate. Through resolution 1441
(2002) and other relevant resolutions, the Council
unanimously recognized Iraq's non-compliance with
previous resolutions and its proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Furthermore, those resolutions and
others repeatedly warned Iraq that continued violations
of its obligations could result in serious consequences.

Once again, today's report attests to some
measures undertaken by Iraq to comply with resolution
1441 (2002). We welcome this development. Such is
the case with the destruction of Al Samoud 2 missiles
and others to provide credible and verifiable
information concerning biological and chemical agents.
However, the Government of Iraq's cooperation with
the process remains relatively insufficient. In my
delegation's view, this posture by the Iraqi authorities
is in no way assisting us in our mission and in the
discharge of our mandate. Iraqi cooperation is, indeed,
an essential element.

We should recognize that Iraq has made some
progress with regard to increased cooperation with the
inspectors. This has usually occurred when associated
with specific benchmarks and dates, signalling the
makings of a model for strengthening the scope and the
intrusiveness of inspections. Under the present
circumstances, such an endeavour seems to be the most
suitable way to maintain the unity of the Security
Council and to continue a course that can lead to a
peaceful solution of the crisis and spare the Iraqi
people, the region and the world an armed conflict and
its dangerous consequences. The manner in which the
Security Council deals with the disarmament of Iraq,
and the Council's resolve, will set the standard to
which we will be held for the advancement of peace
and security in the world.

The Angolan Government shares the international
community's position that the Government of Iraq must
disarm by providing immediate, unimpeded,
unconditional and unrestricted access to sites and
information deemed relevant to the disarmament
process. Furthermore, my delegation joins other
Member States in calling upon Iraq to take a more
energetic and proactive role in the destruction and
subsequent documentation of banned weapons, so as to
assure the international community that it is indeed free
from weapons of mass destruction and associated
infrastructure.

The disarmament of Iraq represents an
unequivocal and unconditional demand of the
international community. The Council should make
absolutely clear, and send a strong signal to the
authorities in Iraq, that our debate ought not to be
construed as unwillingness to act, but rather as a
discussion about how best to act jointly to attain our
common objective of effectively disarming Iraq of its
weapons of mass destruction.

Acting with all the other members of the Security
Council, we stand ready to fully cooperate and to
assume our responsibility to find the most appropriate
solution to the crisis we are facing. In that context, the
international community, regional and subregional
organizations and international public opinion have
been calling for the peaceful disarmament of Iraq.
Organizations such as the African Union, the Non-
Aligned Movement, the League of Arab States and the
European Union have expressed their political,
economic and humanitarian concerns over the use of
force. They have also endorsed a peaceful resolution of
this crisis as the most suitable course for the Iraqi
people and the rest of the world. These constitute valid
and legitimate concerns, but are not, and cannot be,
interpreted or transformed into an unwillingness to act.

In conclusion, the essence of the issue before us
is not whether or not the Security Council is unable to
act to enforce its decisions. This body stands united in
its determination to rid Iraq of weapons of mass
destruction. But its responsibilities include exhausting
all diplomatic and peaceful means to achieve such
disarmament. The Charter binds us to that
commitment, which we are upholding.

