Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): My delegation joins
preceding speakers in extending to you, Sir, sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the current month. We have no

 

doubt that your presidency is an assurance of the successful
outcome of the Security Council's work this month.

I would also like to pay special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Elaraby, for the brilliant manner
in which he presided over the Council's work last month.

We come to this House humbled by the decisive role
that the Council played in bringing peace and stability to
Mozambique. We come, therefore, with a great sense of
duty and responsibility to make our modest contribution to
consideration of the issue before the Council today.

The Council is meeting once again in order to
discharge its responsibilities at an important time in the
history of the people of Angola, when peace and stability
are within their grasp. My delegation has carefully
examined both the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) and the draft resolution before the Council. We have
also listened with keen attention and interest to the
statement made by Mr. Higino Carneiro, Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of Angola. We thank Vice-Minister
Carneiro for giving us once again the real picture of the
situation prevailing in that sister country. His statement
underscores the urgency and determination with which the
international community at large and the Council in
particular must address the issue before it today.

My delegation wishes to welcome the positive
developments in the peace process, particularly those
described in paragraphs 6 and 36 of the Secretary-General's
report, namely the promulgation of the Amnesty Law; the
completion of the quartering of the rapid reaction police;
the partial withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA)
to barracks; some progress in the quartering of Uniao
Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA)
troops; and a small beginning of the incorporation of
UNITA military personnel into the armed forces. These are
significant steps towards implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol.

However, my delegation would like to express concern
over the fact that the steps towards the formation of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation are not
being implemented, mainly because UNITA is not showing
readiness, despite high-level consultations between the
Government and UNITA on constitutional amendments.
Furthermore, UNITA delays in the quartering of troops and
its significantly reduced hand-over of its real military
equipment to the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) continue to be one of my
delegation's concerns. Having all these developments in
mind, my delegation concurs with the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the mandate of UNAVEM. Ill be
extended for a further period of three months, until 11
October 1996.

My Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
speaking before the Council on 27 January 1995, stressed
the importance of these issues and underlined the
importance we attached to the early implementation of the
mandate of UNAVEM. III. Our experience in the
deployment of United Nations forces and the
implementation of Security Council resolutions and
presidential statements in our country shows that the
sooner such a verification mission is established, deployed
and implemented, the better for the success of the peace
process.

The relevance and urgency of this action by the
Council should not be underestimated. The signing of the
Lusaka Protocol represented the culmination of a long and
delicate process of negotiations to address the war
situation in Angola and to contribute to bringing about
peace and stability not only in that country but also in the
entire region of southern Africa. We strongly believe that
there is no real reason for peace in Angola to be delayed
any longer.

No one should be allowed to hold the Angolan
people hostage to motives alien to their desire for peace
and prosperity. I would like, therefore, to urge the
Council to look into these matters even more diligently
and expeditiously, clearly identifying at every stage the
detractors of the peace process.

The United Nations and the international community
at large are duty-bound to extend their hand of solidarity
to the people of Angola and their legitimate Government
in their quest for peace and stability. In assisting the
Angolan people, we consider of utmost importance
observance of the principles and purposes of the Charter
as well as of the principles of sovereignty,
non-intervention and non-interference in the internal
affairs of the Republic of Angola, in line also with the
peace accords.

So long as peace is not an irreversible reality in
Angola, the success achieved in Mozambique can be
considered neither complete nor solid. We wish to
reaffirm our unconditional support for and solidarity with
the people and the Government Of Angola. We reiterate
our readiness to do our best to assist in efforts aimed at

 

bringing about peace, harmony and national reconciliation
in that sister country.

We urge every State Member of the United Nations,
and in particular the members of the Security Council, to
continue to render support to the peace process in Angola
and to use all means at their disposal for the successful
conclusion of the mandate of UNAVEM. III.

