Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I express our sincere condolences to the
Government of Ethiopia and to all the Governments
and the families of the victims of the tragic accident
involving Ethiopian Airlines.

We thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing today. We take this
opportunity to reaffirm our appreciation for UNAMA's
efforts in supporting and helping the Afghan people in
difficult circumstances. I also thank Mr. Hamdullah
Mohib, National Security Adviser of Afghanistan, and
Ms. Storai Tapesh for their participation in our meeting
and for their valuable briefings.

We fully realize that Afghanistan is going through
a delicate transition stage following the parliamentary
elections in October 2018 and the upcoming presidential
elections in July. We hope that the preparations for
the presidential elections will lead to more political
consultations that help de-escalate the tensions among
the various parties and prioritize the national interests
over personal ones, thus selecting the proper candidate
for the presidency ofAfghanistan in the upcoming stage.
The preparations for the presidential elections also call
for redoubled efforts using the lessons learned from the
parliamentary elections in October 2018. In that regard,
we welcome the contents of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/193) and what Mr. Yamamoto noted
in his briefing about the efforts to prepare for the
presidential elections and how the various challenges
posed by the parliamentary elections were addressed,
as well as the imperative need to hold the presidential
elections as scheduled on 20 July 2019.

Discussing presidential elections leads us also to
talk about national reconciliation as an essential element
in the political process in Afghanistan. We noted with
satisfaction the intensified efforts in the second half
of 2018 towards political reconciliation, whereby the
Government of Afghanistan continued its preparations
to conduct a peaceful dialogue among the Afghan
people. In addition, a presidential decree was issued on
12 December 2018 on establishing the High Consultative
Council to strengthen the national dialogue.

We have also followed with satisfaction the
international and regional efforts to advance the peace
process in Afghanistan, including the important role
of the United States Special Representative Zalmay
Khalilzad in the current negotiations. The State of
Kuwait supports all international efforts that would help
bring together the Afghan people and establish national
reconciliation among all parties in Afghanistan.

Kuwait stresses its continued support for the
security, sovereignty and stability of Afghanistan.
However, we are concerned about the instability in the
security situation, as mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General. The conflict between the Afghan
Government and anti-Government forces continues in
most parts of the country. The United Nations reported
more than 22,000 security incidents in Afghanistan in
2018. That serves to underscore the difficulty faced
by the Afghan Government and the international
community, especially given that the Taliban continue
their expansion to many villages and centres in the
country, while the Da'esh group continues its terrorist
attacks against unarmed civilians. We are all aware of
the toll of those terrorist attacks in terms of civilian
lives, with UNAMA recording 10,993 dead or injured
civilian victims as a result ofacts ofviolence committed
during 2018 alone - the highest recorded number since
UNAMA started reporting victims in 2009.

The State of Kuwait believes that there is an
important opportunity now to reach a political
settlement in Afghanistan. We reiterate that any peace
process must include all the parties concerned in order
to reach consensus among them. In addition, it is also
important that any peace process must include the
neighbouring States so as to reach a regional consensus
and achieve stability in Afghanistan. History has
taught us that there cannot be a lasting comprehensive
solution without all levels of Afghan society and all
States in the region participating in the efforts to that
end. We hope that Afghanistan will be able to emerge
from this historic stage and enjoy the benefits of peace
and stability.

