Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing, which was based on the fifth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to
international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat (S/2017/467). We found the report
very comprehensive and informative.
ISIL has indeed been under continuous military
pressure, facing several setbacks on the battlefield,
but what remains of serious concern is the fact that the
group continues to inspire a range of attacks outside
of the conflict zone. Returnees and fighters who
relocated from conflict zones to other regions now pose
a considerable threat to international security. Let me
say in parenthesis that that has been a major problem
in our region for a very long time - long before it was
drawn to the attention of the Security Council.

With regard to East Africa, we already see ISIL
cells in Somalia. The report acknowledges emerging
ISIL affiliates operating in Puntland and in parts of
southern Somalia. That certainly complicates the
challenge of the terrorist threat posed by Al Qa'ida's
affiliate Al-Shabaab, which remains a major threat
to the region and beyond, as the report has quite
rightly noted. There are also interesting reports by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, which
reinforce those findings and provide useful insights.

ISIL has found a foothold in North Africa in reaction
to the continuous pressure in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic and has also become a source of concern
in that region. As Under-Secretary-General Feltman
stated, although ISIL in Libya has weakened after
losing a significant portion of the territory it controlled,
the threat persists in that country and the wider region.
It is impossible to state that the trajectory is promising.
The organization of Al Qa'ida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and factions
of Al Qa'ida affiliates, such as Boko Haram and the
number of terrorist attacks attributed to them show how
ISIL is expanding in the wider region.

Restoring peace and stability in Libya, Mali and
the Lake Chad basin is indeed critical to denying ISIL
safe haven. What complicates the challenge in West
Africa and North Africa is the link between terrorist
groups and organized criminal networks involved
in trafficking, in particular of weapons and related
material. That is why there should be renewed efforts to
develop concrete regional and international cooperation
to counter the threat posed by ISIL in those regions.

Enhancing the capacity of countries of the Lake
Chad basin region, will continue to be very significant
in countering ISIL and its affiliates operating in
the wider region. In that regard, we reiterate our
appreciation to the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in assisting countries of
the region to develop a counter-terrorism strategy and
enhance their counter-terrorism capacity.

ISIL in Yemen continues to conduct deadly
extensive multi-pronged attacks. ISIL in Afghanistan
has also been trying to establish itself in a number of
areas. The rise of ISIL groups in South East Asia has
been of growing concern. The latest attack, in Tehran,
which we condemn most vehemently, underscores the
extent of the common danger that the world faces:
terrorist-financing risks, the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees, terrorist exploitation of
information and communication technologies and social
media and the internet. They are the new frontiers, as
the representative of France pointed out. Vulnerabilities
in certain sectors, including non-profit organizations
and money remitters, remain serious challenges.

Such a huge challenge ought to compel the United
Nations, Member States and regional, subregional
and international organizations to forge meaningful
cooperation, strengthen existing tools and develop new
ones to address the rapidly evolving threat posed by ISIL
and other terrorist organizations and their affiliates.
One thing cannot be denied, namely, the world has yet
to agree in a transparent manner on making the fight
against terror a common top priority. We are not there
yet. We should not kid ourselves on that point. Without
a doubt, the case at hand is one of not putting one's
money where one's mouth is.

In that connection, on 22 June, Ethiopia, together
with Italy, will organize an Arria Formula meeting on
the theme "Preventing terrorism and violent extremism
in the Horn of Africa - enhancing partnership for
regional efforts". We hope that the meeting will
help enhance awareness about efforts being made
in the prevention of, and the fight against, terrorism
and violent extremism in the Horn of Africa and
strengthen cooperation and collaboration among the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and other partners. We look forward to
the members' active participation.

