The President (spoke in Spanish): As a result of
the consultations held among the members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council.

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of his recommendations to the Council entitled
'Small arms' (S/2003/1217) of 31 December
2003, and reaffirms the statements of its President
of 31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/30), of 24
September 1999 (S/PRST/1999/28), and of 31
August 2001 (S/PRST/2001/21).

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in view of which its attention
is drawn inevitably to the illicit trade of small
arms and light weapons, as such weapons are the
most frequently used in armed conflicts.

"The Council reaffirms the inherent right of
individual or collective self-defence in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations and, subject to the Charter, the
right of each State to import, produce and retain
small arms and light weapons for its self-defence
and security needs.

"The Council welcomes all efforts already
undertaken by Member States and calls upon
them to fully implement at the national, regional
and international levels the recommendations
contained in the Programme of Action adopted in
July 2001 by the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.

"The Council welcomes resolution 58/241
of 23 December 2003 of the General Assembly
by which, among other things, it decided to
establish an open-ended working group to
negotiate an international instrument to enable
States to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light
weapons and calls upon all Member States to
support all efforts aimed at this purpose.

"The Council encourages the arms-
exporting countries to exercise the highest degree
of responsibility in small arms and light weapons
transactions. It also encourages international and
regional cooperation in the consideration of the
origin and transfers of small arms and light
weapons in order to prevent their diversion to
terrorist groups, in particular, Al Qaeda. The
Council welcomes the significant steps that have
been taken by Member States in this regard. The
obligation of Member States to enforce the arms
embargo should be coupled with enhanced
international and regional cooperation concerning
arms exports.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on
all Member States to effectively implement arms
embargoes and other sanction measures imposed
by the Council in its relevant resolutions and
urges Member States in a position to do so to
provide assistance to interested States in
strengthening their capacity to fulfil their
obligations in this regard. The Council
encourages Members to undertake vigorous
actions aimed at restricting the supply of small
arms, light weapons and ammunitions to areas of
instability. The Council further encourages
Member States to provide the Sanctions
Committees with available information on alleged
violations of arms embargoes and also calls on
Member States to give due consideration to the
recommendations of the related reports.

"The Council continues to recognize the
need to engage the relevant international
organizations, non-governmental organizations,
business and financial institutions and other
actors at the international, regional and local
levels to contribute to the implementation of arms
embargoes.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of carrying out disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, an
increasingly essential component of peacekeeping
mandates, as comprehensively and effectively as
possible in post-conflict situations under its
consideration.

"The Security Council takes note of the
inclusion of man-portable air defence systems
(MANPADS) on an exceptional basis in the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to update the Council for its
next meeting on the subject on the further
implementation of the recommendations
contained in his report entitled 'Small Arms' of
31 December 2003."

(spoke in Spanish)

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/l.

As there are no further speakers inscribed on my

list, the Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.10pm.
