Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, for their substantive briefings.

We believe that it will be possible to stabilize the
situation in South Sudan only ifthere is a lasting ceasefire
and the start of an inclusive national reconciliation
process. We note that certain progress has been made in
that regard, in the form of the gradual implementation
of President Kiir's initiative, launched in May, to
begin a nationwide dialogue, with the participation
of every ethnic group, political actor and population
sector, aimed at achieving national reconciliation and
ending the conflict in South Sudan. We agree with the
Secretariat that this can be viewed as a supplement to
the process initiated by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for revitalizing the August
2015 peace agreement. In that regard, we welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
in promoting intercommunal reconciliation at the
local level.

We have once again been compelled to turn our
attention to the dire humanitarian repercussions of
the crisis in South Sudan. Its escalation is having
extremely negative repercussions in the subregion,
producing a significant spike in the influx of refugees
into neighbouring countries. In our view, it would not
be fair to lay all the blame for the persistent violence
entirely at the Government's door. It is impossible for
the unilateral ceasefire that Mr. Kiir announced in May
to be implemented without reciprocal measures on the
part of the opposition.

We continue to believe that threatening the
Government with targeted sanctions or an arms
embargo would not help to solve the crisis, and might
in fact exacerbate it. During our recent visit to Addis
Ababa, the members of the Council were able to see
for themselves how wary the regional players are about
increasing the sanctions pressure.

We are pleased that the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force is under way in South Sudan. We trust
that IGAD and the Secretariat will continue working
with the South Sudan Government on mutually
acceptable modalities for the operation, including the
involvement of the Regional Protection Force in the
area of Juba airport. That is a requisite of the basic
principles of peacekeeping.

We call on South Sudan and the troop-contributing
countries to help the Regional Protection Force reach
operational readiness. We welcome the Secretary-
General's personal involvement in the efforts to
achieve a settlement in South Sudan and commend the
cooperation among the African Union, IGAD and the
United Nations. We hope that the current preparations
for the IGAD-led revitalization forum for the peace
agreement will enable it to succeed. While noting
the Kampala and Nairobi mediation efforts, we share
the Secretary-General's opinion that those processes
require tight coordination. We would also like to note
the importance of ensuring that the regional Powers
maintain a united approach to the settlement of the crisis
in South Sudan. Attempts to advance short-sighted
national agendas, let alone to compete with neighbours
in the region where South Sudan is concerned, could
have disastrous consequences for the peace process.

