I would like to thank my colleague the Permanent Representative of the Dominican Republic for presiding over the work of the Security Council this month. All Security Council resolutions pertaining to the situation in my country, Syria, have stressed an unavoidable conclusion, namely, the need for the full commitment by all States Members of the United Nations, both inside and outside the Security Council, to respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. However, eight years after the adoption of its first relevant resolution (resolution 2042 (2012)), the Security Council is still unable to enforce respect for this fundamental principle by some Member States despite the fact that no realistic or sustainable solution to the crisis can be envisaged without full implementation of this principle. Nine years have passed since the start of the so-called Syrian crisis, which is in fact a barbaric and terrorist war waged by the Governments of well-known States that have espoused the game of hegemony and sought to legalize interference in the affairs of my country and other countries of our region, the shedding of the blood of their people and the looting of their resources under false and fabricated pretexts. In these nine years, a wide range of weaponry has been deployed against my country, whether it be through large-scale information and media warfare, an investment in terrorism, the sponsorship of criminal Takfiri organizations, direct military interventions, bombing, aggression and occupation by the United States, France, the United Kingdom, Turkey and Israel - including the recent Israeli aggression two days ago, which killed three civilians and wounded four others - or through economic terrorism and collective punishment of the Syrian people by the imposition of unilateral coercive measures, all of which constitute a flagrant violation of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, and a challenge to the mandate and resolutions of the Security Council as well as its ability to fulfil its responsibilities in maintaining international peace and security. We reiterate that we will not shy away from upholding the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, no matter how intense the pressure or to what degree the plots against us are escalated. Furthermore, we will not give up on the liberation of our occupied territories, whether they be occupied by the United States, Turkey, Israel or their affiliated terrorist organizations. We also stress that any foreign military presence on the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic without the explicit consent of the Syrian Government is an act of aggression and occupation and will be dealt with as such in accordance with our rights under international law. Not only has the Turkish regime violated its commitments under the Astana, Sochi and Moscow understandings and supported the armed terrorist groups affiliated with the many organizations it transferred to Idlib province, it has also shamelessly reinforced its illegitimate military presence on the territory of my country by allowing the daily access of convoys loaded with weapons and many other types of heavy equipment across the borders with a view to supporting the armed terrorist groups. But that was not all: the Turkish Defence Minister recently infiltrated the Syrian province of Idlib to hold meetings with leaders of some terrorist organizations operating there, with the aim of continuing Turkey's investment in terrorism and in preparation for upcoming rounds of armed confrontation. Accordingly, the representatives of countries participating in today's meeting should now realize that many Turkish infantry units have entered occupied Syrian territories and that Turkish air-defence systems are even being deployed. Turkey has strengthened its military forces in Idlib with Hawk anti-aircraft missiles that were sent from the United States of America in clear violation of international law and the United Nations Charter. The presence of Turkish air- defence systems in the Syrian province of Idlib proves Turkey's true aim: to sustain its occupation of the Syrian territories, given that the sole purpose of deploying air-defence systems on the occupied Syrian territories is undoubtedly to destroy such air targets as planes and helicopters, which clearly means that these systems' missiles will not be used against the radical terrorist groups that are in fact allies of the Turkish regime. My delegation warns that if these Turkish air-defence systems fall into the hands of the terrorist organizations operating in Idlib - Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, Huras Al-Din and the Turkistan Islamic Party in Syria - there will be grave and dangerous consequences. For years, the Turkish regime has recruited tens of thousands of terrorists from Central Asia and the Caucasus, including Turkmen, Uighurs and others, and brought them to my country. Yet many theoreticians in the Security Council and the Secretariat have somehow been blind to that fact, as there have been no references to this terrorist activity in any of their reports or briefings. The Turkish regime is now expanding its sponsorship of terrorism by recruiting Syrian and foreign terrorists to fight in Libya by offering tempting monthly salaries. Thousands of these terrorist recruits have been transported by Turkish aircraft to Libya undeterred and without accountability. The world's media have been flooded with images of the hundreds of terrorists transported by Erdogan to Libya and killed there. My European colleagues in the Security Council know the magnitude of the threat this Turkish behaviour poses to the security of Europe and the world, but their alliance with Turkey through NATO has prompted them to impose the silence of the grave on the Security Council, thereby limiting its ability to fulfil its mandate. In this context, and in order to preserve the Council's credibility and maintain international support for the Moscow agreement, the Turkish leadership, both political and military, must focus on implementing the agreement instead of shirking its responsibilities by failing to put it into effect. Terrorist groups have taken advantage of the period of calm following the adoption of the Moscow agreement together with the international concern that has arisen in relation to combating the coronavirus disease pandemic to reorganize their forces, principally with the support of the American and Turkish occupation forces. In mid-April, the leadership of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham/Jabhat Al-Nusra announced that it had reorganized its forces and formed three new brigades in preparation for upcoming confrontations in north-west Syria. This reaffirms the need for the Security Council to require certain States to commit to stopping their support for terrorism and to upholding the absolute priority of bolstering the efforts of the Syrian State to fight terrorism and eradicate this tumour from the Syrian body. This must be done in order to completely restore security and stability in the country and help it achieve what it hopes for most: a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led solution without any foreign interference.
