Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting on the report
(S/2011/41) of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
We wish to express our sincere gratitude to the former
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Wittig, for his leadership of the Commission during the
past year. We also thank the Chairs of the five country-
specific configurations for Burundi, Sierra Leone, the
Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia,
for their dedication and hard work. We thank the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its invaluable support
to the PBC.

South Africa looks forward to the leadership of the
new Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Gasana, the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda. My delegation stands ready to contribute
concretely to peacebuilding activities through our
membership in the sixth country-specific configuration.

The Peacebuilding Commission has made a
considerable contribution to United Nations
peacebuilding efforts since it was established. The
recent of addition of Liberia and Guinea to the
Commission's agenda is another indication of the
significance of the work of the Commission. However,
more still needs to be done if we are to achieve the
objective of preventing the relapse of countries into
conflict and building durable peace.

We welcome the support provided by the
international community to the Commission through
the PBC country-specific configurations. The five
countries currently on the PBC's agenda have received
assistance in various ways, including through the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and other programmes. The
Commission played a critical role in Burundi and in the
Central African Republic by providing support for the
election processes and mobilizing financial resources
to bridge the funding gap in the electoral budgets. That

contribution of the Commission went a long way
towards ensuring that the two countries held successful
elections.

The Commission's interaction with the Security
Council has improved. However, there is still scope for
further improvement. We still believe that the PBC has
a crucial role to play in advising the Security Council
on peacebuilding elements that could be integrated into
peacebuilding mandates. We are certain that such
advice is important to enhancing the Council's
peacebuilding efforts.

We encourage the Commission to continue to
strengthen its relationship with other bodies of the
United Nations, in particular the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. We appreciate the
Commission's efforts to build collaboration and
partnership with a wide range of stakeholders through
outreach activities. South Africa believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission could improve its reporting
by also focusing and reflecting more on the following
five areas.

First, it should focus on better coordination of
peacebuilding initiatives among the stakeholders.
Secondly, greater consideration should be given to the
visibility of women and civil society in peacebuilding,
including in providing leadership on socio-economic
development issues. Thirdly, the report should focus on
further enhancing cooperation and information-sharing.
For example, lessons learned should be shared among
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and other United Nations
agencies, such as the United Nations Development
Programme. Fourthly, the role of regional authorities
and stakeholders in peacebuilding processes should be
emphasized. In this context, local ownership and
prioritization become important, and more could be
done jointly in consultation with the authorities in
countries emerging from conflict. Fifthly, the report
should also elaborate on the Commission's activities in
partnership with the international financial institutions.
That partnership is certainly important in light of the
nexus between peace and security.
The Peacebuilding Fund has provided critical
assistance to countries emerging from conflict. South
Africa encourages greater interaction and collaboration
between the PBC and the PBF in ascertaining how
countries emerging from conflict can be assisted
financially in accordance with their priorities and
national vision. It is important that the existing
complementarities between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund be sustained
and maintained. South Africa believes that the
Peacebuilding Support Office, in partnership with the
broader United Nations system, adds enormous value
to peacebuilding efforts.

In conclusion, it is our sincere hope that the
recommendations of the 2010 review of the
peacebuilding process will add value to the work of the
Commission by enhancing and improving coherence,
coordination and collaboration, including by enhancing
the relationships among the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly
and other partners.

