Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): By chance, Sir, I find
myself the first member of the Council to speak in the first
open discussion of your presidency. Your presidency marks
a real landmark, both for your country and for you
personally. We have much appreciated the way in which
you have smoothly guided the Council's work so far this
month. I want to assure you that you will have our full
cooperation for the remainder of your tenure.

Sierra Leone has come a long way since the security
crisis last December. In the last few months, there have
been some very real strides towards peace. As the
representative of Sierra Leone has just noted, the
negotiations leading to the Lorne Peace Agreement were
difficult, with both sides - in particular the Government of
Sierra Leone - making some difficult and uncomfortable
compromises. Those compromises, however difficult and
uncomfortable, have at last given the people of Sierra
Leone a real chance of peace - a peace which they badly
need, and a peace which we are here to support today.

We pay tribute to the Government of Sierra Leone and
to all those who have strived to bring about that peace. In
particular, we applaud the vital role played by the
Economic Community of West African States Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG). Without ECOMOG's efforts to bring
about peace and preserve security, there would not be a
peace process for us to support.

We must now focus on the future. Sierra Leone needs
a coordinated and sustained effort by the international
community to secure lasting peace. What Sierra Leone does
not need is a Peace Agreement that fails, as others have
done before it. The United Kingdom views the draft
resolution we are to adopt today as a sign of the United
Nations determination to support the implementation of the
Lome Agreement. It marks a real turning point. But it is
only a first step towards a much more substantial United
Nations role.

We have no illusions. The Lorne Agreement is not
perfect. The inclusion of a blanket amnesty for those who
have committed appalling atrocities has rightly caused
concern. But this was one of many hard choices that the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone had to make
in the interests of securing a workable agreement.

Now the international community must help ensure
that the Agreement promotes accountability and an end to
impunity, and begins the long process of national
reconciliation. We accordingly pledge our continued
support to the Government of Sierra Leone. We will work
with and assist the establishment of the Truth and
Reconciliation and Human Rights Commissions now
foreseen for Sierra Leone.

We welcome the steps that the Government of Sierra
Leone has already taken to realize the Agreement. But the
lack of momentum on its overall implementation threatens
to undermine the peace. The way ahead is clear.

First, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme must start immediately. Delay
risks a descent into wider lawlessness. Beginning the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
will also help alleviate the dire humanitarian situation in
certain parts of country. We urge all those involved -
the World Bank, the Government of Sierra Leone,
ECOMOG and the United Nations - to use the resources
available to get the programme under way immediately.
Urgent contributions are also needed for the World Bank
trust fund to help sustain the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme.

Secondly, Foday Sankoh must return to Freetown
and assume his responsibilities under the Peace
Agreement with the absolute minimum of delay. He must
ensure that his followers understand and adhere to the
Agreement and persuade them to release all remaining
detainees, including children.

Thirdly, we must establish a full United Nations
peacekeeping operation to assist in the implementation of
the Peace Agreement and to help create a climate of
confidence. The larger Observer Mission that we are
authorizing today is only a stopgap. The recent hostage-
taking only highlights the urgent need to address the
security of United Nations military observers. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's recommendations on

 

the mandate and structure of an enhanced United Nations
peacekeeping presence. ECOMOG's continuing presence
until the peace is secure will be vital to the success of this
endeavour. We hope that the United Nations and ECOMOG
will agree soon on their respective areas of responsibility
under the new peacekeeping regime. The sooner the new
framework is in place, the better for the United Nations,
ECOMOG and the Sierra Leonean people. Clarity is needed
to mobilize international support for the operation.

For the first time in eight years, Sierra Leone has a
real chance of bringing to an end, once and for all, the
appalling suffering of its people. The decision we are
making today must turn that expectation into reality.
