I warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Sergey Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia and His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine, to the meeting. I would also like to express my appreciation to Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing on the current situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. We continue to hear increasingly grim reports from the ground. It is regrettable that another act of bad faith has been committed by Israel. As we learned recently, on 14 and 15 October, the Israeli authorities approved the construction of another 5,000 settlement units in the occupied Palestinian territory. That development is not surprising or new. This creeping annexation is testament that Israel's annexation plan is alive and well. Collective efforts to realize a two-State solution based on pre-1967 borders cannot be achieved when international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions are repeatedly violated and ignored by Israel. Indonesia condemns this latest flagrant violation of international law, and once again demands that Israel immediately cease all of its illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. On that note, I would like to convey three pertinent points. First, we call for accountability and an end to impunity. The expansion of illegal settlements clearly violates Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Israel's continued violations derive from decades of unchecked accountability and systemic impunity. This has to stop. We, the international community, must act together to end impunity and to hold Israel accountable. Secondly, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive and inclusive solution. A unilateral approach to finding a solution for the Israel-Palestine conflict is not only unjust but unsustainable. A comprehensive and inclusive solution is needed. Indonesia urges the international community to focus all of its effort on restarting a credible multilateral process based on United Nations resolutions, international law and other relevant internationally agreed parameters. The process should also, first and foremost, involve direct engagement between the two conflicting parties - Israel and Palestine. I would like to reiterate and echo President Abbas' call for the Secretary- General to convene an international conference as part of a multilateral approach to the peace process, with the participation of the Middle East Quartet and all relevant parties. In addition, we would like to extend our support for intra-Palestinian unity talks as an essential step towards internal reconciliation and a unified Palestine. Thirdly, we note the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, which continues to worsen due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with more than 60,000 positive cases and 492 deaths, according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). The huge spike represents a significant burden and exacerbates an already difficult and challenging situation, particularly for women, children and refugees. In October alone, OCHA reported that more than 6,000 additional Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territory had tested positive for COVID-19, resulting in 90 more deaths. As such, the role of United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), is more urgent than ever. The international community should remain committed to supporting and ensuring predictable funding and political backing in order for UNRWA to effectively carry out its mandate. Today we are commemorating the seventy-fifth year of the Charter of the United Nations, where we are recommitting to the spirit and letter of the Charter. We heard the beautiful poem, entitled "Inheritance", by Ms. Eleanor Wikstrom, Youth Poet Laurate. If the youth of the world ask us what we have inherited on this issue of Palestine, the answer would be that the United Nations inherit the despair and suffering of the Palestinian people. We inherit stories of conflict, violence and violations of human rights by Israel in the Palestinian territory. We inherit the non-implementation and non-fulfilment of United Nations and Security Council resolutions on the issue of Palestine. The question of Palestine requires a just solution. We, as the Security Council, have a solemn duty to resolve it. Indonesia remains steadfast and committed to stand with the Palestinian people to achieve their independence and sovereignty.
