The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Austria, Israel, Lebanon,
Malaysia, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Arab
Emirates and Yemen in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
20 March 2006 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2006/ 197, and which reads as follows.

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Thursday, 30 March 2006, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
28 March 2006 from the Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that His Excellency Mr. Paul
Badji, Chairman of the Committee, be invited to
participate in the debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council."

In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Paul Badji to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will first
hear a briefing by Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs. I now give him
the floor.


