The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Albania, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Romania, Spain, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kulla (Albania)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Sucharipa
(Austria), Mr. Reyn (Belgium), Mr. Kimberg
(Denmark), Mr. Orpana (Finland), Mr. Eitel
(Germany), Mr. Sarris (Greece), Mr. Hoey (Ireland),
Mr. Fulci (Italy), Mr. Berteling (Netherlands),
Mr. Gorita (Romania), Mr. Laclaustra (Spain),
Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and Mr. Celem (Turkey) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 28 March 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Albania to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council, document S/1997/259.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l997/260, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Austria, Belgium, France,
Greece, Italy, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America. Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland and the
Netherlands have joined as sponsors of the draft
resolution.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following revisions to be made to the
text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/ 1997/260 in its provisional form.

The last part of the seventh preambular paragraph
should read:

"in particular those of the OSCE and of the
European Union";

and the last part of operative paragraph 4 should read:

"further authorizes these Member States to ensure
the security and freedom of movement of the
personnel of the said multinational protection force".

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1997/226 and
S/ 1997/230, letters dated 17 and 14 March 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, and
S/ 1997/251, letter dated 24 March 1997 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of the
Netherlands to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General; and S/ 1997/258, letter dated 27 March
1997 from the Permanent Representative of Italy to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it, as orally
revised in its provisional form. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


