Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Chairs of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities; the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, I have the honour to inform the Security
Council ofthe continued cooperation among those three
committees and their respective Groups of Experts,
in accordance with the Council's request under its
resolutions 2083 (2012), 1963 (2010), 1977 (2011) and
prior resolutions.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and the risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction on the part of non-State actors continue
to pose a grave threat to international peace and
security. In order to address that grave threat, the
Security Council has stressed the importance of
close and effective coordination among the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, the Anti-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). Since the last time the Council received
updated information, the three Committees have
continued to cooperate on dissemination carried out
within the frameworks of their respective mandates;
have strengthened their cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations; and have
conducted joint visits, increased their exchange of
information, coordinated their activities with respect to
travel and planning, and established a common focal
point. I would like to provide more detailed information
on the areas of increased cooperation.

Dissemination activities and country visits are
important tools that enable the three Committees to
fulfil their respective mandates. Since November 2014,
the three Groups of Experts have been represented in
more than a dozen workshops and other activities of
dissemination; at least two of those Groups participated
in additional meetings. Since the previous briefing (see S/PV.7331), the three Groups of Experts have continued
to cooperate within the context of official visits to
Member States. For example, in April, the Monitoring
Team and the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee
joined the follow-up visit to Uzbekistan by the Executive
Directorate of the Anti-Terrorism Committee on behalf
of that Committee. In May, the Group of Experts of the
1540 Committee accompanied the Executive Directorate
of the Anti-Terrorism Committee on a specific visit to
Italy that took place on behalf of the Anti-Terrorism
Committee. Joint participation in country Visits
continues to contribute to improving cooperation and
exchange of information among the three Expert Groups
and ensures that the Groups transmit a single message
and present a unified position to Member States. As
a means for strengthening cooperation, the Groups of
Experts continued to coordinate their country Visits
and dissemination activities.

The Executive Directorate of the Anti-Terrorism
Committee and the Expert Group ofthe 1540 Committee
share a focal point in the Caribbean that works with
Member States in the region to strengthen dialogue
with both Committees and to increase awareness and
understanding of the provisions of resolutions 1373
(2001), 1540 (2004), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014). At the
institutional level, that also encourages inter-agency
support for national implementation initiatives,
coordinates the delivery of technical assistance based
on States' specific needs and acts as an early-warning
mechanism. The focal point submitted a progress report
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee on 18 December
2014.

In February 2015, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2199 (2015) to stem the financing ofterrorists
through the illicit oil trade. The resolution has made a
major contribution to consolidating international efforts
to counter the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) and Al-Nusra Front. However,
the level of reporting has thus far been insufficient.
Therefore, the 1267 Committee urges Member States to
submit, as soon as possible, reports in conformity with
paragraph 29 of the resolution and to continue to report
in conformity with paragraph 2.

With regard to cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
1267 Committee Monitoring Team continued their
close cooperation in countering money laundering and
the of financing of terrorism, in particular by freezing
terrorist assets. It should be highlighted that the
Monitoring Team represented the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate at the twenty-first
plenary meeting of the Middle East and North Africa
Financial Task Force held in Oman in April. As a
recurring practice, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team provide
joint comments on draft legislation relating to the
finance-related provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001), upon requests by Member States. In that
context, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Team provided joint
comments to Tanzania and Uganda concerning their
respective draft laws on the implementation of the
two resolutions' asset freezing requirements and the
implementation of financial measures.

The three Expert Groups are all counter-terrorism
implementation task force entities. In that regard,
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
continues to provide a platform for enhanced cooperation
by the three Expert Groups, not only among themselves
but also among over 30 United Nations organizations,
agencies and programmes concerned with various
aspects of counter-terrorism. The Monitoring Team
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate have also continued their leading roles in
their respective Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force working groups. The 1540 Committee
Group of Experts participated in the Working Group
on Border Management Relating to Counter-Terrorism
and the Working Group on Preventing and Responding
to Weapons of Mass Destruction Attacks. The three
Committees have close cooperation on issues related to
border management. As Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Working Group on Border
Management Relating to Counter-Terrorism, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
presided over the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force Experts Meeting on Coordinated Border
Management held in Lyon in May 2015. The experts
from the Monitoring Team and 1540 Committee Group
of Experts attended the meeting and contributed to the
discussion of the templates developed by the Team in
cooperation with the Stimson Center on coordination of
border management. Discussions among the three Expert
Groups included future participation and cooperation
of the Working Groups on border management in order
to better coordinate a comprehensive manner to help
national border management agencies carry out their
duties more effectively.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate also worked closely with the Monitoring
Team in providing comments and suggestions to the
Working Group on tackling the financing of terrorism,
regarding its capacity-building initiative on asset
freezing, pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373
(2001). This month, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team will
deliver a joint presentation on the financing of foreign
terrorist fighters to the Financial Action Task Force
plenary meeting.

Exchange of information among the Expert Groups
continues to be carried out on a regular basis. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
regularly shares with the other two groups the monthly
reports submitted by its Executive Director to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, including information
on its recent missions, country visits and technical
assistance activities. As a new initiative, the three
Expert Groups have shared their respective working
calendars of events and discussed ways of improving
the effectiveness and efficiency of country visits and
capacity-building potential, with a view to improving
cost efficiency. The experts of the 1540 Committee
prepare informative notes on the Committee's outreach
events and post them on its website for the sake of
transparency and sharing of information.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Team routinely rely
on and reference each others' reports and analyses.
For example, on 18 February 2015, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate's report
on the prosecutorial challenges associated with
bringing terrorists to justice, adopted by the Security
Council, was quoted in the Monitoring Team's report
on foreign terrorist fighters, while the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate referenced
the Monitoring Team's work in its report on foreign
terrorist fighters.

The Security Council's presidential statement of
19 November 2014 (S/PRST/2014/23) requested that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
prepare within 180 days an analysis of the gaps in
Member States' use of advance passenger information
and make recommendations to expand its use. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
closely consulted with the Monitoring Team in
preparing that report.

In April 2015, the Monitoring Team attended an
expert briefing organized by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. The three Expert Groups continue
to hold joint meetings when appropriate - whether
involving the heads of each team or the Expert
Teams - in order to prepare for relevant outreach
activities and exchange information on themes specific
to countries or regions.

The work of the three Committees, when taken
as a whole, presents opportunities for additional
synergies, which, once fully realized, would have a
multiplier effect on achieving outcomes. It should
be possible to achieve such improved results while
also respecting the independence of the respective
Expert Groups and their mandates. On the basis of
current coordination and joint cooperation, each of
the three Committee's staff and Expert Groups are
committed to advancing cooperation in a number
of areas. As previously mentioned, those include but
are not limited to the holding of meetings among the
three Committees at the committee level and/or among
chairing countries; increasing engagement in on-site
visits to States, at their request, in order to facilitate the
implementation of each of the resolutions; coordinating
a common regional approach to engage with Member
States with geographical and political similarities;
and coordinating on key thematic areas of interest to
all Committees in order to benefit from sharing of
information, experience and effective practices. They
also include improving coordination in implementing
projects within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, particularly through
the various thematic working groups; coordinating
approaches to donor States and assistance providers,
and the joint evaluation of outcomes; considering the
possibility of developing joint assistance packages for
States at their request and where necessary; enhancing
joint interaction, particularly with non-reporting States,
in their fulfilment of their reporting obligations under
the relevant resolutions; cooperating on input into the
1540 Committee's 2016 comprehensive implementation
review, as required under resolution 1977 (2011); and,
in cooperation with other United Nations counter-
terrorism entities, enhancing the work between the
Al-Qaida Monitoring Team and Executive Directorate
on measures that can improve the implementation of
resolution 2199 (2015).

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council, for the opportunity to make
this joint statement on behalf of the three Committees.

