Mr. Wolfensohn: I should tell you, Mr. President,
that two of our buildings have just been evacuated
because of explosions in the transformers, which were
to set the scene for me for this meeting. This gives
some idea of what post-conflict is like, and it just
shows the attention to detail that there is in our
institution - that we should create smoke around our
building to give a sense of what we are talking about. I
have vacated to another building, and I thank you for
the invitation to join you.

Let me start by saying that the World Bank -
certainly under my incumbency, which will last another
five days, and, I strongly believe, under that of my
successor, Paul Wolfowitz - is deeply committed to
cooperating with the Security Council on the
suggestions of the Secretary-General to have a
Peacebuilding Commission, with which we would
work closely. The reason for this is not just our
admiration for the United Nations and for the
Secretary-General; it is because all of us here strongly
believe that it is essential to change the balance that
exists between making peace, in terms of stopping
conflict, and building peace, in terms of the creation of
hope and viable States.

All of us in our institution recognize that, at the
moment, the weighting is hugely and substantially on
the military side, on the intervention side, on the
prevention or the concluding of wars, but far too little
is spent on winning the war of peace. The numbers are
compelling, as I think the Security Council well
knows, maybe better than anybody. Military
expenditure accounts for $1,000 billion a year,
including, sadly, more than $200 billion by developing
countries, and that we spend maybe $50 or $60 billion
on development assistance. Separate from that, of
course, we still have the problems of trade that will be
discussed later in the year in the conclusion of the
Doha Round.

Thus, from our point of view, the issue of the
transition from conflict to that intermediate zone in
which we have worked together in so many countries,
to the third area to which the Secretary-General has
paid such attention, which is the building of peace, we
recognize the interdependence between our institution
and the various arms of the United Nations. Last night
I read the Secretary-General's report of a couple of
years ago on the prevention of armed conflict. As I
read it, I was reminded again of the closeness of our
perceptions of the issues when the Secretary-General
pointed out that an effective prevention strategy
requires a comprehensive approach and encompasses
both short-term and long-term political, diplomatic and
economic considerations.

It really is this line of thought that permeates the
excellent report "In larger freedom", on issues of want,
fear and dignity, in which the Secretary-General
pointed again to a precursor to this notion of a
Peacebuilding Commission.

To take the mystery out of this, let me say that the
way we look at it is as follows. Whether a country is
poor and peaceful, or whether, as in at least 50 per cent
of cases, a country is poor and in post-conflict, exactly
the same considerations prevail as to whether you can
bring hope and economic development to those
countries. The considerations are always the same. You
must have a strengthening of capacity. You must have
people in the country who can in fact run the country.
In that context, the issue of capacity-building is
essential.

Having said that, that particular problem is
exacerbated in post-conflict situations because, very
often, the people are not there or have been killed or
because in-built antagonisms between one side and the
other remain. So, putting together that first strand of
capacity becomes critically important, and we must
deal with that.

The second element, which, again, we often
forget, is that you cannot have a viable State unless you
have judicial and legal systems that can protect rights.
That too becomes very important in post-conflict
situations, where rights - whether physical rights,
human rights or rights to contract - are very often
tremendously weakened in the post-conflict period. But
the second issue remains the same: establishing a form
of legal order.

The third issue is that of re-establishing some sort
of financial framework so that the people in the
country can bring about investment, from micro-credit
through to financing small- and medium-sized industry
or, indeed, attracting outside investment.

The fourth precondition is making sure that you
deal with the issue of corruption.

I note those four elements - capacity, legal and
judicial systems, financial systems and corruption -
because they pervade the reports of the United Nations
itself, including the recent report, "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005), as well as being raised in earlier reports
of the Secretary-General. It is therefore not surprising
that we should come back to the issue of taking a
comprehensive approach to development in the post-
conflict arena.

For us at the World Bank, it has taken some time
to recognize that the issues of post-conflict situations
are the same as those of non-post-conflict situations.
The same preconditions are needed for growth in all
countries. We are not inventing something new for
post-conflict situations. The problem is that in post-
conflict situations, the capacity needed is much greater
because of the after-effects of the conflict.

Of course, we have the additional issue of
calming down the causes that may have generated the
conflict. That is a fifth dimension we must address in
our post-conflict work together. What caused the
conflict? Was it inequity? Was it a desire for
diamonds? Was it a desire for natural resources? Or
was it long-term cultural differences? Whatever it is, it
belongs to the political side, with which the Security
Council is so familiar, but it becomes another condition
precedent, exacerbating the problem of the post-
conflict situation, as compared to normal development
considerations.

After that, the issues of country ownership, of a
comprehensive approach and of working together -
the Council, the Bank and other agencies - to support
a strengthened local Government and local ownership,
are exactly the same. We must get local ownership. We
must try and deal with that. And the issue here, so
sadly true, is that the international community's
attention span in bringing about longer-term and even
medium-term reconstruction disappears when the
bombs stop going off and the headlines dissipate
because no one is getting killed. It is hard to
photograph peacebuilding. It is easy to photograph
wars. Peacebuilding does not get headlines. It is a
long-term, tough, day-after-day activity.

It is that issue that I hope that the Secretary-
General and those on the Peacebuilding Commission
will be able to address in their work. My own
judgement is that the solution is not rocket science. It
is not something that requires doing doctorates in
politics or economics. It is common sense. But it is a
common sense that our world does not have. Our world
does not give longer-term support to the turgid process
of building States. That is a problem we face
throughout the issue of development and one that I
think we need vigorously to address with respect to the
post-conflict period.

In conclusion, very simply, I believe that our
analysis and the Council's analysis are very similar. We
welcome the fact that the Secretary-General has
identified the need for a Peacebuilding Commission.
We welcome the opportunity to participate with the
Security Council, and we think that together, we might
be able to get your shareholders and our shareholders
at the level of heads of State and, hopefully, at the level
of the congresses and Governments to understand that
what we are putting to them is not some radical new
insight. It is common sense, and the world needs to
have some of that if we are going to avoid more wars.

