Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I thank our briefers for their valuable updates this morning. I also take this opportunity to reaffirm Saint Vincent and the Grenadines support for Mr. Martin Griffiths and his team in their dedicated efforts towards a solution to the challenging situation in Yemen, as well as for their continued cooperation and coordination with the Security Council. Mr. Griffiths began his briefing this morning by stating that we are witnessing in Yemen what we have long feared and that the situation has become increasingly dire. His words were chilling. Like Mr. Griffiths, we are distressed. Last month, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines pointed to the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen and expressed our concerns over the restrictions on the delivery of humanitarian aid (see S/PV.8704). It is unfortunate that we return to the Council to hear such chilling reports one month later, as we remain troubled by the unprecedented threats that continue to persist. At the same meeting, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham informed us that access constraints affect 6.7 million people in need of assistance across the country. We have all heard, on several occasions, the various complaints about the treatment of humanitarian personnel andlistened to briefings that emphasize the ways in which those restrictions are paralysing humanitarian operations. The people of Yemen have suffered enough and have lost too much. People have lost their livelihoods; children have lost their childhoods; and parents have lost children - that does not even begin to scratch the surface. Yemen has been mired in conflict for too long, and the people cannot lose their last shreds of hope. The importance of sustaining humanitarian assistance cannot be overstated, as the consequence of restricted access is the prolonged suffering of many. We recall the obligations under international humanitarian law that demand unhindered humanitarian access. In times of conflict especially, there can be no derogation from those sacrosanct principles. The international community must continue to engage with all parties to encourage the active facilitation of safe and unhindered humanitarian access in accordance with humanitarian law. In that vein, we welcome the efforts of the humanitarian community to collectively overcome the challenges I mentioned, in order to maintain the delivery of humanitarian assistance to millions of Yemenis. As such, we recognize the recent conference of aid agencies and donors that took place in Brussels, where the immediate removal of all restrictions, obstructions and interference violating humanitarian principles was called for. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines wholeheartedly supports and reiterates that sentiment. We welcome and encourage all actions by parties that contribute to the easing of impediments to that life-saving assistance. While humanitarian aid is critical, it is not a panacea - such assistance merely treats one of the symptoms of the conflict. What is needed for a sustainable and tenable solution is a comprehensive peace agreement. We call for the resumption of the desperately needed peace process, which must be inclusive and reflective of all groups across the various categories in society. That is the only way to avoid a further unravelling of the conflict, which remains fragile, as evidenced by the stark deterioration in circumstances and intensification of tensions. Yemen remains an extremely multifaceted and complex conflict with a wide range of actors, all of whom must come to the negotiating table with the requisite political will to achieve the much-needed lasting peace that Yemenis deserve. We echo Mr. Mark Lowcock's sentiment that the situation is unacceptable. Allow me to note Saint Vincent and the Grenadines concern about the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The potential environmental risks that we face are unprecedented and far too great to allow inaction. There is an urgent need to address the issue. We urge the immediate facilitation of the required access to the tanker. Allow me to end on a positive note by recognizing the efforts that are being made, as our acknowledgement of such is also critical in encouraging the parties to act. The facilitation and official commencement of mercy flights is commendable, as is the finalization of a plan to implement the prisoner exchange as per the Stockholm Agreement. Such acts, which reflect a willingness to engage, are those that kindle and sustain the hope that Yemen can achieve peace.
