Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to echo the thanks that
have been offered to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his efforts to resolve the situation in Darfur and to
promote peace and security both in the province and in
Africa as a whole. We should also like to welcome
Mr. Jan Eliasson and thank him for his very useful
briefing to the Security Council. We commend his
endeavours carried out together with Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, the African Union envoy. We reiterate our
support for the Secretariat's decision to extend
Mr. Eliasson's mandate. We would also like to thank
Mr. Guehenno for his briefing. I welcome the
Permanent Observer of the African Union and thank
her for her statement.
Mr. Eliasson's briefing reflects the efforts he has
made in recent months, together with his colleague, to
persuade all parties to sit down at the negotiating table,
to unify the movements and coordinate their positions,
and to relaunch the negotiations that began in Sirte,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in October 2007. We believe
that that mission should be commended, as it clearly
reflects the difficulties that remain to be overcome,
chief among which is the absence of some factions
from the peace process.

Regarding the crisis in Darfur, we must
emphasize the fact that peace cannot be achieved
unless a comprehensive peace process is launched and
the conditions are established to make the process a
reality. My delegation would stress certain aspects of
the issue.

First, we welcome the approach adopted by the
two Special Envoys with respect to consulting with the
various parties to unify the movements and coordinate
their positions with a view to preparing objective
consultations in Sirt. We are aware of the mission's
complexity, as Mr. Eliasson emphasized, but our efforts
must be maintained and contacts pursued in that
regard.

Secondly, if the political process is to be
successful, all participants must cease hostilities
forthwith and take part in the peace negotiations
without prior conditions, thereby preventing their
positions from being linked to the speed of deployment
and the size of the force in Darfur. That is a most
important consideration.

Thirdly, we are deeply concerned by the stance of
certain groups that continue to refuse to participate in
the political process and to snub their noses at the
negotiation efforts. We reiterate the importance to
some parties, including this Council, for appropriate
pressure to be brought to bear on those groups to
reconsider their position and decide to join the political
process, thereby demonstrating their good intentions
without preconditions. The Council must adopt the
necessary measures regarding those groups.

Fourthly, Libya is closely following current
developments in Darfur, with which it shares a border,
and hopes to provide every possibly assistance to
achieving peace and security in the province. Libya has
a great interest in accelerating the political process and
will continue to lend its support to the two mediators
and to play an effective role, particularly in extending

its good offices. We appeal once again to the rebels to
join the political process and commit to meeting
objective criteria, including a ceasefire, and to
facilitating humanitarian work.

With respect to the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), I commend the efforts of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Government of the
Sudan to address the technical aspects of deployment.
We also welcome the positive consensual attitude that
prevailed at the meeting between President Bashir and
the Secretary-General on the margins of the recent
African Union summit in Addis Ababa, as well as the
ensuing progress, which reflects other advances
achieved, in particular the negotiation of the status-of-
forces agreement. We hope that the agreement will be
signed tomorrow. Indeed, the Secretary-General raised
that issue in his most recent statement, in which he
expressed his satisfaction with the cooperation
extended by the Sudanese authorities in facilitating the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation. We hope that this
course can be pursued in order to strengthen
confidence and alleviate tensions with the Government
of the Sudan. We are convinced that the Sudanese
Government is doing its utmost to facilitate the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation and to promote
the political process.

For our part, we remain concerned by the
international community's inability to establish the
conditions in which UNAMID can be deployed,
particularly with respect to land and air assets. In that
regard, we thank those States that are in a position to
respond to that matter and that have contributed to the
Hybrid Operation. It is indeed extremely important to
emphasize the African contribution to control and
command within the Operation, pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1769 (2007) and other consequent
relevant decisions.

We are concerned by the Violence that has
erupted in Chad, claiming many innocent lives. We
express our apprehension concerning the current
tensions and reciprocal accusations between Chad and
the Sudan. Relations between those two brotherly
neighbours have an impact on the security and
humanitarian situation on both sides of the border, with
negative repercussions for the peace efforts in Darfur
and the region as a whole. We therefore appeal to the
two parties to relaunch dialogue towards the
implementation of the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February
2006 to guarantee security along their common border.
That would surely alleviate the suffering of refugees
and internally displaced persons, help to achieve a
peaceful settlement, and create the objective conditions
for ending the conflicts in Darfur and Chad.

Lastly, we extend our best wishes to the
Ambassador of Croatia and thank her for all her hard
work in the Organization. As she will be leaving us
shortly, we wish her every success in her new
endeavours.

