Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's briefing on
threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. We are grateful for the briefings presented
by, respectively, Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx. South
Africa believes that this meeting could have been
further enriched had the Council invited the countries
most affected to participate in the briefing. We will
hope that it will do so in future.

The threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) may have evolved and changed, but it has
not diminished in any way. Given ISIL's global reach,
countering it requires a coherent, coordinated response
that is underpinned by strengthened cooperation at the
domestic, bilateral, regional and international levels,
including the sharing of information and experiences.

The United Nations remains key in the coordination
of the international community's efforts in this regard,
and the importance of its support for Member States in
addressing their specific challenges in countering ISIL
cannot be underestimated. We welcome the efforts of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council
and its Executive Directorate in this respect.

South Africa has always supported a holistic
approach to countering the threat of terrorism.
Terrorism should be addressed in its totality, not only
in its individual components. Security measures alone
will not succeed in countering the terrorist threat.
Addressing what gives rise to it and its prevention are
equally important. In that connection, South Africa
supports a whole-of-Government and a whole-of-
society approach that also addresses the role of women
and children, youth, civil society, the private sector and
communities in dealing with terrorist acts.

We welcome the Madrid Guiding Principles and
the addendum (S/2018/ll77, annex) that has been
developed to complement them. In South Africa's fight
against terrorism, we have, under our Protection of
Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
Activities Act, incorporated means of addressing
the financing of terrorism, complemented by South
Africa's Financial Intelligence Centre, which is part of
a global network of similar centres dealing with tracing
illegal financial flows to terrorist groups, and good
cooperation with the private sector. It is also of great
importance to South Africa to emphasize that measures
taken to counter the threat of ISIL comply with our
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law, as well as the
principle of the rule of law.

South Africa remains concerned by the presence
of terrorist groups in Africa, including in sub-Saharan
Africa, the Sahel, West and East Africa, and, recently,
in some parts of our own region, which have links with
ISIL and its evil ideology. Over the years, the African
Union (AU) has taken a number of initiatives in the
fight against terrorism. In 2002, 17 years ago, the
AU adopted a plan of action on the prevention of and
combat against terrorism. In 2011, the AU Commission
developed an African Model Law on Counter-Terrorism.
We will continue to spare no effort to ensure that this
destructive phenomenon does not take root in our
region, and we will continue to work closely with the
international community, including the United Nations,
in the fight against terrorism.

