Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia voted in favour of
resolution 2397 (2017) because of its pacifist beliefs.
We do not believe in war as a means of solving the
global problems facing the international community.
We therefore call for any military solution to be ruled
out. Bolivia also voted in favour of the resolution
because we believe that the unity and consensus of
the Security Council on this issue is fundamental to a
peaceful solution and because we welcome the fact that
the resolution includes the support of and request for
the resumption of the six-party talks.

However, we regret that there was not more time
to discuss the text. We therefore express our concern
about the possible repercussions and humanitarian
consequences that the sanctions may have on the
civilian population. We are also concerned about the
repercussions for workers outside the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, who are expected to be
deported, as well as the possible non-observance of the
human rights of migrant workers.

Bolivia once again condemns the implementation
of unilateral sanctions, since they constitute a flagrant
violation of international law by being illegal measures
that extend the jurisdiction and national legislation of
one State over another, violating the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. We also believe that
sanctions should not be an end in themselves. In the
current situation, they should serve to bring the parties
involved to the negotiating table.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
Russian-Chinese proposal and its respective road map,
which includes the Chinese initiative of simultaneous
suspensions. which we believe to be currently the only
concrete proposal to resolve the conflict and that will
allow for a simultaneous cessation of both the launching
of ballistic missiles and nuclear tests and the execution
of unilateral or joint military exercises on the Korean
peninsula. We therefore call on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to abandon its nuclear programme
and ballistic missiles in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible way and to comply with the provisions of
the Security Council resolutions.

To conclude, it is important to emphasize that
we are at a stage where we must initiate a dialogue
without conditions in order to build mutual trust. That
is essential to reduce the risk of miscalculations or
misunderstandings and to reduce tensions in the region.
We therefore underscore the need to keep open the
possible channels of communication established since
Under-Secretary General Jeffrey Feltman's visit to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In addition,
the good offices of the Secretary-General may be key to
facilitating a dialogue that leads to a peaceful solution
of the conflict.

