Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mexico for her presence among us today and
for convening this important debate. My country highly
values the work of the Mexican delegation in the
presidency of the Security Council and Mexico's
leadership of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We also thank Ms. Ann Veneman,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund, and Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for their presentations. In
particular, my delegation thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her presentation of the
Secretary-General's annual report (S/2009/ 158) and for
her recommendations for making the efforts of the
Working Group more effective and efficient.

We have also heard the harrowing testimony of
Grace Akallo. Her words should spur us on to work to
protect girls and boys around the world.

The creation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the establishment of the Working
Group have focused the attention of the Council and of
the Organization in general on the plight of children in
situations of armed conflict, an issue that has become
prominent in our discussions and concrete analysis of
specific situations.

The use of new tools has already brought very
positive progress to the fight against the recruitment of
children. Throughout the world, parties to conflicts
have reached agreements to halt the recruitment of
children and secured the demobilization and
reintegration of child recruits subject to abuses and
violations of their rights. Nevertheless and in spite of
those achievements, we still face major challenges in
addressing the issues that affect children in conflicts.

The limited number of situations where plans of
action have been implemented, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, is a major concern for Costa
Rica, as is the limited scope of the existing
mechanisms that deal mainly with the recruitment of
children and relegate other grave violations to
secondary consideration. We firmly affirm that the lack
of systematic follow-up of the recommendations of the
Working Group has limited the potential scope and
efficiency of the Working Group.

Costa Rica believes that now is the ideal moment
to take stock of the Group's work and to review, update
and strengthen the framework established in Security
Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005),
particularly in the following areas.

First, the number of violations that may trigger
the monitoring and reporting mechanism must be
expanded. On that issue, my delegation considers that
all six grave violations established in resolution 1612
(2005) are equally grave and we believe that they must
all receive due and balanced consideration on the part
of the Working Group. Costa Rica does not believe it
appropriate to establish artificial hierarchies, as has
been done up to now, subordinating the triggering of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism only to the
recruitment of children. In our opinion, such narrow
and outdated criteria put other violations in the
background when there is an absence of recruitment,
and they become neglected.

Costa Rica would support the implementation of
a progressive approach that would trigger the
monitoring and reporting mechanism on the basis of
two additional grave violations: the killing and
maiming of children and sexual violence. It is clear
that to ensure the viability of this approach it is
necessary, on the basis of international law, to clearly
define the limits of each grave violation, set forth
jurisdiction and identify the most effective response by
the various United Nations organs. My delegation
welcomes the Council's intention to take action in
response to this concern within the next three months.

The second area of importance for Costa Rica is
that of the action plans. For us, it appears necessary to
carefully review the factors that have limited their
application until now. It is also necessary to determine
how timely and appropriate it is to use this tool to
respond to other grave violations.

My country considers that these plans must
include a component for dealing in a comprehensive
and sustained way with victims of violations, including
access to basic services in key areas such as education
and health, with a gender-sensitive approach and
special attention to particularly vulnerable groups such
as children with disabilities. This response calls for the
imperative participation of various United Nations
agencies and is key in preventing other violations.

Thirdly, my delegation considers it indispensable
to follow up more systematically on the
recommendations of the Working Group, which must
serve as true indicators of progress in successive
assessments of each situation. This follow-up of the
Working Group's recommendations should also be
accompanied by measures and sanctions, as other
delegations have affirmed this morning, to make them
effective when necessary. In this respect, we agree with
the report's recommendation that cases be referred to
the Security Council sanctions committees as a means
of deterrence. Moreover, we believe that the use of
complementary mechanisms to support national
judiciary institutions, such as the International
Criminal Court can also be a valuable tool in the fight
against impunity.

Finally, we deem it necessary that each report
include an assessment of the progress or deterioration
of each specific situation. These assessments would
bring a measure of accountability, both to those who
commit grave violations against children and to those
of us who are responsible for making the perpetrators
accountable. We encourage the Office of the Special
Representative to ensure that its reports go beyond the
compilation of statistical information and help to
identify with greater clarity trends and patterns of
violations, as well as to promote a strategic vision to
find solutions to each one of them.

