Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Let me to join
others, Mr. President, in congratulating you and your
country on Jordan's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We also wish to thank
the President for convening this important debate.

For many years, South Africa has called for
increased engagement by the Council on the question
of Palestine, as we hold the view that the Council has
an obligation to step in to end impunity on the ground
and to move the stalled peace process forward. We
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his important
briefing. At this time, we wish to express our gratitude
to Mr. Robert Serry for his years of service and for
his work in trying to resolve one of the world's most
intractable conflicts. My delegation welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as the new
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of Secretary-General to the
Palestinian Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority. We wish him every success in carrying out
his duties and assure him of our strong support for his
work.

Mrs. Kawar took the Chair.

South Africa associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

In his last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7417),
Mr. Serry recalled that, during his tenure in office,
three United States-led peace initiatives remained
inconclusive and did not bring us closer to the urgently
needed peace agreement based on the two-State
solution. Moreover, all three stalled negotiations were
followed by wars in Gaza, leaving the Strip devastated
and worsening the humanitarian situation on the
ground. That led Mr. Serry to call for a new strategy to
be adopted by the United States and the international
community to prioritize the situation in Gaza. He
also urged the Security Council to take the lead and
to present a framework for the negotiations to the
parties. He expressed the belief that it would be the only
way to preserve and achieve the two-State solution.
Mr. Serry cautioned that the situation on the ground
was developing towards a one-State "solution", which
is not a solution.

South Africa believes that the time to act is long
overdue. The illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza
Strip continues to inflict grave suffering to the lives
of 1.8 million Palestinians, worsening the already
pervasive humanitarian crisis. We reiterate our deep
concern that the solution envisioned by the Oslo
Accords more than 20 years ago is being taken apart
piecemeal with every new settlement that is announced.
The settlements are not only illegal under international
law, but also remain a major stumbling block to the
achievement of sustainable peace.

Essentially, the Israeli settlement activities are
confiscating Palestinian territory essential for a future
State and aim to isolate East Jerusalem from other
main Palestinian cities, thus seriously threatening the
very achievement of the two-State solution in line with
the overwhelming call for the creation of a sovereign,
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
coexisting peacefully alongside the State of Israel on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. We again call on Israel to immediately
stop its settlement activities as an obligation under
various Security Council resolutions and international
law. Moreover, Israel's actions in Gaza also constitute
a violation of international humanitarian law, including
article 23 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and violate
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and
1860 (2009).

To date, the Security Council has failed to hold
Israel responsible for its violations of Council decisions,
thereby enabling Israel's impunity. The dire situation
is punctuated by provocations and attacks against the
holy sites in East Jerusalem, by the violent response
to peaceful protests by Palestinians and by attacks
by illegal settlers against Palestinian communities.
We recently witnessed the effect of those attacks,
with individual Palestinians retaliating. South Africa
reiterates its condemnation of all forms of violence,
including that perpetrated by individuals, as detrimental
to the teetering peace process.

South Africa welcomes the announcement by
Israel and Palestine on Saturday, 18 April, that an
agreement had been reached to release hundreds of
millions of dollars in tax revenues and customs duties
withheld from the Palestinian Authority since the
beginning of the year. We hope that the agreement
will be implemented without delay. We reiterate that
withholding tax revenue is illegal collective punishment
in response to Palestine's accession to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court and to other
international agreements and organizations. We believe
that, as a State, Palestine has the right to join whatever
organizations it pleases, and we will support Palestine's
membership application to the United Nations, which
has stalled in the Council.

South Africa looks forward to the release of the
report of the Human Rights Council's Commission of
Inquiry established to investigate war crimes committed
during the last Gaza conflict. We acknowledge the
difficulties the Commission has faced, but we hope that
it will not affect the impartiality or the thoroughness
of the report and that it will be a first step towards the
realization ofjustice for the many victims of the Gaza
conflict. We remain committed to a just, lasting and
peaceful solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and we support international efforts aimed at the
establishment ofa viable Palestinian State.

With regard to Syria, my delegation is deeply
disappointed that the Syrian conflict has been raging
for more than four years, with devastating humanitarian
consequences and with no prospect of abating. It is one
of the worst humanitarian disasters facing humankind,
with severe political and economic consequences for
the entire region. The only hope for the Syrian people
lies in the willingness of all the parties to the conflict
to immediately put an end to the violence and to
start engaging each other constructively and without
preconditions, with the aim of reaching an agreement
on a political transition in the spirit of reconciliation,
based on the Geneva communique of June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). South Africa supports the ongoing
diplomatic efforts of the Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to find a peaceful resolution to the conflict.

In conclusion, South Africa also deplores the
repulsive atrocities and human rights violations
committed against minorities by extremists in the
region. It is important for the international community
to work together to counter that threat and prevent it
further spread.

