Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for the overview that she has just provided
on the current situation in the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has been
closely monitoring developments in Venezuela, and in
particular the trends reported by the media during the
past week, which are of concern to us given that they
may reach a level that would cause further suffering
to the population. Our delegation underscores the
urgent need for all interested parties to refrain from
carrying out acts of violence and provocation, and calls
on the Government, the opposition political parties,
civil society and the people of Venezuela to summon
the courage, wisdom and good sense to overcome the
situation and find a reliable solution in the interest of
peace and security, with due respect for human rights
and the freedoms of its citizens. Such a solution, in
addition to being peaceful and democratic, should be
based on the framework of the Venezuelan Constitution.

Equatorial Guinea believes that the situation in
Venezuela is an internal matter and that it does not
pose a threat to international peace and security. We
therefore urge the Security Council and the international
community to be sufficiently cautious and to take into
account recent experiences in the Middle East and
Africa in order to avoid a spillover of the situation in
the country. The main role of the United Nations and
the international community in this situation should be
focused on supporting the country's efforts in promoting
a frank and inclusive intra-Venezuelan dialogue that
allows the parties to negotiate the differences that tend
to undermine Venezuela's fate.

In other words, the neighbouring countries and those
of the region and the wider international community
must not pour fuel on the current fire in Venezuela,
turning it into a large-scale conflagration, but rather
serve as firefighters to put out that fire, facilitating an
inclusive and peaceful intra-Venezuelan dialogue as a
way of finding a solution to the prevailing situation,
given that neither external interference nor violent and
extreme positions would facilitate such a solution, but
rather would aggravate the situation. We must give
Venezuelans the space to engage in dialogue and find a
solution. The call of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
for internal dialogue is based on the following realities.

In the context of recent developments in the Middle
East and Africa, specifically in Libya, we are today
experiencing the spillover of a situation generated
by foreign intervention as a result of an appeal and
the ill-intended implementation in 2011 of a Security
Council resolution based on the right to protect. Let us
compile the statistics and establish the figures on the
current suffering and the number of human lives that
have been and continue to be lost, not only in Libya,
but the entire subregion of Western and even Central
Africa, due to terrorist activity, organized crime and
the creation of numerous armed groups as a result of
that external interference, which focused solely on
regime change without regard for what would happen
later in the country.

Respect for the rule of law is rightly considered a
dogma of the Security Council and the United Nations. In
Venezuela, all judicial bodies recognize and resolutely
support the current Government in power, which is why
the international community must also support that
position in respect of the rule of law. Last but not least,
the kind of change of Government being considered
by some with respect to the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela would set a very dangerous precedent that
could have disastrous consequences in many countries
following the holding of electoral cycles.

For all of these reasons, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea recognizes, respects and adheres to the
constitutional order of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and expects the parties to resolve their
differences through dialogue, while refraining, as
we stated earlier, from carrying out violent actions
that could contribute to further exacerbating the
vulnerability of the prevailing situation.

That is why, in recognition of the principle of
subsidiarity, we ask that the actions of organizations and
stakeholders in the region be in line with international
law and the principles and purposes of the Charter ofthe
United Nations. In that regard, we call on the Secretary-

General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, to use his expertise and
diplomatic experience to discharge his good offices as a
facilitator and mediator amid this crisis.

