Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Six
weeks after nearly 300 Nigerian girls were kidnapped
by Boko Haram and less than one month after a series
of deadly attacks wracked Sana'a, we are reminded
that terrorism remains one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security. Since we last met
on the topic in November (see S/PV.7071), thousands of
foreign terrorist fighters continue to support Al-Qaida
and its affiliates, and groups such as Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram continue to
commit atrocities and instil fear in the Sahel. As the
terrorist threat evolves, so too must our response.
The need for a whole-of-United Nations approach to
countering terrorism has never been greater. Only with
a targeted, nimble and united approach can we respond
appropriately to the ever-changing terrorist landscape.

The Security Council's three counter-terrorism
Committees should focus on combating the growth
of Al-Qaida and its ideology, building the counter-
terrorism capacities of States and ensuring that
terrorists do not have access to weapons of mass
destruction. We are grateful to the Chairs of the
Committees - Australia, Lithuania and the Republic
of Korea - for their excellent work in promoting the
implementation of the resolutions.

Fifteen years after the creation of the sanctions
regime under resolution 1267 (1999), those sanctions
remain one of the most effective tools to curb the
financing and flow of arms to terrorists. When the
Security Council reviews the Al-Qaida sanctions
next month, we should assess their effectiveness and
calibrate them to the evolving Al-Qaida threat. We see
three particular areas that need the Council's undivided
attention: kidnapping for ransom, the cross-border flow
of terrorist fighters, and the threat posed by improvised
explosive devices (IEDs).

To combat those trends, the Council must focus on
more effective implementation of those measures. That
can help to isolate and defund groups like Boko Haram
and deter future attacks of kidnapping for ransom - an
appalling practice that the Council rightly condemned
earlier this year in resolution 2133 (2014). Effective
implementation can also curb the flow of foreign
fighters, not only to Syria but also to the Afghanistan-
Pakistan region, Yemen, the Sahel, East Africa and
elsewhere. To stop those flows, States should review
United Nations sanctions lists prior to issuing visas
and share information with international partners.
Finally, effective implementation can encourage States
to exercise greater vigilance to prevent terrorists
from using IEDs - weapons that have killed more
civilians than combatants. We encourage States to
share information, establish partnerships and develop
strategies to combat IEDs.

In addition to the 1267 sanctions, we must work
together to bring greater strategic coherence to the
broader counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations.
As an important first step, we welcome the efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and Assistant Secretary-General Laborde and
his team to return CTED to its origins of providing
assessments of counter-terrorism capacity-building
gaps. CTED can and should serve as a matchmaker,
connecting assistance providers with those States most
in need of help. We see a particular need for the United
Nations to strengthen the criminal justice sector in a
rule-of-law framework, as well as to enhance border
security in countering violent extremism.

We welcome the important role of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre (UNCCT) in
building the counter-terrorism capacity of Member
States and the central role of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) in coordinating
those efforts. We hope that CTITF and the UNCCT will
continue to increase the strategic nature and impact of
their policies, including by focusing on regions and
countries with the biggest capacity gaps and through
the use of monitoring and evaluation efforts. We
encourage Member States to contribute to the UNCCT.
We encourage all United Nations entities to continue to
interact with the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum and
to use its framework documents and good practices in
areas such as countering violent extremism, criminal
justice, kidnapping for ransom, supporting victims of
terrorism and community-oriented policing.

We look forward to the creation, on 18 June, of
the international institute on justice and the rule of
law in Malta, which will help to strengthen criminal
justice systems. We welcome the creation later
this year of the global community engagement and
resilience fund 4 the first global effort to harness the
resources of the public and private sectors to support
local, community-based projects on educational and
vocational training, civic engagement, media and
women's advocacy. We encourage States to support and
contribute to this important fund.

We would like to thank the Republic of Korea
for convening earlier this month an open debate on
resolution 1540 (2004) (see S/PV.7169) - another
pillar of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
The Council's presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7,
adopted at that meeting, can serve as useful guidance
for the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) as it plans its future work, such as its
interaction with civil society and industry.

The United States has most directly supported the
work of the 1540 Committee through a $4.5 million
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Global and Regional Disarmament Activities. The
contribution has helped to fund the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and 1540 Committee
projects, such as the recent meetings in Gabon and
South Africa for non-reporting States. We urge
Member States to consider how they assist others in
implementation resolution 1540 (2004), including by
contributing to the Trust Fund.

To ensure the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), we know what we need to do. Each State
must identify its own vulnerabilities and gaps in
implementation and develop a plan so that the next steps

are prioritized. States that lack capacity should request
help and those in a position to assist should do so.
Finally, everyone should be open to sharing useful
information on a timely basis. States should place
special emphasis on improving the design of national
and global approaches to the problem of biosecurity. As
reflected in the joint statement issued at the Nuclear
Security Summit in March, States should also seek the
full implementation of the nuclear security elements
of resolution 1540 (2004) by 2016. By identifying such
priorities, the Committee can use its resources more
effectively and efficiently.

