I welcome you, Madam President, in presiding over this important video- teleconference. My thanks also go to Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Shearer and Mr. Kitenge for their participation. Peacekeeping and peace operations are of the utmost importance today in an ongoing challenging environment. These operations have always been seen as a pivotal activity of the United Nations in the area of maintaining peace and security. We pay tribute to the courage of the more than 100,000 United Nations civilian, military and police personnel who are currently serving worldwide on behalf of the international community to protect peace and international law. We appreciate the personal efforts of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to ensure the effective functioning of peacekeeping operations. No matter how peacekeeping reform proceeds in future, what should stand at the core of that process is respect for the sovereignty of host countries, compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and adherence to the basic principles of peacekeeping - the consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence of the mandate. Neutrality and a mandate-oriented standard of conduct as well as respect for local customs, practices, culture, religion and traditions are all well-known postulates that can prevent peacekeepers from risking becoming involved in conflict. We fully understand the importance of the human rights component in peacekeeping. Unfortunately, the topic of human rights has been extremely politicized, which is detrimental to the international community's trust in the United Nations human rights machinery and in human rights as a whole. In such a situation, the credibility and recognition of peacekeeping missions and their human rights component are directly dependent on the decency of individual employees and their ability and desire to rely on objective information. The Security Council is not a human rights body. Any attempt to somehow squeeze the topic of human rights into its agenda encroaches upon the prerogatives and mandates of the Human Rights Council, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other relevant institutions. However, splitting mandates is only half the trouble. More concerning are attempts to use human rights as an instrument for exerting political and military pressure on other countries. We know of examples of interventions made for the sake of human rights and of their devastating consequences. At the same time, the main objective of United Nations peacekeeping and political missions is to promote reconciliation and peacebuilding. Other tasks, including the human rights component of mandates, are auxiliary. They are designed to contribute to the achievement of the main goal and should not replace the priority areas of peace operations. It is necessary to carefully and responsibly approach the implementation of the human rights component of the activities of various United Nations structures and to avoid duplication of their functions. Excessive emphasis on human rights issues at the expense of other problems facing the international community today inevitably leads to the overloading of the entire system and a decrease in the efficiency of its work. The prevention and resolution of armed conflict are the main means of preventing human rights abuses, not vice versa. Human rights violations are not the cause of conflict but their consequence. The best contribution that the Security Council could make to protecting human rights is to work effectively on its main task - to safeguard international peace and security - in accordance with its mandate and the Charter of the United Nations.
