We thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK), His Excellency Mr. Ivica Da¢ic¢ and Ms. Meliza Haradinaj-Stublla for their briefings. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines takes note of the agreements signed on 4 September by the Serbian and Kosovo leaders in Washington, D.C. In particular, we welcome the various commitments made with a view to increasing economic cooperation between the parties. We commend the efforts of UNMIK and the United Nations Kosovo team in containing the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and ensuring that persons made most vulnerable, including displaced persons, receive much-needed health, social and economic support during this critical time. We also appreciate UNMIK's overall initiatives, including those related to women, youth and trust- building projects. We call on all political parties in Kosovo to unite to combat the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We welcome the resumption of the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by the European Union (EU) and the overall significance of dialogue in resolving the issues and attaining a lasting solution. This is key to stability in the region. In this regard, we applaud commitments by both parties to move forward with economic normalization. We also call for the implementation of existing agreements in the EU-facilitated dialogue. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends UNMIK's dedication to maintaining and promoting security, stability and respect for human rights in the Kosovo region, in particular for women and girls. We commend the work of UN-Women, UNMIK and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to promote durable solutions to empower women and girls in Kosovo, such as the awareness-raising campaign that was launched to support survivors and victims of domestic violence. As we mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we must accelerate actions to facilitate the full, equal and meaningful participation of diverse women in preventing and resolving conflict. Women's leadership and contribution to all efforts aimed at maintaining and promoting peace and security, as well as ensuring the safety and protection of women and girls, are essential to comprehensive security. We encourage efforts in Kosovo to uphold the rule of law, fight against corruption and organized crime and ensure that no one is left behind. My delegation also emphasizes the nexus between development and security. Efforts to promote economic recovery must be inclusive, climate-friendly and youth- and gender- responsive, in order to lay the foundation for widespread social and political transformation of the region. As we conclude, we remain a committed partner in the quest for long-lasting peace in and around Kosovo.
