Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank your delegation, Mr. President, for convening
this debate and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the other briefers for the information and analysis
they have provided to us. I also would like to extend
special thanks to Ambassador Lucas, Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, for
her presence in the Chamber and the work she has been
doing throughout the year.

While we welcome the Secretary-General's annual
report (S/2014/339), we are once again appalled by its
findings. Children around the world continued to suffer
serious violations of their rights, including unlawful
recruitment and use as soldiers, killing and maiming,
rape and other forms of sexual violence, abductions and
denial of humanitarian access in 23 conflicts in 2013.
Since then, the plight of children has gone from bad to
worse in several situations, including in Gaza, Syria,
Iraq and Nigeria. Liechtenstein particularly condemns
the unspeakable violence committed by Boko Haram
and fully supports its listing in the annex to the report,
as well as its inclusion in the Council's Al-Qaida
sanctions list. We are also shocked by the atrocious
abuses of children by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, as evidenced in the statement of the Special
Representative.

We would like to congratulate the Special
Representative and UNICEF for the success of the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign. We commend the
Government of Chad for having implemented the Action
Plan and for its delisting from the Secretary-General's
report. We are also pleased to see the progress achieved
by the Governments of Yemen, Myanmar, Afghanistan
and South Sudan. At the same time, we note that 51
of the 59 parties listed are non-State actors. Most of
them have been listed for at least five years and are
hence considered persistent perpetrators. We therefore
continue to support the Special Representative's efforts
to engage with all relevant parties to conclude action
plans and promote their implementation. We welcome
in that regard the commitments made by non-State
actors in South Sudan, the Philippines and in Syria.
We hope that those will soon be followed by action and
tangible progress on the ground.

Of the 23 conflicts profiled in the Secretary-
General's report, 17 included targeted attacks on
schools, students and teachers. In 15 conflicts, parties
used schools for military purposes. Liechtenstein
reiterates its condemnation of those practices, which
gravely endanger civilians and deprive children of
their education. We urge States to take steps nationally
and internationally to end those serious violations
of international humanitarian law and to protect
children's right to education. We therefore welcome
the draft Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict,
and hope for their widespread implementation. We
commend the leadership role that Norway has taken in
that respect.

We cannot continue to tolerate inaction and
impunity with regard to the atrocious crimes committed
against children every day. Liechtenstein believes
that the Council should make more frequent use of its
power to refer situations to the International Criminal
Court, which can play an important role in that regard.
Furthermore, efforts aimed at resolving conflicts must
take greater account of children's needs. Mediation
processes and peace negotiations and their outcomes
should include the perspective of children at the earliest
possible stage; that will lead to broader understanding
and acceptance and ultimately better implementation.
We therefore call on the Council, the relevant United
Nations entities and the Member States concerned
to consistently integrate and address the needs of
children in all relevant decisions and policies and, most
important, in their work on the ground.

