The President (spoke in Portuguese; English interpretation provided by the delegation): I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon. His presence here today is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to
be addressed.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Canada, Chile, Egypt, Georgia, Guatemala, Honduras,
Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Mexico, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Slovenia,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms.Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to participate in this
meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Catherine
Bragg, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Philip
Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

I wish to inform members that I have received a
letter dated 8 November 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal, in which he requests that a
representative of the International Humanitarian Fact-
Finding Commission be invited to participate in the
2
consideration of the item, in accordance with rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the President of the Republic of Portugal.

It is especially gratifying for me to be here today
to preside over this open debate of the Security Council
on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. This is
a topic on the Council's agenda to which Portugal
attributes the utmost importance.

I am grateful to the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for joining
us in the Chamber. Their presence demonstrates the
interest and relevance of this debate.

I have made a point of speaking in Portuguese. In
this way, my words will be immediately understood by
more than 250 million citizens of the eight countries,
and one autonomous region of the People's Republic of
China, where Portuguese is the official language, as
well as by the many other millions who have studied or
who are studying Portuguese, and who identify with it
and see in it an important cultural or economic asset.

I am therefore speaking in one of the most rapidly
expanding languages in the world, the third-most
spoken European language worldwide, and the sixth
most spoken in general. It is a language that has long
deserved to be attributed the status of official language
of the Organization. Indeed, there are two Portuguese-
speaking countries represented in the current formation
of the Council, which is an expressive sign of those
nations' unwavering commitment to the promotion of
the values of peace, security and respect for the
inalienable rights of all human beings, as embodied in
the United Nations Charter and reflected in the
founding charter of the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries.

Every year, many millions of men, women and
children are killed, kidnapped, injured or forced to
leave their homes as a result of armed conflicts in
different parts of the world. Portugal vehemently
11-58543
condemns all attacks targeting civilians, whether in
Libya, the Great Lakes region of Africa, Afghanistan or
Iraq, where arms and explosive devices continue
indiscriminately to cause suffering, or even in Syria,
where intense violence has already caused the deaths of
more than 3,000 people.

Civilians have always represented and remain the
majority of the victims of armed conflicts. Victims are
not only those who are party to the conflict and who
are killed, mutilated or injured because they form part
of a regular army or a group of combatants; it is
civilians who, on a large scale, continue to suffer the
direct effects of war.

It is our obligation to learn from the lessons of
the past. Inaction is never a solution and can never be
the response of the United Nations to civilian
populations that are the targets of indiscriminate
attacks by parties to a conflict; in failing to act, we abet
those who violate international humanitarian law and
human rights. When civilians are targeted and national
authorities or the conflicting parties fail in their
obligation to protect them, the United Nations, and
especially the Security Council, have the duty to speak
up and the obligation to act.

The attention that this Council has dedicated to
the protection of civilians is part of a long tradition.
The Council has been improving its legal framework to
ensure that its actions in this area are more effective
and more responsible. A remarkable number of
peacekeeping missions have been set up with strong
protection of civilians mandates, and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has been doing very
important work in that respect. Local strategies have
been created and cooperation with regional structures
has been improved. These developments have had a
significant impact on improving the protection of
civilian populations.

We agree with the Secretary-General regarding
the need for further coordination among all of the
parties involved in the protection of civilians, whether
on the ground or in raising international awareness of
the need to develop efficient mechanisms for the
prevention, monitoring and protection of civilians in
armed conflicts.

In that context, the European Union has acquired
vast experience both in supporting the work of the
United Nations and all the relevant parties involved,
and with regard to the missions and operations

conducted under the European Security and Defence
Policy. We therefore believe that it would be useful to
improve and deepen cooperation between the European
Union and the United Nations with regard to the
protection of civilians, as well as between the United
Nations and other regional organizations such as the
African Union.

We share the general consensus on the
importance of drawing up realistic mandates for the
protection of civilians and ensuring those mandates are
adapted to the real situation on the ground and
compatible with the capacity and human resources
available to the respective peacekeeping missions.
Whether in Darfur or in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the safety of thousands of
civilians, many of whom are women and children,
largely depends upon peacekeeping missions with a
mandate to protect them. We also deem it necessary to
closely involve the main troop- and police-contributing
countries in the definition of those mandates.

Another fundamental aspect for the protection of
civilians is, without doubt, the need to strengthen
accountability for human rights violations. Fighting
impunity, whether through national institutions or
international ones such as the International Criminal
Court, is fundamental to the prevention of future
violations. As the Secretary-General emphasized in his
last report on this issue,

"In many conflicts, it is to a large degree the
absence of accountability and, worse still, the
lack in many instances of any expectation
thereof, that allows violations to thrive."
(5/2009/277, para. 61)

Some days ago, Portugal, together with the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
organized a seminar on international criminal
accountability, the investigation of human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law, as well as on the question of reparations for
victims. The aim was to identify challenges and
possible further steps that the Council could take on
these important areas.

We believe that today more than ever the Security
Council has the capacity to protect civilians. It has
more and better regulatory instruments. It has acquired
knowledge and skills with previous experiences and
has more, and increasingly multifaceted, missions on
the ground. Today it is better prepared to act
appropriately and effectively, with real time
information on threats to civilians. We Member States
have the political responsibility to ensure that the
Security Council acts consistently and with
determination in order to guarantee respect for
international humanitarian law and the protection of all
civilians who are directly targeted or who become
accidental victims in conflicts.

Before I conclude my remarks, I would like to
reiterate my country's firm commitment to continue to
work to promote more effective protection for civilians
from the devastating effects of armed conflicts. We will
continue to do this in all the international forums in
which we participate - whether at the United Nations,
the European Union or the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries - not only due to an evident moral
imperative but also because we believe that, in this
way, we will be helping in a very concrete and
objective manner to build a better, more just and
peaceful world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.

