Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.

China closely follows the current tensions in
Palestine and is particularly concerned about the risk of
a potential escalation of conflict in Gaza. We hope that
the relevant actors, Israel and Palestine, will remain
calm, exercise restraint, work towards the same goals,
cease military action and take concrete measures in
order to achieve progress in de-escalation. China has
continued to call for the settlement of the Palestinian-
Israeli dispute through peaceful negotiations. China
opposes all Violence, which leads to a deterioration of
the situation and targets civilians.

The Security Council and the relevant parties
should aim to achieve peace and tranquillity and strive
to create the necessary conditions for stabilizing the
situation and resuming dialogue. China's Special
Envoy on the Middle East issue paid a recent visit to
Palestine and Israel and met with Special Coordinator
Mladenov. The two sides held an in-depth exchange
of views on the Palestinian question, in particular the
current situation in Gaza, and conveyed the importance
of ongoing progress in the Middle East peace process.

The Palestinian question is at the core of the
situation in the Middle East. It is an underlying issue for
the attainment of peace in the region. Under the current
circumstances, the long-delayed resumption of peace
talks between Palestine and Israel is highly urgent and
necessary. The international community should do its
utmost to promote the resumption of talks and reach
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution as soon as
possible. That is the only way to achieve peace between
Palestine and Israel and to guarantee stability and
security in Gaza. The international community should
continue to uphold the two-State solution, work in
accordance with the existing international consensus,
including relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative
and play a constructive role in the political settlement
of the Palestinian question.

I would like to reiterate the fact that China has
always been committed to promoting the Middle East
peace process and supporting the just cause of the
Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national
rights. China supports the establishment of a fully
sovereign, independent State of Palestine on the basis
of pre-l967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
China will continue to follow President Xi Jinping's
four-point proposal for the promotion of a political
settlement of the Palestinian question, work together
with all the parties concerned in the international
community and play a positive and constructive role in
the achievement of peace in the Middle East.

