Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
of course like, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to thank the representative of Gabon for his skilful
conduct of the work of the Council during the month of
June. I wish also to thank Mr. De Mistura for his
presentation on the situation in Afghanistan and would
like to associate myself with the statement to be made
later by the representative of the European Union. In
addition, I should like to thank Ambassador Tanin for
his statement.

I should like at the outset to start by paying
tribute to all United Nations staff working in
Afghanistan. The Security Council reacted in the
aftermath of the 1 April attack against United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
headquarters in Mazar-e-Sharif, an attack that was all
the more revolting given that the men and women who
were murdered there were working for the
stabilization, security and development of Afghanistan.

The attack should not make us deviate from our
main goal, which is to help the Afghan Government
move ahead on the path towards full sovereignty. In
that regard, the transition process has begun. This new
phase of our commitment is leading, as of this year, to
the gradual and orderly transfer of security
responsibilities to the Afghan authorities. France will
remain committed, along with its allies, alongside the
Afghan people so as to ensure that the transition
process is completed, as scheduled, at the end of 2014,
be it in our area of deployment or with respect to the
training of the Afghan security forces. Our
commitment in Afghanistan is long-term and will be
adapted so as to take account of the new context of
transition. The planned redeployment of French troops
will take place in close cooperation with our allies and
the Afghan authorities. However, we must be careful to
ensure that that the transition process also leads to the
assumption of responsibility by the Afghan
Government for both governance and development.

Much remains to be done, and time is of the
essence. We must ensure greater involvement of the
Afghan people in the planning and implementation of
development projects. For its part, the Afghan
Government must wage a more resolute combat against
corruption and nepotism, as evidenced by the Kabul
Bank situation.

Progress has also been noted in the area of budget
performance through the decentralization of public
expenditures and the further strengthening of capacities
in the planning and implementation of development
projects in the provinces and districts.

Turning to the issue of security, we have resumed
the military initiative and thereby made it possible for
the Government of Afghanistan to regain a foothold in
several areas. The country's army and police force are
growing stronger with our support - financially and in
terms of training, making it possible for the allies to
envision a gradual withdrawal of some of the combat
forces in Afghanistan.

Our military and training efforts are starting to
bear fruit, at the cost, however, of very arduous
combat. Military gains will be short-lived if they do
not take place in a context that reinforces the
legitimacy of the Afghan authorities and that makes it
possible to envisage a political solution to the conflict.
Unfortunately, the court-created uncertainty that affects
the legislative powers is detrimental to the proper
functioning of democratic institutions and is distracting
them from the real concerns of the Afghan voters. We
call on all Afghan institutions to work in the context of
their respective competencies, as set out in the
Constitution and on the basis of the principle of the
separation of powers. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General must continue to monitor the
situation and electoral reform, which the country
needs.

We have, however, also noted the progress made
on the path to inter-Afghan reconciliation. We continue
to support the efforts of President Karzai and the High
Peace Council to develop a peace process involving all
segments of Afghan society. Such a process must be
supported by regional efforts that take into account the
security interests of Afghanistan's neighbours while
respecting its sovereignty. The United Nations can
from that point of view play a useful role.

By separating the sanctions regime of the United
Nations for Al-Qaida and the Taliban, the Security
Council took a very significant decision which, we
hope, will motivate the Afghan people to turn their
backs on international terrorism, undertake direct
dialogue and look to the future together.

France would like to conclude by reaffirming its
full support for the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Staffan dc Mistura. The Security
Council, through its resolution 1974 (2011), renewed
the mandate of UNAMA and confirmed that the
priorities it outlined two years ago were the right ones.
The Council also requested that a full review of the
activities of UNAMA and of the United Nations in
Afghanistan be carried out by the end of 2011. This
will represent an opportunity to reflect on the evolution
of the commitment of the United Nations in that
country. The review must take place in a context of full
transparency, working with the Afghan authorities.
That process, the second Bonn Conference and the
renewal of UNAMA's mandate in 2012 all represent
opportunities to reiterate our commitment to the
common goal of a democratic, independent and
prosperous Afghanistan that has definitively turned its
back on violence and instability.

