Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me first thank
Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala, Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs, for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2002/ 1053). I would also like to
thank your delegation, Mr. President, and the
delegation of Colombia for circulating the orientation
papers for this meeting, which we found extremely
useful.

Today we are having yet another discussion,
following a fresh report from the Secretary-General
setting out the serious security, humanitarian and
development challenges posed by the proliferation of
illicit small arms and light weapons. Last year saw the
convening of a United Nations Conference on this
important issue, at which a Programme of Action was
adopted. Likewise, the Security Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2001/21) on 31 August
of last year which contained several recommendations
on ways to combat arms trafficking. In addition, we
have had a series of regional and subregional initiatives
such as the Bamako Declaration and the moratorium
declared by the Economic Community of West African
States, all aimed at checking the illicit flow of small
arms and light weapons.

Yet we have not seen any substantial reduction in
the circulation of illicit small arms and light weapons.
If anything, the illicit flow has increased. The current
situation in Cote d'Ivoire, for instance, with the sudden
appearance of a large number of sophisticated
weapons, clearly shows that we have had little success
in addressing this scourge.

Today's meeting should therefore aim at
identifying concrete and practical ways and means to
curb and to eliminate the illicit flow of small arms and
light weapons. We need to look beyond the classical
approach of simply coming out with another statement
which will remain a dead letter.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
small arms and for the importance that he attaches to
this issue. We fully support his 12 recommendations.
The statistics presented in the report are very alarming.
He says that 40 per cent of the estimated 639 million
small arms in the world today are held illegally. Half a
million people, mostly women, the elderly and
children, fall victim to small and light weapons
annually. These are indeed matters of very serious
concern.

The problem of illicit flows of small arms and
light weapons affects almost every region of the world.
However, Africa remains the most severely affected
continent, with certain parts, namely the Horn of Africa
and the Western African region, being particularly
afflicted. Those regions have become the leading
destinations for illicit weapons, fuelling conflicts and
causing economic decline and political instability,
which, in turn, have had serious humanitarian
consequences. Small arms and light weapons are also
easily finding their way into the hands of bandits and
terrorists, who, as we all know, are causing havoc
throughout the world.

We should ask ourselves today why the
international community has not so far been able to
make any serious dent in the illicit flow of small arms
and light weapons. Several reasons can be put forward
to explain this situation. I will try to enumerate just a
few of them which my delegation considers to be very
important.

First, it is our View that there has not been enough
concerted and coordinated effort to address the issue in
a comprehensive manner. The General Assembly has
been doing things on its own, and the Security Council
has been pursuing its efforts on its own. There have
been several plans at the regional and subregional
levels as well. For example, two years ago the
countries of the Great Lakes region and the Horn of
Africa launched an initiative to combat the problem of
arms trafficking. While we encourage all such
initiatives, it is extremely important that there be
proper coordination not only at the regional and
subregional levels but also at the international level,
since the problem can be tackled only if all key
players - producers, buyers, dealers and
middlemen - cooperate fully. In that respect, the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects adopted last year
was a major step towards a global approach to fighting
the proliferation and trafficking of small arms and light
weapons. It is also important that the General
Assembly and the Security Council work closely
together to ensure proper coordination. We therefore
fully support the Secretary-General's recommendation
to set up a small arms advisory service to ensure, inter
alia, the optimal coordination and harmonization of the
United Nations response on this matter.

Secondly, there is very little follow-up or
monitoring to ensure that decisions and
recommendations are actually being implemented.
Apart from those areas which are under arms
embargoes and where appropriate monitoring
mechanisms exist, the implementation of decisions is
very much left to the will and discretion of individuals
countries. Hence, in many parts of Africa, especially
where there are ongoing conflicts, very little attention
is paid to the implementation and follow-up of
decisions. Since we all agree that small arms are indeed
contributing enormously to fuelling conflicts, it is time
for the Council to seriously look into the matter and to
set up some kind of system which will help monitor the
compliance of Member States with all decisions
relating to small arms.

Thirdly, my delegation has always stressed that
arms-producing countries should act with utmost
responsibility in arms sales transactions. It is important
that all sales be made to bona fide dealers and that the
end-users are clearly known. It is equally important
that weapon manufacturers appropriately mark their
weapons to enable easy identification and tracing if
required. In that regard, we fully support the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Council should
encourage States that have not already done so to
establish the necessary legislative and regulatory
measures, including the use of authenticated end-user
certificates, to ensure effective control over the export
and transit of small arms and light weapons. We also
support the idea that Member States should enter all
details about the transfers of small and light weapons
in regional registers and in the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms. It is also important that buyer
countries exercise full and effective control over the
arms that they buy or possess. It has been documented,
for example, that arms which have been declared
destroyed by fire in some countries have actually found
their way into the hands of rebel groups in other parts
of the continent.

Fourthly, we are yet to find an effective way to
deal with brokers and middlemen involved in the trade
of small arms and light weapons. The greater part of
arms sales, both legal and illegal, are made through the
intervention of intermediaries and brokers. In the case
of illegal arms deals, monitoring mechanisms in
respect of arms embargoes time and again point to the
same individuals or companies, which continue to
operate unaffected. It is not a mere coincidence that the
same names have been cited by the panels of experts on
Angola, Sierra Leone and Liberia. These same names
also appear on the list of those involved in the trade of
illegally exploited natural resources. We believe that,
as long as actions are not taken against those
individuals and those engaged in such activities, the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons will
continue and that the weapons will continue to fall into
the wrong hands, perpetuating a vicious cycle.

The members of the international community,
particularly those with sophisticated intelligence
services, must assist the countries directly affected by
the illicit trafficking to combat this scourge. Member
States must maintain strict national registration of each
arms manufacturer, dealer, broker, transporter and
financer, even where they are arranging deliveries
through third countries, and both buyer and seller must
use only registered brokers and dealers.

Fifthly, incomplete or improper disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration are another factor that
has an important bearing on the illicit flow of small
arms and light weapons. A comprehensive programme
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
should aim at achieving full collection and disposal of
all arms and light weapons. Before the disposal of
these weapons, it is important that they be properly
catalogued and that their origins be traced back for
reference purposes and, if necessary, for appropriate
action against culprits. We must at all costs prevent the
sale of such weapons by one former combatant to
another. We should encourage weapons buy-back
programmes, which have proved quite successful in
some parts of Africa.

As of now, this objective is heavily dependent on
voluntary funding. In this regard, we appeal for the
support and assistance of the donor community. At the
same time, we favour the idea of including in the
mandate of peacekeeping operations clear provisions
regarding the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, as well as specific
measures for collection and disposal of illicit and
surplus arms and light weapons. We are also amongst
those who believe that disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration should not entirely depend upon
voluntary contributions from Member States. In this
context, we welcome the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General in his special report on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo regarding the new approach to
funding the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement programme.

Finally, I would like to touch upon the question of
arms embargoes and their enforcement. My delegation
believes that arms embargoes bring temporary
solutions to the problem of small arms and light
weapons. The Secretary-General has rightly pointed
out in his report that

"While arms embargoes help to stop arms flows
into the targeted countries and to rebel groups,
they do not eradicate small arms and light
weapons that already exist in areas of conflict".
(S/2002/1053, para. I4)

These weapons continue to move from one country to
another, from one rebel group to another, and the
embargoes themselves in some cases have failed to
prevent the flow of weapons. While we do recognize
their limited success, my delegation does not believe
that arms embargoes represent the exclusive solution in
stopping and eradicating the flow of small arms and
light weapons. The problem needs to be addressed in a
more comprehensive and concerted manner at the
national, regional and global levels in order to ensure a
lasting solution.

