Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation for Angola's
leadership, as Chair of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, in consolidating peace
and security in the region. I also thank the Secretary-
General and the guest speakers for their briefings.

Today, I wish to focus on one crucial issue - the
importance of preventing lapses and relapses into conflict.
According to the WorldDevelopmentReport 2011, 57 per
cent of all countries that experienced civil war between
1945 and 2009 returned to conflict. Unfortunately, that
is the case in the Great Lakes region. The people of
the region have been suffering from instability for too
long. In that regard, let me share with the Council the
outcomes of the Peacebuilding Commission's Working
Group on Lessons Learned.

As Chair of the Group until last year, I led
discussions on the challenges faced by post-conflict
countries during and after United Nations mission
drawdown. From that exercise, we drew two lessons.
The first is that there is a need for the sustained attention
of the international community to mitigating political
and financial gaps resulting from United Nations
mission drawdowns. The second is that there is a need
for countries in transition to build national institutional
capacities to achieve lasting peace. The question is how
to translate these lessons learned into practice in post-
conflict settings to prevent relapses.

The United Nations has various tools for funding.
In addition to the funds and programmes of the United
Nations, we have the Peacebuilding Fund and the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security at our disposal.
Let us make good use of them. These funds carry out
great work. Let me cite some examples. In Burundi,
the Peacebuilding Fund recently supported a group of
512 female community mediators in addressing more
than 5,000 local disputes. These female mediators are
helping to reduce tension within communities and also
between communities and security forces. The United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security supported the
empowerment of conflict-affected communities in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. That project
supported the restoration of livelihoods and agriculture,
benefitting returnees, internally displaced persons and
members of host communities. It also provided access
to improved social services and local infrastructure.
Both funds contribute to empowering people in fragile
situations and to enhancing social resilience against
relapse into conflict.

Countries in transition can also make use of United
Nations and bilateral donor partnerships to consolidate
peace. Let me elaborate on the actions Japan has taken
in partnership with the United Nations focusing on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The first example is an institution-building
programme. For 12 years Japan has provided training
for more than 20,000 of the country's total of 100,000
police officers, in collaboration with police forces of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This means
that one of every five police officers in that country
has been trained by Japan. We have also undertaken
the training of trainers to strengthen the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's training capacities. Given
that most of that country's officers, unfortunately,
start working without any training, we believe the
programme has greatly contributed to enhancing the
capacity of the police force of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The second example is a project for the reintegration

of children formerly associated with armed groups into
an education system in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Children are mixed discreetly with other
children in schools in order to avoid prejudice. This
project provides support not only to the children, but
also to the entire community so that children can go to
school. For example, parents are given support to sustain
their own livelihood. It is important that children are not
relied upon as a source of labour. Also, a professional
training centre for youth employment has been built.
This is an ongoing project carried out in collaboration
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, UN-Women, the World Food Programme,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Children's Fund. We look forward to its
successful outcome.

Japan wishes to hold an open debate on the theme of
peacebuilding in Africa during our Council presidency
in the month of July. We would like to fully utilize
today's very timely discussion in preparation for our
open debate in July.

