Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to brief the Council today on my recent
visit to the Central African Republic. A month ago I
visited Bangui on ajoint mission with the Special Envoy
of the African Union on Women, Peace and Security.
Our joint presence strengthened the coordination and
standing of the Mission, as well as the potential for
joint follow-up action with the African Union (AU).

In the Central African Republic, we met with
the President, the Prime Minister, key ministers and
Government officials, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the African
Union Chair, Special Representative and Head of the
African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA), the United Nations
country team, the Technical Follow-Up Committee on
the Crisis in the Central African Republic, the High-
Level Women's Advisory Group, 17 civil society
organizations, 16 women's organizations, religious
leaders and many internally displaced persons (IDPs).
We received enormous support from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Head
of MISCA and their teams, for which I am grateful.

Our goals were to give visibility to the plight of
women and girls, ensure that gender issues were
addressed from the outset in the newly established
United Nations Mission and promote women's
participation and leadership in local reconciliation,
national dialogues, transitional justice and upcoming
elections.

What we heard and what we saw was terrifying.
In displacement camps all over the country, including
the one we visited, people seek shelter under plastic
covers or even pieces of cloth in inhumane conditions,
surrounded by dirty puddles of stagnant water and
garbage, vulnerable to water-borne diseases. The
international community has received numerous reports
of rape, sexual slavery and other violations perpetrated
by armed actors. Those reports were confirmed in
December by a United Nations fact-finding mission led
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (UNHCR) and supported by
UN-Women. That violence has taken place in house-to-
house searches, unauthorized roadblocks and military
camps, and as part of sectarian violence. We learned
that girls were frequently subjected to forced marriage.
Many have become pregnant, miscarried or contracted
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV. There is a
great need for medical and psychosocial support at IDP
sites, 90 per cent of which lack services for survivors of
gender-based violence. The very few services that are
available assist hundreds of rape victims every month.

An untold number of pregnant women do not have
access to basic reproductive and obstetric care. That is
a matter of life and death in a country where a woman's
risk of maternal death is already 140 times higher
than in a developed country. What I heard over and
over again from women was that they needed security
and the rule of law, health care, food and schools
for their children. Those were some of their greatest
needs. Almost two thirds of schools remain closed,

and hundreds of thousands of children are growing up
without an education.

Neighbouring countries are struggling to provide
adequate support for tens of thousands of refugees.
Cameroon now hosts approximately 100,000 newly
arrived refugees, of whom 84 per cent are women and
children who arrived after travelling for many days or
weeks and are often sick and traumatized. They arrive
to find one nurse and fewer than a few dozen hygiene
and medical kits for assisting thousands. It is important
to highlight those alarming and distressing facts
because, as of today, the international community has
funded less than one third of the humanitarian appeal.

Today I would like to call urgently for the full
funding of that appeal. But I would also like to draw
the Council's attention to a very different side of the
Central African Republic. Against the odds, many
people, including women from all walks of life, are
organizing to survive and prosper. Young people asked
us to support and lead them in rehabilitating their peers
who had been affected by violence or who had also
participated in violent acts. Women leaders separated
by religious and social divides are clear in their resolve
to bridge their differences and build a better future for
their country. They are organized and full of plans, ideas
and courage. They are particularly asking for support
in order to engage in women's economic activity, for
psychosocial assistance and for help in restoring their
country's educational system.

I urge members of the Security Council to support
the women of the Central African Republic and to
implement the gender-equality recommendations made
by the United Nations electoral needs assessment
mission. The success of reconciliation initiatives, the
upcoming elections and national recovery depends on
women's leadership and participation. Priority should
be given to special temporary measures and quotas
for women's representation, as well as protection and
security from MINUSCA for women's participation in
the elections.

Stronger action must be taken to protect civilians
and restore State authority and the rule of law. As the
Council knows, most courts and prisons have ceased
to function, and many civil servants and magistrates
have abandoned their positions. UN-Women is taking
part in a joint programme that will improve women's
access to justice. It will focus on survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence and on building the capacity
of national institutions, while also deploying mobile
courts and holding perpetrators accountable. We note
the efforts of the International Commission of Inquiry
and the President's recent request to the International
Criminal Court. Efforts to secure justice at all levels
must be supported, and UN-Women has offered to

provide dedicated gender-crime investigators.

We also welcome the Council's recent decision to
establish a robust peacekeeping mission in MINUSCA,
building on the efforts of the Economic Community of
Central African States and the African Union, and on the
support offered by the French forces and the European
Union mission. This year's initial deployment of gender
and women's protection advisers must be strengthened
next year. That expertise must expand beyond Bangui
to the regions and be embedded in all of the Mission's
priority areas. To build durable national security, we
need more women in the Mission's military, police and
civilian components.

I am pleased to announce that, for the first time,
UN-Women and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will offer specialized predeployment
training on preventing sexual violence. I urge all
troop-contributing countries to take up the offer and
support the full implementation of this training in their
countries. I also urge the international community and
members of the Security Council to increase funding
for the safety and protection of women and girls, for
women's economic empowerment and for education. We
know that women's employment, entrepreneurship and
child care all have a significant impact on family and
community recovery and can be a powerful investment
for peacebuilding.

UN-Women will work with partners, including
the AU, to ensure that emergency employment
programmes include women as at least 40 per cent
of their beneficiaries. We encourage all international
partners to adhere to the United Nations policy on
earmarking 15 per cent or more of funding for women's
empowerment and gender equality.

UN-Women is also partnering with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to respond to the urgent needs of women and girls in
refugee sites in Cameroon and to support women's
access to humanitarian aid in the Central African
Republic.

To reiterate, I request the Council to ensure that
MINUSCA has the proper gender architecture to
fulfil its mission, that troop-contributing countries
provide all troops access to training on the prevention
of sexual violence, that women be represented in all
processes that deal with peacemaking, peacebuilding
and reconciliation, that election preparations place
women's representation and participation at their
centre, that efforts to rebuild the justice system
and secure accountability for grave crimes include
dedicated sexual and gender crimes experts and that our
humanitarian response be scaled up, both within and
outside the country, and that education and economic
well-being are addressed.

The women we met in the Central African Republic,
including interim President Samba-Panza, must be
supported to play their full and equal role as agents of
change, peace and security. Empowered women are the
best drivers of growth, the best hope for reconciliation
and the best buffer against the radicalization of youth
and the repetition of cycles of violence. Their voices
must be heard.

In going about my work, I have been touched by the
level of awareness among women around the world of
the Security Council's decisions on women and peace
and security. This body has made very significant
promises to women, most recently in resolution 2122
(2013) and resolution 2149 (2014), on the Central
African Republic, and has included strong language
on women's participation, leadership and protection.
UN-Women stands ready to support the Council to
implement those strong commitments and to keep its
promises.

Once again, Sir, I thank you for this opportunity,
and I look forward to our discussion.

