Mrs. Ogata: Thank you, Sir, for having invited
me once more to brief the Security Council. In six
weeks, after 10 years, I will leave office, so it is for the
last time that I speak here today as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. Therefore, rather
than elaborate on specific regional crises, I will take
this opportunity to give, perhaps, some food for
thought, looking back at the experiences of the past
turbulent decade and reflecting on the future of refugee
work - in particular, on its relationship with this body,
the most important forum where issues of peace and
security are discussed and addressed.

I briefed the Security Council for the first time
eight years ago. Since then, I have met with the
Council quite often; if my records are accurate, this is
my twelfth briefing. Over the years, refugee issues
have also appeared on the agenda of the Council more
regularly and frequently. This proves the obvious. The
nature of contemporary wars, which is primarily
internal and intercommunal; their intensity; and their
objectives - especially the brutal expulsion of entire
communities from specific areas - mean that conflicts
today are inevitably the main cause of mass exodus.
Internal conflicts and refugee flows, in turn, have
become a threat to peace and security across borders in
many areas.

More than ever, refugees and wars are
inextricably linked. My first briefing to the Council
was in 1992, when the violent break-up of the former
Yugoslavia was displacing millions of people. It was
less usual then than it is today that the representative of
a humanitarian agency should be asked to speak before
the Security Council, and it was the tragedy of ethnic
cleansing which placed the United Nations refugee
agency - whose mission is to serve people - at the
centre of the political debate on peace and security.

Over the years, I have observed the interface
between the political and humanitarian spheres grow
and evolve. I have not ceased calling for political
support for humanitarian crises. I have repeated
countless times that humanitarian action can only
address - not resolve - political problems. I have
given much thought to the relationship between
humanitarian and political bodies. Bridging the gap
between the pressing, often dramatic interests of the
most vulnerable and deprived people in the world and
the legitimate concerns of States has been the crucial
theme of my decade at the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

My central question today is therefore the
following: What do refugees need from the Security
Council? What does the United Nations refugee agency
expect from the body responsible for addressing peace
and security problems in order to be able to fulfil its
core mission to provide effective protection to refugees
and find durable solutions to their problems?

I would like to elaborate on and make concrete
proposals in two main areas: peace operations and
peace-building. Let me begin with peace operations.

As we have said many times, the nature of war
has changed, but the concept of peace operations may
still be based on the assumption that wars are fought
across clear-cut front lines. In spite of discussions on
wider approaches, peace operations continue to be
country-based and to reflect neither the internal nor the
regional nature of many of today's wars. The Council
will appreciate that we at UNHCR ask ourselves such
questions as an agency dealing precisely with forced
population movements across blurred conflict lines and
across borders.
We deploy our own staff - unarmed
humanitarian workers - to dangerous and isolated
duty stations. They are increasingly targeted and - as
in the terrible September incidents of Atambua and
Macenta - attacked and brutally killed. The gap in
time between the beginning of humanitarian activities
and that of peace operations continues to widen. Last,
but certainly not least, in many places, such as West
Timor, Guinea and Liberia, forced population
movements have become the cause and conduit of
grave insecurity and instability and little is done to
address the problem, as if we had learned nothing from
the lessons of the former eastern Zaire.

This is a situation that worries me deeply. In most
parts of the world where UNHCR and its humanitarian
partners are called upon to operate, mechanisms to
address security problems are slow-moving, unwieldy
and not adapted to the new type of conflicts. In many
places, they simply do not exist. Among my most vivid
memories is the rescue operation that we set up in the
former Zaire in 1996. When all deployment of
international forces failed, our staff had to go and
search for scattered, hungry and terrified refugees in
the rainforest of that vast country, sometimes even on
foot.

I am aware of the difficulties in political terms, in
military terms and in terms of resources, but there are a
few points that I would like to raise and a few
suggestions that I would like to make in this respect.

Let me insist first of all on the need to initiate and
implement peace operations much more rapidly. The
issue of timing, frankly speaking, is one that has not
yet been satisfactorily addressed by Governments. We
know that peace operations will inevitably be slower
than the humanitarian response. In refugee
emergencies, UNHCR, other United Nations front-line
agencies - especially the United Nations Children's
Fund and the World Food Programme - the Red Cross
movement and non-governmental organizations will
continue to be the first on the ground. If there has to be
complementarity in this endeavour, however, we must
do all that we can to reduce the gap between the
deployment of humanitarian personnel and the
implementation of some security support measures.
Otherwise, the cost is simply unbearable, as proven by
the catastrophic consequences of inaction in the
successive Great Lakes crises, for example, or by the
recent murders in Indonesia and Guinea.

We at UNHCR have become used to being called
to confront refugee emergencies literally at a few
hours' notice. We have no choice; delays in our work
inevitably mean that lives are lost. Since 1992, we have
therefore progressively built systems to respond
quickly to sudden, massive population movements.
These systems are based essentially on the concept of
stand-by resources that can be mobilized and sent to
the field within 72 hours - staff, equipment, goods
and money.

Since 1992, however, the environment has
changed rapidly. Political pressure for quick solutions
to refugee problems has increased and there is a
growing number of humanitarian actors, including
sometimes Government themselves. The Kosovo
refugee crisis last year proved that we had to adapt our
existing emergency response systems to a new and
more crowded humanitarian space, and the area on
which we are focusing in particular is to upgrade our
surge capacity to address refugee emergencies at very
short notice.

No matter how rapidly and effectively
humanitarian agencies mobilize, however, their
response will be inadequate unless the environment in
which they operate is secure. I am speaking both of
staff security and, from UNHCR's point of view, of the
security of refugees and of the communities hosting
them.

There is today an increased awareness that
humanitarian agencies should not be left alone to
confront difficult and dangerous situations. The
question is: How do we ensure that? I have often
spoken - also in this room - of the need to look at
different options: not only full-fledged peacekeeping,
but also and especially measures intended to support
local law-enforcement capacity.

I insist on the word "support". That is the key
concept, and it implies working together, as opposed to
straightforward intervention. I am also referring to very
specific situations, especially insecure border areas in
and around refugee sites. And I am thinking of
relatively simple measures: assisting the judiciary;
training the police and the military; supporting the
police with logistics and communication; and
deploying, if necessary, liaison officers to work as
coordinators and advisors. We have some such
programmes - and they are working reasonably
well - in the area of western Tanzania hosting
refugees from Burundi, Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We need the Council's support
for similar programmes in other critical spots: in
Guinea, for example, whose Government has requested
international cooperation in addressing security
problems in the areas bordering Liberia and Sierra
Leone.

The response of Governments to the concept of a
ladder of options to improve local security in refugee-
inhabited areas has been very positive, but it has
remained, so far, in the realm of theory. It is urgent that
we take steps to operationalize it, and to implement
concrete, predictable measures, for example the
deployment of humanitarian security staff. We need to
know what contributions may be forthcoming in
human, material and financial terms, and, again, how
quickly they will be available.

I have insisted so far on intermediate security
measures, because I know that in most situations
peacekeeping is simply an unrealistic option. But I also
believe that the transition that started with the end of
the cold war has not yet ended, that new or renewed
conflicts will flare up in different regions, and that the
international community will have to maintain peace
after very fragile ceasefire agreements are signed.
Peacekeeping, therefore, will continue to remain
necessary. But to remain relevant, it will have to adapt
to the new environment and become much more
effective.

We in the humanitarian community have
welcomed the initiative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, on an in-depth review of peace
operations. We have been among the most eager
supporters of the report (5/2000/809) of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations chaired by
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and are participating very
actively in the discussions on its implementation. The
report is very important and courageous in its attempt
to discuss comprehensively and in a broader context
how the United Nations can fulfil its key function of
helping maintain peace and security.

But from a more specific operational
humanitarian perspective, the report is also extremely
relevant to UNHCR and its partners, particularly as it
sets out a few objectives which, if achieved, would
provide crucial support to humanitarian action. It
stresses the need for quick decisions in responding to
crises; it gives priority to quick fact-finding missions to
the field; it underlines the importance of identifying
and pursuing early solutions; and it places great
emphasis on presence in the field. Those are crucial
aspects of the report the importance of which UNHCR
has advocated for years. They are also, by the way,
basic elements of any humanitarian deployment. They
clearly show the affinity, if I may call it so, between
humanitarian action and peace operations, and the need
to refine their relationship and mutual support.

UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies have
large programmes in post-conflict areas, where
peacekeeping is vital: think of Bosnia, Kosovo and
East Timor, just to mention a few. Without
peacekeepers, we could not have worked and could not
continue to work effectively in those areas. On the
other hand, I am pleased that, in discussions of the
concept of preliminary assessments, the role that is
played and can be played by field-based humanitarian
agencies has been recognized. It is very important that
these agencies are seen as complementary to peace
operations, and not just as other actors who happen to
work in the same areas. In my 1992 briefing to the
Security Council, I said that humanitarian action was
becoming dynamically linked to peacekeeping and
peacemaking. We were then learning important lessons
from our close cooperation with the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia. I am
pleased that the United Nations is now finally trying to
make this concept a concrete reality.

But speaking not only from a humanitarian but
also from a refugee perspective, I would like to take
this opportunity to go beyond the conclusions of the
Brahimi Panel report. Look at West Africa, for
example. There have been, as members know, cross-
border attacks in both Guinea and Liberia in areas
hosting refugees - and indeed because of the presence
of refugees. Beyond Sierra Leone's borders, however,
the only presence of the international community,
amidst half a million refugees, is humanitarian,
because the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) is, of course, limited to
Sierra Leone. Yet, not only are humanitarian workers
seriously at risk in border areas of Liberia and Guinea,
but there is also a very real danger that the Sierra
Leone conflict will spread, and that refugee flows will
be one of the conduits of that propagation. The
conflict, in simple words, may become regional but the
response, as I have said, continues to be country-based.

I understand of course that to expand
peacekeeping beyond a country's borders presents
many political hurdles and problems of resources.
Sierra Leone is itself a good example of the difficulties
encountered by a large operation in an area of
relatively low strategic interest, with uncertain
prospects and high risks. But the issue of insecurity
spilling over across borders from countries in conflict
and affecting in particular areas hosting refugees
should be examined and factored into strategies for
such operations.

West Africa is a case in point, but the matter is
broader and particularly serious in Africa. The
Burundi, Congo and Angola conflicts, for instance,
pose similar problems. I would like to make a proposal.
Could peacekeepers, in situations of refugee flows
which might become carriers of instability, be given a
special, cross-border observer mandate - in a word, to
monitor areas hosting refugees beyond the borders of
the country in which those peacekeepers operate?
Refugee-hosting countries, of course, would have to
agree, but that would be in their interest, because this
expanded concept of peacekeeping could address some
of their own concerns in terms of security and stability.

Had we had that form of support, say, in West
Timor, maybe the events of last September could have
been avoided. Such an arrangement would also have
been useful in the former eastern Zaire in 1994 to
1996; perhaps some of the subsequent violence and
instability could have been prevented.

Let me now turn to the second important area on
which I want to focus: peace-building. For years we
have been saying that unless more attention is devoted
to the consolidation of institutions and communities
after conflict, peace will not hold. UNHCR, of course,
has a very special interest in this process because of its
mission to ensure that refugees return home and settle
down in safety and dignity. And we have had very
difficult experiences in countries emerging from
conflict, with large numbers of people returning and
resources rapidly dwindling after emergencies have
subsided, as in Rwanda, Liberia and Bosnia, just to
mention a few examples.

Its focus on peace-building truly makes the
Brahimi Panel report very complete. Once more,
however, we should shift into operational mode and
look at how we can be as comprehensive in action as
we are on paper. I will speak, again, from the
perspective of the United Nations refugee agency. Our
problem, as I have said many times, is that we do not
have the resources, or indeed the expertise, to run
development programmes. And yet, development
agencies are slow to come once emergencies have
ended. There is a gap between emergency, short-term
humanitarian activities and the implementation of
medium-term to long-term development and
reconstruction programmes. During that gap, societies
can unravel again very easily, and conflicts can re-start.

I have personally made efforts to coordinate a
joint initiative with two key international development
partners of UNHCR - the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP). This
initiative, which was launched in January 1999 under
the auspices of the Brookings Institution, has become
known as the Brookings process.

We aimed in particular at filling the gap in
funding and the gap in responsibilities and operations.
In some countries we have initiated interesting and
creative projects - for example with the World Bank
in war-affected areas of Sri Lanka. In others, such as
Sierra Leone, we have made proposals for pilot
projects involving all three agencies. We are now
examining opportunities elsewhere - Burundi, if a
peace agreement is eventually implemented, would be
a possibility. On our side, we have made great efforts,
yet the response by Governments and organizations has
been very timid, and raising funds for post-conflict
activities remains a very difficult and uncertain
exercise. I must tell the Council that I am disappointed
by the limited response to our work in this area.

For us at UNHCR, peace-building is not an
abstract concept. We see the concrete, sometimes
desperate needs of returnees in devastated areas or in
areas where communities continue to be deeply
divided. We are doing our part to address these needs.
In the 1980s, we initiated "quick impact projects" for
emergency rehabilitation in areas of return. In some
places, we were criticized for having gone beyond our
mission, but in countries like Rwanda, for example,
could we have afforded to withdraw when returnees
still lived under plastic sheeting? When schools had no
roofs, no books, no teachers?

We are now going farther and exploring new
avenues, particularly in the promotion of community
coexistence as a first step towards reconciliation. We
have launched a pilot project, in returnee areas of
Rwanda and Bosnia, called Imagine Coexistence,
consisting essentially of support to small, community-
based inter-ethnic income-generating activities, around
which we would like to build clusters of other activities
branching off into the community - sports, theatre,
culture, dialogue. This is one of the innovative
approaches that we are taking. But its impact, once
again, will be limited, unless there are more rapid and
comprehensive efforts for peace-building at various
levels.

One crucial issue which I would like to mention
before concluding is that of disarmament,
demobilization, and reintegration (DDR). UNHCR is
particularly anxious that effective DDR contributes to
the creation of a safe environment for refugees
returning home. Without any doubt, DDR is also one of
the areas in which UNHCR expects more decisive
action by the Security Council. In their great potential
and in the obstacles which undermine them, DDR
programmes reflect all the contradictions of peace-
building.

I see two problems which need to be addressed in
particular: first, the roles and responsibilities of all
actors involved in DDR-related activities must be
clarified; secondly, there must be a stronger focus on
reintegration, because disarmed and demobilized
soldiers, if they are not given opportunities for a future,
will go back to more lucrative military activities. These
are not small matters and, unless they are addressed
seriously, little progress will be achieved in this
important area.

The last 10 years have proved that, if they are not
part of a comprehensive political and security
approach, humanitarian workers face dangers, are less
effective and even risk aggravating humanitarian
crises. What we must establish, at different levels, are
what we could call "security partnerships for
refugees" - joint ventures between States hosting
refugees, those ready to provide resources, and
humanitarian organizations like UNHCR. In my
briefing today, I have spoken of practical ways on how
to promote such partnerships: by containing insecurity
linked to refugee crises, improving peace operations
and focusing more decisively on peace-building.
Through security partnerships, together we can create a
better security environment in which refugee protection
and solutions can be more effective. This is an
essential, if very complex, task.

My successor, High Commissioner-elect Ruud
Lubbers, has the experience and the stature to carry it
out with energy, courage and creativity. I trust that the
Security Council will give him the same strong and
constant support that I have enjoyed in this Chamber
for the past 10 years - support for which I would like
to express once more my deep personal gratitude. I do
so also on behalf of my colleagues, and of all the
uprooted people they so bravely work with in some of
the most dangerous areas in the world. Please continue
to help them.

