Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to express my
gratitude to the United States for its efforts to ensure
the adoption of resolution 2440 (2018), as well as to the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Mr. Horst Kohler, and all of the personnel of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) for their hard work. We wish them
every success in meeting the ongoing challenges of the
period that begins today.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea voted in
favour of the resolution just adopted on the renewal of
MINURSO'S mandate because we believe it important
that the parties continue to receive the support, vigilance
and facilitation of the United Nations in reaching
a just and lasting political solution that is mutually
acceptable to the parties to the dispute. We therefore
urge the international community to support the efforts
of the parties and encourage them to find a definitive
solution. We also urge the parties to the conflict to
facilitate the work of the United Nations, above all that
of the Personal Envoy, to achieve a lasting peace and
put an end this long-standing conflict.

It is necessary for transparency and the spirit
of permanent consultation to prevail throughout the
process so that all parties, including the members of
the Council and the parties involved, be kept up to date
on the process. That should result in a climate of trust
and facilitate decision-making on the matter at hand.

Finally, we commend the full readiness of the
parties to the conflict to participate in December's
round table. We are hopeful and optimistic with
regard to the meetings, while acknowledging that the
Kingdom of Morocco has added a number of helpful
ingredients that could greatly facilitate the achievement
of a constructive solution during the negotiations.
Meanwhile, we call on all the parties to refrain from any
action that could undermine the prevailing environment
of calm in the region.

