Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is International Women's Day. To all women colleagues
present and to all women peacekeepers serving in
missions around the world, I would like to offer my
holiday greeting and pay my high tribute.

China thanks Mr. Shearer, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, for his
briefing. China also acknowledges the briefing by
Ms. Jial.

The Government of South Sudan and major
opposition groups signed the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan in September 2018, bringing the light of peace
to the South Sudanese people. China is pleased to note
that, over the past few months, the situation in South
Sudan has continued to improve. Signatories to the
peace agreement have been making efforts to implement
it. The ceasefire has been maintained in large parts of
South Sudan. The Government of South Sudan has
engaged in in-depth and extensive consultations with
the opposition on political and security arrangements
for their transitional period and has adopted a multitude
of measures to increase mutual trust. The South
Sudanese parties held a national dialogue in Wau
from 25 February to 2 March. Displaced persons and
refugees in some parts of the country have begun to
return home.

At the same time, the implementation of the peace
agreement still faces many difficulties. There have
been delays in some of the work stipulated in it. The
international community, in particular the Security
Council, should provide more assistance and continue
to help maintain the momentum of the peace process in
South Sudan and push all parties to work for the further
implementation of the agreement. China would like to
stress the following three points.

First, the South Sudanese parties bear the primary
responsibility for implementing the peace agreement.
The international community should, in the light of the
needs of the South Sudanese parties, actively provide
the necessary funding and technical support and respect
the leadership role of South Sudan. At the same time,
in monitoring the implementation of the agreement,
efforts should be made to bring into active play the role
of ceasefire and transitional security arrangements, the
monitoring and verification mechanisms and the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.

Secondly, efforts should be made to actively
support regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, as well as the countries of the region,
and to continue to strengthen their good offices. The
priority should be on pushing the South Sudanese
parties to reach consensus quickly on such key issues as
implementing the political and security arrangements,
as provided for in the peace agreement, and urging all
the relevant parties to sign the agreement at an early
date and take part in the political process.

Thirdly, efforts should be made to continue
to provide humanitarian assistance and economic
support to South Sudan and assist it in addressing its
food security, while placing priority on strengthening
imports, agriculture, energy facilities, infrastructure,
education and medical care, with a View to helping
the South Sudanese people to rebuild their homes and
resume their capacity for development.

China highly commends the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for its important
contribution to maintaining peace and stability in
South Sudan. China supports the mandate renewal of
UNMISS as well as its focus on the priority work to
assist the South Sudanese parties in implementing the
peace agreement.

China has always supported peace and development
in South Sudan and has contributed more than
1,000 Chinese peacekeepers, including 25 women
peacekeepers, to UNMISS. Last month, China provided
South Sudan with 1,000 tons of rice in food assistance
and a batch of anti-malaria drugs. China will, as
always, support actively and participate constructively
in the peace process in South Sudan and will make our
contribution to South Sudan's realization of a durable
peace and sustainable development.

