Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for the
presentation of the sixteenth report of the Office of
the Prosecutor, in accordance with resolution 1593
(2005). The report has informed the Council about the
ongoing judicial activities, as well as forecasts. It also
addresses cooperation with States and investigations
undertaken by the Court in the fight against impunity
with respect to the situation in Darfur. It also gives us
the opportunity to make several observations, although
Togo is not a party to the Rome Statute of the ICC.

With respect to security, the situation in Darfur
during the period under review remained fragile. Little
genuine progress was made in implementing the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. It is the same with
regard to implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).
It is clear from that state of affairs that no sufficient
progress has been made on any of the issues since the
last briefing by the former Prosecutor of the ICC in
June (see S/PV.6778).

In terms of judicial activities, we understand that
there has been no decision to date concerning opening
new cases and that most of the recent judicial activities
relate essentially to the Banda and Jerbo case. We
welcome the holding of the status conferences planned
for in that case and hope that the conferences will make
it possible to iron out the differences among the parties
so as to resolve the difficulties that can compromise
the proper functioning of the trial, including setting
the opening date. We also recall that the fight against
impunity presupposes the guarantee of a fair trial, which
would ensure that each decision is beyond reproach.

With respect to cooperation with the ICC, we regret
that, despite the principle of complementarity, which
requires that the perpetrators of crimes committed
in Darfur be prosecuted and tried, there has been no
progress in the work ofthe successive specialprosecutors
who have been appointed at the national level. This has
given impunity to those persons suspected of having
committed those acts.

In addition, it has been reported that the four
persons subject to five arrest warrants issued separately
by the ICC have still not been arrested. In this regard,
Togo encourages the various bodies of the ICC and the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute to take
any and all initiatives to identify the true root causes of
this lack of cooperation in order to consider appropriate
remedies to it. We express our firm desire that the
request contained in the relevant resolutions of the
Council and the appeals of other institutions, including
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, to
take measures at the national level to ensure justice and
cooperate with the ICC should be followed up by action
on the part of the Sudanese authorities.

In respect of the investigative activities under
way, my country endorses the many calls for an
end to the violence and violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. We encourage
the Office of the Prosecutor to continue to monitor
the ongoing crimes being committed in Darfur, in
particular aerial bombardments and indiscriminate
ground attacks against civilians, including women and
children, even in camps for displaced persons.

The Office of the Prosecutor should also closely
monitor the widespread sexual and gender-based
violence; attacks against human rights workers,
members of civil society and heads of communities;
the recruitment of child soldiers; and intentional acts
aimed at achieving the total or partial disappearance of
groups. Ongoing monitoring of the situation in Darfur
is a way to ensure deterrence and prevent impunity.

In addition, Togo expresses its serious concern with
respect to the attacks on and abductions of humanitarian
workers and members of United Nations peacekeeping
forces, which have to date led to the deaths of 43
soldiers of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

My country welcomes the announcement by the
Prosecutor's Office of the start of prosecutions with
respect to the killing of peacekeepers at the Haskanita
base in 2007, particularly since Togo also lost police
officers in Darfur. We hope that these investigations
will, in this case, make it possible to shed light on
the circumstances of these attacks and identify the
perpetrators at all levels of responsibility so that
they can be held accountable for their acts. We also
urge the Office of the Prosecutor to work to advance
the investigations and to prosecute those who recruit
child soldiers and who are responsible for intentionally
subjecting groups to living conditions that lead to their
total or partial disappearance.

A lasting solution to the conflict in Darfur
will entail a negotiated agreement and the fight
against impunity through the prosecution, arrest and
punishment of persons involved in committing crimes.
In this regard, we believe that the political will of
the most senior Sudanese authorities to put an end to
impunity continues to be the key to a lasting settlement
to the conflict in Darfur. From this standpoint, the
Government and the groups that are non-signatories
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur must
immediately put an end to the hostilities and undertake
discussions without preconditions in order to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the conflict and ensure genuine
reconciliation.

