Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Madam
President, let me at the outset join previous speakers
in commending your initiative to convene today's
meeting. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on children and armed conflict
(S/2018/465), which helps to make clear the full gravity
of this important issue, and to welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018), which enjoys broad
support with sponsors from 95 countries, including the
Republic of Korea.

Over the past 20-some years, we have collectively
endeavoured to advance the protection of children
from armed conflict and have achieved some
progress towards this end. However, there remains a
significant gap between our aspirations and the harsh
realities on the ground. Children are increasingly and
disproportionately affected by the myriad ongoing and
protracted armed conflicts around the world.

It is appalling that in 2017 alone more than 21,000
verified violations were committed against children
globally, a substantial increase indeed from 16,500
in the previous year. It is also deeply troubling that
children under the age of 18 make up more than half of
the world's 25.4 million refugees.

Against this distressing backdrop, I would like
to highlight three points of particular importance in
addressing this daunting challenge.

First, we must continue to focus on prevention.
As the Secretary-General has repeatedly emphasized,
prevention is the paradigm-shifting approach that
closes the gap between commitment and reality. It is
also the direction underscored by the three reviews on
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture, and
women and peace and security.

While serving as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission last year, I worked closely with the
Secretary-General to help push his prevention agenda
forward. The Republic of Korea remains firmly
committed to supporting him in translating this
commitment into reality, especially bearing in mind the
urgent need to protect children from the danger of armed
conflicts. Such efforts should start with preventing
children from being exposed to violent extremism. It is
for this reason that, working together with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
leading information and communications technology
companies such as Google, Microsoft, Facebook and
Twitter, we launched last year the Knowledge-Sharing
Platform, which is aimed at strengthening the
capabilities of small technology companies to fight
against terrorists' attempts to abuse digital spaces,
thereby enhancing young people's awareness of the
terrorist use of the Internet.

Secondly, we must ensure accountability for
all violations against children. Strengthening
accountability and abolishing impunity is the key to
ending gross violations and preventing any recurrence
thereof. Those who have committed grave violations
against children must be held accountable through both
national and international justice systems, including
the International Criminal Court.

In addition to justice mechanisms, we also need to
make full use of other tools, including, among others,
the monitoring and reporting mechanisms established
by the Security Council, the listing of violators in the
Secretary-General's report, and targeted sanctions to
seek accountability.

Thirdly, children should be seen as enablers for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. As the Secretary-
General highlighted in his report, we must ensure
that child protection is an integral part of strategies
for enabling sustainable peace and that the close
involvement of children is promoted throughout the
whole process.

In this regard, it is critically important to strengthen
partnerships with all stakeholders, including regional
and subregional organizations, international financial
institutions and civil society, in the light of existing
funding gaps and cross-border violations. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General also has an
important role to play, especially in harnessing and
leveraging resources from various actors.

In working towards that end, special attention
should be paid to reintegrating former child soldiers
and children of foreign terrorist fighters into society
without stigmatization. It is against this backdrop that
the Republic of Korea currently provides assistance
to Colombia in its post-conflict recovery through the
Korea-Colombia Friendship Rehabilitation Center,
established to help former combatants, including young
soldiers, to be reintegrated into Colombian society
with enhanced attention to their psychological security,
physical rehabilitation and professional skills.

The Republic ofKorea will continue to work closely
with the international community to save and protect
children from the scourge of armed conflict.

