Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his substantive briefing. We also
welcome the participation in this meeting of
representatives of the Economic Community of
Western African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
about the recent upsurge in armed robbery at sea and
the seizure of vessels for ransom as well as of high-
value freight off the west coast of Africa.

On 8 October, 70 nautical miles south of Lagos,
the German tanker Cape Bird was seized; it was freed
on 14 October. Russian Federation citizens were
among the crew taken hostage. That was not the first
case where Russian sailors suffered acts of piracy in
that subregion. We believe that such acts are serious
crimes and that the security of people, including
Russian citizens, is at risk, and we therefore intend to
give this issue high priority.

There were isolated attacks on vessels in the Gulf
of Guinea in the past, but this year piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coasts of Ghana, Togo, Benin and
Nigeria have shown all the hallmarks of a well-
functioning criminal enterprise that threatens the
security of maritime shipping and the economic well-
being of coastal States.

Based on information from the International
Maritime Organization, since the beginning of this year

there have been upwards of 30 incidents in the Gulf of
Guinea. We believe that the real figure is much higher.
In comparison, in 2010 there was not a single serious
attack.

In addition, the character of these acts of piracy is
changing. Whereas in the past there were minor
robberies and the seizure of small vessels and small
quantities of freight, today we are seeing large-scale
robberies carried out by well-equipped groups of
pirates. In addition, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is
becoming increasingly violent. We must also now
consider the possibility of links between piracy and
other branches of organized crime, including drug
trafficking in Western Africa.

The situation in that region continues to be a
growing concern for shipping companies and the
insurance industry. Most of the attacks are carried out
close to shore, within the territorial waters of coastal
States. That demands appropriate measures of
response, mainly from the affected countries of the
region, in order to enhance the security of shipping.

We must step up control of the coast by
improving coast guard services and providing them
with the latest technical equipment. We must build on
successful experience in combating piracy in other
regions of the world's oceans, based on the valuable
work of the International Maritime Organization in that
arena. It is clear that the primary burden for dealing
with the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea lies with
the States of the region. However, they require
significant international support in their struggle.

We welcome the organizational and practical
steps adopted by the countries of the region, either
individually or within the context of regional
groupings, in particular ECOWAS, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, aimed at developing effective
ant-piracy measures. We also welcome the idea of
holding a subregional conference on the problem.

We must not underestimate the risk of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea. If effective measures are not taken
to address it now, the situation could get out of control
in the near future. In that case, more resources and
additional effort will be required to deal with it. The
aim should be for the countries of West and Central
Africa, with the support of the international
community, to implement a combined anti-piracy
strategy and a coordinated security system for shipping
in the Gulf of Guinea.

Given Russia's own experience in this area, we
are ready also to consider possible cooperative support
to those countries and regional groupings.

