Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
France will not say farewell to you as in the song,
Madam President, as you certainly will remain here
with us beyond the month of your presidency. As other
speakers have already said, your mark, and that of your
country, on the work of the Security Council and the
United Nations extends beyond the work done during
just this one month, which has indeed been excellent.
Beyond your work this month, Madam President, I
would like, by way of example, to mention your
tireless work on behalf of children and in preparation
for the summit on children, as well as the work done by
your Deputy Permanent Representative, Mr. Ward, in
the area of cooperation with troop-contributing
countries. I believe that the work of Jamaica and its
Mission in those two areas will go far beyond this
month, however substantial the month of your
presidency has been.

Madam President, you have submitted a
document to the Council about which I would like to
make a few comments. My first comment relates to
transparency. I think the President is correct in
continuing to emphasize the importance of improving
the transparency of the Council's work. Many efforts
have been made in the last year or two, and we must
continue in that direction. I believe that we are
responding better and better to the demands of non-
members of the Council for an interactive dialogue
with them. Of course, as others have said, the open and
transparent meetings are sometimes very formal and
replete with too many repetitive national statements.
Each of us, members and non-members of the Council
alike, needs to make an effort to make meetings more
interactive and less formal. There are several ways of
doing that. As others have said, that could involve
meetings with other bodies. For instance, Ambassador
Greenstock made an excellent proposal to hold an
informal meeting with the Economic and Social
Council and, possibly, with the presidency of the
General Assembly. This could also involve closed
meetings with groups of countries, such as the ones we
have had on numerous occasions with the signatories to
the Lusaka agreements, with those involved in the
Arusha process on Burundi, and with the Economic
Community of West African States on Sierra Leone and
the West African region. I think we should continue in
that vein.

I would like in particular to emphasize the
dialogue between the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries. We believe that we must go
further on the basis of the recommendations made by
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, led by
Ambassador Ward. As the Ambassador of Bangladesh
has just said, we should be able to continue to make
progress. France has for several months suggested
establishing subsidiary Council bodies for the major
peacekeeping operations, and in that framework we
could hold regular dialogues between Council members
and troop-contributing countries. We believe that we
must continue the thinking that has begun in the
Working Group and that, as one of us has already
proposed, the Group could continue its activities next
year in order to make further progress in the dialogue
with troop-contributing countries. We are making that
proposal for the very simple reason that we can have
peacekeeping operations only if we have contingents
available for peacekeeping; hence the importance of
having a very regular dialogue with troop-contributing
countries.

The President's note also refers to briefings the
Council could receive from Member States,
organizations and groups of friends. There are
sometimes questions with regard to the usefulness of
groups of friends. I would recall that such groups
involve members of the Council as well as non-
members. This has also provided a way of having
dialogue with non-members of the Council that are
Members of the United Nations. That, too, is part of
the spirit of transparency and dialogue. But, of course,
groups of friends do not exist to do the work of the
Council. That must be clear. The Council has its own
responsibilities and must fully assume them. But there
is no reason why groups of friends or the coordinator
of a group of friends could not fully brief the Council
on their activities as necessary. I think that the
importance of groups of friends is that they bring
together countries that are particularly interested in a
given crisis, including troop-contributing countries
when a peacekeeping operation exists, to discuss how
they can act together usefully for the cause of peace in
the region concerned.

My last comment has to do with ministerial
meetings. In this regard we have seen that the practice
is for ministers to meet at the margins of the General
Assembly's ministerial week. I believe that has been
the case for a number of years. Should that be
formalized or not? Undoubtedly, it should not be
formalized. At the same time, however, we need to
recognize that this takes place almost systematically
every year during the ministerial week. As others have
said, those meetings need to be well prepared, lead to
useful results and deal with very well-defined topics
that are closely related to the work of the Security
Council.

I have a final point on thematic debates. thematic
debates are very useful when they deal with matters
under the purview of the Security Council. As to how
they can be linked to conflict situations, I believe that
depends on the particular thematic debate. I believe
that the thematic debate on the protection of children in
armed conflict was very useful, as this is a problem
that comes up in questions before the Council - for
example, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
the Great Lakes region and in Sierra Leone. We can use
the resolution on the protection of children in armed
conflict, adopted under the presidency of Jamaica, to
deal with conflicts before the Council. But, in general
terms, we must also ensure that we respect the
competence of the General Assembly. I recall that in
certain thematic debates in the past certain non-
members of the Council that were invited to participate
in the debate stated that we had to see to it that the
Council did not impinge on the General Assembly's
competences.

I thank you again, Madam President, for the very
complete agenda we had during November. I also thank
you for your very useful note, which has made it
possible for us to respond to some of the questions you
posed to us.

