Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'lvoire thanks your country, Madam
President, for organizing this important discussion on
the topic of conflict and hunger. This highly relevant
theme is of great concern to the Security Council in the
light of the numerous conflicts taking place in the world
and the serious humanitarian crises they engender. Cote
d'Ivoire also extends its gratitude to Mr. Lowcock and
Mr. Beasley for their briefings on the matter at hand.

Not a day goes by without United Nations
humanitarian agencies, non-United Nations
humanitarian organizations, the international media
and human rights organizations issuing urgent appeals
to the international community, particularly to the
Organization and the Security Council, on conflict-
related hunger and food insecurity. The latest report of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, published in 2017, which unfortunately
portrays a particularly alarming situation, clearly
highlights with evidence the strong correlation between
armed conflict, hunger and food insecurity, and appeals
to our conscience for us to commit to collective action
towards lasting conflict resolution. According to the
report, 489 million of the 815 million food insecure and
chronically undernourished people in the world live in
conflict-affected countries, including in Africa, Asia
and the Middle East.

While recognizing that armed conflict and hunger

are intertwined, my delegation believes that identifying
root causes and the nature of conflicts could provide
a lasting solution to the problem. Certainly, finding
solutions to the underlying and various causes of conflict
is the best way to prevent the outbreak of conflicts
and reduce the risk of food insecurity. In that context,
Member States must continue their efforts to promote
democracy, the rule of law and inclusive development
and fight against corruption, the dividends of which
will benefit the entire population.

As for the United Nations, it must continue
relentlessly in the promotion of the Sustainable
Development Goals by encouraging Member States
to prioritize food security in their policy-making by
developing an agricultural policy that requires targeted
investments as a matter of priority with a view to
satisfying the basic needs of the populations. Such
agricultural policies must also take into account the
empowerment of women, who can play a leading role
in strengthening food security and combating climate
change. Eliminating hunger is therefore a collective
responsibility that requires us, in our opinion, to
fight upstream against all the factors that can lead to
poverty and food crises, which constitute real threats to
international peace and security.

It is regrettable to note that countries in conflict or
weakened by the persistence of political crises devote
a significant portion of their financial resources to
military spending, to the detriment of the agricultural
sector, while better targeted investments could
contribute to boosting resilience to food insecurity
and hunger. Furthermore, due to massive population
displacements and the resulting densely populated
concentrations, armed conflicts and Violence lead to
the overexploitation and depletion of water resources
and arable lands, as well as increased strain on
the environment.

As evidence of that, the region of the Lake Chad
basin, which has experienced an alarming 90 per
cent drop in water volume over the past 40 years, has
recorded more than 2.2 million displaced people since
the 2009 Boko Haram insurrection. It is undeniable
that, in a context strongly marked by the effects of
climate change, such massive displacements of people
exacerbate the tensions between host communities and
refugees for control of arable lands.

As conflicts are one of the major causes of hunger
and food insecurity, we believe it is essential to work
towards strengthening the resilience ofState and regional
actors to crises, specifically on the African continent.
To that end, we must bolster cooperation among States
with a view to improving the living conditions of the
people who are in search of a better life.

Humanitarian access to populations facing hunger
and food insecurity is a sacred right, non-respect of
which constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. The perpetrators of hindering
international humanitarian assistance must therefore
be identified and held accountable before international
courts. All parties to a conflict must ensure respect
for peoples' right to access humanitarian aid, which
means opening and securing humanitarian corridors is
essential for the delivery of such aid.

Finally, to be effective, emergency humanitarian
relief must be coordinated between the structures
involved in humanitarian operations, in addition to
being associated with long-term development goals in
order to address structural development challenges,
such as youth employment and social cohesion.

