Ms. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): I too would like to thank the Presidents and
the Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their biannual
reports.

The briefings we have just heard confirm that
there is slippage in the calendar, and the Security
Council will have to respond accordingly. The first
thing to do, of course, is to give the Tribunals the
resources to complete the current trials and appeals,
with full respect of the rules of fairness. We hope that
in its future decisions the Council will clearly state its
will to ensure that the Tribunals have the resources
they need. That said, as the representative of Japan
remarked, the slippage is a matter of concern, and we
ask the Tribunals to make greater efforts to increase the
effectiveness and pace of the work of the Trial and
Appeals Chambers.

The action of the Prosecutors is essential to the
search for fugitives whose arrest and transfer to the
Tribunals remains a priority. The existence of fugitive
indictees is one of the principal uncertainties weighing
on the completion strategies.

With respect to the ICTR, as Judge Byron and
Prosecutor Jallow reminded us, 11 fugitives remain at
large. There is an excellent record of regional
cooperation in making arrests in the past, and we call
on all States to fully cooperate with Prosecutor Jallow.
On behalf of France, I would like to welcome once
again the activities of the Prosecutor, who has been
able to gain the confidence of all actors in the region.
The President of the Tribunal, at the Prosecutor's
request, has reported to us of the non-cooperation of
Kenya, which is a significant step. We must reiterate
our request to Kenya to fulfil its obligations in order to
arrest and bring to justice Felicien Kabuga. The entire
international community, including France, remains
mobilized alongside the Rwandans, the countries of the
region and the Tribunal in ensuring that low-ranking
indictees responsible for heinous acts will also be tried.

Turning to the ICTY, Mr. Karadzie's arrest by the
Serbian authorities was a significant step forward. His
trial must now proceed. We also hope for the arrest of
Mr. Mladic and Mr. HadZie. As the European Union's
Foreign Affairs Council recalled following Prosecutor
Brammertz's briefing to it, Serbia should follow the
Prosecutor's recommendations. As for the pending
Tribunal questions involving Croatia, we fully trust
that Croatia will resolve them.

If the issue of fugitives is not resolved, it will
have to be dealt with in the framework of managing the
Tribunal's legacy. The arrest warrants will not
disappear. The residual mechanism thus will have to
take over the investigation and arrest process. The
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals has continued to work on this subject under
the chairmanship of Austria, for which we are very
grateful.

The Working Group is an important one and its
work has affected not only Rwanda, the Great Lakes
region and all of Europe, but more broadly for the
future of international criminal justice. That is why
France calls on the Secretariat, in accordance with the
presidential statement we adopted in 2008
(S/PRST/2008/47) to focus closely on the services,
including interpretation, needed by the Group and the
Austrian chairmanship. France will continue to work in
the Group, with a view to the Council taking a timely
decision that will preserve the integrity of the legacy of
the two Tribunals and that will meet the criteria of
continuity, simplicity and fiscal discipline.

France firmly believes that we should take
advantage of the existing structures in The Hague and
Arusha and of the services that other judicial
institutions can provide to the residual mechanism,
along with possible synergies between the mechanism
and these judicial institutions.

