Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr. President, thank you for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council at this
critical time for the Palestinian people. We have full
confidence in your leadership and in your efforts to
steer the deliberations of the Council in the month of
October.

Since last Thursday, the Zionist forces in the
occupied territories have reacted excessively and
disproportionately to the justified protests that
followed a flagrant act of provocation committed by
the criminals of Sabra and Shatila and spread promptly
across the whole occupied territory. In recent days, the
whole area has been the scene of the killing of dozens
and the injury of hundreds of defenceless Palestinian
civilians.

The provocative act - committed last Thursday
by one faction of the occupying regime, facilitated by
the other and followed by the indiscriminate killing of
Palestinians - negates the Israeli pretence of
entertaining peaceful intentions or a desire for pacific
coexistence with the Muslims and Christians of the
region. This recent crime represents another attempt by
the Zionists to desecrate the Islamic holy site and
ultimately to destroy the Islamic nature of Beit al-
Maqdis. It followed two previous attempts: one in
1969, to burn down the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
other, in 1996, to dig tunnels underneath its blessed
soil. In so doing, they insulted the religious feelings of
more than 1 billion Muslims worldwide and initiated a
new wave of crime in occupied Palestine.

The recent crime committed by the Israeli armed
forces is consistent with the aggressive and
expansionist policies of Israel. It aims, in vain, at
gaining international recognition of its claim to
sovereignty over the holy Islamic sites. The Zionist
regime' s repeated crimes and heavy-handed approach
run counter to all its high-sounding and empty claims
that it seeks peace. This regime is the main cause
behind the tension and instability in the region. While
deceitfully negotiating peace with the Palestinians, it
violently assaults the oppressed and defenceless people
of the occupied territories.

The events in the occupied territories are another
illustration of the perennial unequal war of stone versus
heavy weapons; Palestinian struggle versus Israeli
aggression; and sacrifice for freedom and liberation
versus arrogant oppression and occupation. This
unequal war is unlikely to cease. If history is any
lesson, oppression, aggression and heavy-handedness
cannot last forever and the Palestinians will eventually
gain control over their destiny.

The fundamental question for the international
community, and particularly the Security Council and
the Middle East peace brokers, is the amount of
Palestinian blood, life, homelessness and agony we can
justify before the occupiers and aggressors are tamed
and the fundamental right of the Palestinians to self-
determination in their own land is realized.

The international community in general and the
Islamic world in particular are deeply concerned about
the ongoing atrocities committed by Israeli troops. The
incidents in recent days, partly captured on camera and
Viewed across the world, illustrate the contempt in
which world public opinion is held by the Israeli
regime. The disdain of the Israeli leaders for the
principles of international law and the decisions of the
United Nations is no secret to anyone in this Chamber.
It is commonly acknowledged, deplored and
condemned, but very little, if anything, is done about it.

Undoubtedly, this latest act by Israel is likely to
further exacerbate the Middle East crisis unless the
international community and the United Nations
intervene immediately to stop the Israeli armed forces'
brutal campaign against the civilians. In this respect,
the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in his
capacity as the Chairman of the Eighth Summit of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), called
for an emergency meeting of the foreign ministers of
the States members of the OIC to consider the issue.

There is no doubt that the Security Council in
particular is expected to act resolutely with a View to
putting an end to the violations by the occupying
Power of the Fourth Geneva Convention and to paving
the way for bringing those responsible to justice. The
first step in this direction is explicit condemnation of
the excessive use of force by the Israeli armed forces
against defenceless civilians.

Several times in the past, the Security Council
has been called upon to shoulder its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security by putting an end to the inhuman
and aggressive acts of the Israeli regime. Regrettably,
however, the exercise or threat of exercise of the veto
has so far prevented the Council from discharging its
constitutional responsibility in such a crucial issue and
has thus raised profound international disappointment.
Undoubtedly, the inaction of the Security Council
emboldens Israel to defy the wishes of the international
community, reflected in, among other things, numerous
General Assembly resolutions.

