Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align
themselves with this statement.

This open debate that you, Mr. President, have
been good enough to organize - a debate open to all
members of the United Nations - is an opportunity to
consider the recent report of the Secretary-General on
Ethiopia and Eritrea. I would like to thank Mr. Bernard
Miyet for having given us an oral introduction to that
report.

On behalf of the European Union, I wish to make
a few brief comments on the report. The first concerns
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General.
The European Union is glad to welcome the
recommendations for the enlargement of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE).
The proposals made concerning the Mission's mandate,
its structure and its concept of operations seem to us to
be a good basis to implement the peace settlement and
to supervise the redeployment provided for in the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities.

Secondly, regarding the role of Ethiopia and
Eritrea, we welcome the statement in paragraph 50 of
the Secretary-General's report that "To date, the parties
have shown the commitment required to ensure the
implementation of the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities." We welcome this climate of cooperation.
We call on Ethiopia and Eritrea to continue their
endeavours to secure lasting peace.

We take note of the proximity talks held in July in
Washington, and we would ask the two parties to
resume their discussions as early as possible, with a
view to arriving at a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the conflict.

We call on the parties to continue to cooperate
with the United Nations Mission, in particular so as to
ensure freedom of movement for United Nations
personnel entrusted with peacekeeping. As the
Secretary-General notes, it is also necessary for
Ethiopia and Eritrea to provide the United Nations
Mission with all information available to them about
the areas in which mines or unexploded ordnance are
known or suspected to be present.

Thirdly, concerning cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the European Union intends to lend its support
to the measures taken by the OAU and the United
Nations, working in coordination, to implement the
peace settlement.

I would like to take this opportunity to pay a
tribute to the endeavours of President Bouteflika and
the high-level OAU delegation, thanks to which it was
possible to sign the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities in Algiers in June. The European Union,
which was represented at the Algiers talks by Mr. Rino
Serri, the Italian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Personal Envoy of the Presidency of the European
Union, expresses its full support for the OAU's
activities. The European Union encourages the OAU to
continue its endeavours to bring about an early
resumption of talks between Ethiopia and Eritrea. It
welcomes the cooperation established between the
United Nations and the African organization.

Fourthly, I would like to comment on the
humanitarian situation. The populations of Ethiopia
and Eritrea have suffered greatly from the conflict
between the two countries. Drought has added to their
difficulties. The European Union is striving to provide
assistance to tackle these serious difficulties. The
Union is particularly troubled by the large number of
internally displaced persons and refugees in the region.
The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
must establish and maintain close cooperation with
humanitarian actors in the region.

The Secretary-General has presented us with
recommendations for the expansion of the mandate and
format of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea. It is our hope that the Security Council will
take action as quickly as possible on these
recommendations so that the peacekeeping operation
may be set up as early as possible.

For its part, the European Union supports the
deployment of international observers. It is also ready
to lend support to the work of delimitation and
demarcation of borders, mine clearance and activities
taken to assist refugees and displaced persons.

