Mr. Moratinos Cuyaube (spoke in Spanish): I
wish first of all to thank the Ministers present here -
Mr. Kubis and Mr. de Gucht - as well as the Italian
Under-Secretary of State, Mr. Craxi, and other Council
members, for their statements.

I believe that today's debate underscored the
importance of strengthening and maintaining the
tradition of dialogue and cooperation between the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations and its Security
Council. I believe that regional organizations like the
OSCE have the responsibility to support the efforts of
the United Nations and its leading role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. To
that end, this informal exchange of views in the
Security Council complements all our efforts to
guarantee peace and stability in a broad international
context.

I would like to respond to a number of the
questions that were put to me, but before doing so,
allow me to reaffirm that the current Spanish

chairmanship of the OSCE - at the end of its
chairmanship but before the upcoming Madrid
Ministerial Council - two main concerns relating to

security and cooperation. One of them is Kosovo. I
have taken note of the statements made by a number of
delegations calling for the proper deployment and
action of the OSCE field mission in Kosovo. We are
aware of the responsibilities that the organization will
hold in seeking to address the situation, whatever the
future status of Kosovo may be, with the presence of
more than 1,000 OSCE personnel in the field. We know
that our work to achieve reconciliation and to protect
religious and cultural sites is of fundamental
importance. We are therefore aware of and will
shoulder our responsibility to ensure a good outcome
and a satisfactory situation in Kosovo.

The second issue of great concern, which will
also have a significant impact on security and
cooperation in Europe, concerns the Treaty on
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. In this regard,
we shall do our utmost to ensure that at the Madrid
Ministerial Council we will at least be able to make
some political progress on the Treaty and advance
towards building mutual confidence in the area of
European disarmament.
Those are the two specific comments I would like
to make concerning the immediate tasks and concerns
that the Spanish chairmanship faces. As I indicated in
my introductory statement, we shall ensure that the full
organization, with its three facets - political and
military; economic and environmental; and human -
maintains the pace of its development.

I shall now turn to some of the specific concerns
and questions raised by Council members who took the
floor. I had no intention of opening a debate or of being
more specific on the situation in Georgia and the
incidents that occurred last August. But as a number of
statements were made, I shall indicate what the
Spanish OSCE chairmanship's commitments and
actions have been in this regard.

At the first news of the incidents, the
chairmanship assumed a leadership role, and contacted
all the parties. This made it possible for the existing
dialogue between Georgia and Russia to address what
should be our common objective: common
understanding, cooperation and good-neighbourliness
between two important countries: Georgia and the
Russian Federation.

I appointed a Personal Representative of the
chairmanship, the former Foreign Minister of Croatia,
Mr. Zuzul, with the specific intention of establishing a
climate of trust and dialogue.

The Personal Representative, Mr. Zuzul, briefed
the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna on his
mission. He gave an account that looked to the future,
not the past, aimed at creating a climate of mutual trust
and dialogue in order to move forward and thus ensure
security and cooperation for the entire OSCE
membership. A number of measures were suggested
and were outlined in the Permanent Council, including
rapid warning measures to prevent similar incidents
from arising in the future and measures to improve the
work of the military observers. All of that was done
with a view to ensuring that such incidents would not
recur in the future.

In that regard, I believe that the most positive
thing is that there is good dialogue between the
Russian Federation and Georgia. The OSCE
encourages and promotes that good dialogue, and we
want that cooperative dialogue to continue. The
chairmanship will continue to work through its
Personal Representative, if the parties deem it
appropriate. We remain at the disposal of all the parties
and all OSCE member States.
There are many options. There is, of course,
interest in defusing any type of incident. The
representatives of France and the Russian Federation
may be certain that the Spanish chairmanship is

already in contact with Georgia in order to clarify the
situation relating to those members of the
peacekeeping forces in South Ossetia. We are in
contact with Georgia in order to get that information. I
also wish to convey to the representative of the United
States that better border control measures are one of
the key matters, which of course must be the subject of
general consensus in OSCE. But it is one of the ideas
that we are exploring with all member States.

Turning to Afghanistan, the representative of the
United States referred to one fundamental issue, which
I touched upon in my statement: Central Asia. There is
a new situation in Central Asia, where historically
there have been greater strategic challenges to confront
in order to ensure stability in the region. As full
members of OSCE, they must also shoulder their share
of the responsibility in guaranteeing security.

One of the first things I gained from my visit to
Central Asia was a firsthand understanding of the
importance, and also the absence up until now, of
greater engagement and assistance in jointly resolving
the major challenges facing Afghanistan. I believe that
during the Ministerial Council meeting in Madrid, the
Spanish chairmanship will be prepared to bring
Afghanistan into the OSCE fold and, most important,
to help enable Central Asian countries to participate
and become more deeply involved in resolving security
issues and issues regarding economic cooperation and
infrastructure.

There is thus a great deal of work to be done in
the area of cooperation between OSCE and
Afghanistan, and we will work to that end. I believe
that all of us can benefit from greater stability and
cooperation, if we are able to clearly define the
objectives and the priorities. That should be
accomplished in a spirit of familial dialogue,
cooperation and friendship between all States members
of the OSCE, a spirit that has been ours since we took
up the OSCE chairmanship.

