Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Zahir Tanin, for
his briefing on the recent situation in Kosovo. I would
also like to welcome the presence of the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, His Excellency Ivica Dacie, in
New York.

We took note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/797) and would like to join others in expressing
our deep concern at the recent situation in the field.
Today I would like to bring the following three points
to the attention of the Council.

First, concerning the de-escalation in the region,
we call on both parties to actively engage in sincere
actions to de-escalate the tensions on the ground,
including urging all parties to refrain from vandalizing
any religious sites, as indicated in the report. Religious
sites are sacred sanctuaries aimed at creating a positive
spirit. We therefore condemn the vandalism and call
on law-enforcement institutions to ensure a swift
investigation and to bring those responsible to justice.

We support the Secretary-General's steadfast
commitment to the protection of religious sites, which
is also in line with the United Nations Plan of Action
to Safeguard Religious Sites. I call on all relevant
stakeholders from both parties to give priority to the
protection of religious sites.

Secondly, there is a need to resume dialogue.
Dialogue is the only feasible way to achieve a win-win
solution for both parties in the most peaceful possible
way. Both parties need to resume dialogue under the
auspices of the European Union, without further delay,
to bring unity back to the region. All stakeholders
should be involved in that dialogue. We regret that
no high-level meetings were held between Belgrade
and Pristina within the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue.

All obstacles to dialogue should be removed.
We welcome efforts aimed at ensuring the greater
involvement in the political process of wider segments
of society and encourage women to engage and lead in
the dialogue. We also second the Secretary-General's
view that trust-building cannot be successful if the
rule of law is not strengthened and the judiciary is not
perceived as credible, independent and impartial.

My third point concerns the important role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). Indonesia greatly appreciates
UNMIK's multifaceted approach to engaging grass-
roots communities through various forums, conferences
and trust-building projects.

We are deeply saddened by the incident in Zubin
Potok involving the arrest of UNMIK staff by the
authorities in northern Kosovo. We welcome the
thorough internal investigation into the incident,
as presented by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. The incident clearly violated
international law and the immunities of international
United Nations staff members. We therefore urge an
immediate termination of the criminal proceedings
against the two staff members as well as the restoration
of their status, privileges and immunities.

We welcome the reintegration process that is being
monitored by UNMIK and international partners and
are pleased by the voluntary return by members of
non-majority communities who had been displaced.
The reintegration process is an important step
towards establishing a strong and stable community in
the region.

Ultimately, Indonesia recognizes that what people
want is happiness, not selfishness. What is most
important is peace, not hatred. These are important
building blocks in order for people to live side by side.
That is the goal whose achievement UNMIK must
ultimately support.

Finally, Sir, let me join others in congratulating
your delegation on having successfully presided over
the Council during the month of October.

