The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.

I want to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
especially on the conflict related to Gaza. I also wish
to thank Ambassador Riyad Mansour, Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine, and the
representative of Israel to the United Nations, David
Roet, for their respective statements.

The current trend regarding the security situation
in the Middle East, from Gaza to Iraq through Syria
and Yemen, is concerning. The level of human loss
and destruction in the region as a result of recurring
violence is unspeakable. In just two weeks of the crisis
in Gaza, more than 600 lives have been lost and more
than 3,700 people wounded, in addition to over 100,000
people displaced. In this regard, we also strongly
condemn the indiscriminate rocket fire by Hamas into
Israel and call for an immediate end to these attacks.
We recognize the right of Israel to self-defence, as no
country on Earth would accept daily rocket attacks on
its cities and its people.

Nonetheless, we are deeply disturbed by the level
of civilian victims of this war, including an increasing
number of children, as demonstrated by the recent
fighting in Shujaiya. We call for the protection of
civilians and respect for international humanitarian
and human rights law. Above all, the parties to this
conflict must heed the call for an immediate cessation
of hostilities based on a return to the November 2012
ceasefire agreement, as expressed last Sunday by
the Council. Rwanda further supports the proposed
ceasefire to be brokered by Egypt, which would give a
chance for a long-term political and economic solution
for Gaza.

We further believe that the proposal put forward
in the Council to establish a viable verification
and monitoring mission, which would ensure the
implementation of any ceasefire agreement, should be
supported by the concerned parties and stakeholders.
There is do doubt that our collective failure to advance
a political solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
will continue to lead to cyclical violence in the Middle
East.

We welcome the visit to the region ofthe Secretary-
General and the United States Secretary of State, who
emphasized the need for an immediate ceasefire as
well as the importance of taking concrete action in
addressing the underlying causes of this crisis. Indeed,
only a political solution based on a two-State solution
with two peoples living side by side in peace and
security will provide a sustainable settlement to the six-
decade conflict.

For the past three years now, the conflict in Syria
has been destroying a people, with massive violations of
human rights and a worsening humanitarian situation.
Over 150,000 have died and more than 10 million
are in dire need of humanitarian assistance. It is the
responsibility of the Syrian parties, supported by those
countries that have influence on them, to end that war.

In that regard, Rwanda welcomes the appointment
of the new United Nations Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We are convinced that he will
use his experience to jump-start the Geneva II peace
process, with the support of all stakeholders.

Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation has
continued to deteriorate in Syria, mainly due to the
continued hostilities, but also to the failure of the
parties to implement resolution 2139 (2014). Rwanda
welcomed the unanimous adoption of resolution 2165
(2014), which authorized United Nations humanitarian
agencies to use four additional border crossings. We
hope that the new resolution will enable humanitarian
actors to assist up to 2 million hard-to-reach people.
However, Rwanda believes that the Council should
be vigilant as well as fully prepared to take concrete
measures under the Charter of the United Nations in
the event of non-compliance with both humanitarian
resolutions in Syria.

On a more positive note, Rwanda commends
Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Special Coordinator of the joint
mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations, together
with her team, for their tremendous achievements in
the elimination and destruction of all declared chemical
weapons of the Syrian Government, as requested by
resolution 2118 (2013).

Although we hope that no chemical material was
left behind, we cannot forget that, last August, hundreds
of innocent people, including women and children, lost
their lives following horrendous suffering. Now more
than ever, the perpetrators must be held accountable.

In conclusion, Rwanda expresses its firm belief
that only an inclusive moderate and responsible
approach will restore stability in the Middle East and
achieve permanent peace in the region. It is therefore
our collective responsibility to support the Secretary-
General and other stakeholders in their tireless efforts
to work for a peaceful resolution of conflicts throughout
the Middle East.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Jordan has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.

