Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of Switzerland and my own
country, Liechtenstein.

At the outset, I thank the Chairpersons of the
various Committees that have briefed the Council on
their work this morning. I would also like to take this

opportunity to reiterate our commitment to
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
We join all other States in the unequivocal
condemnation of all terrorist acts, irrespective of their
motivation and wherever and by whomever they are
committed.

Liechtenstein and Switzerland fully support the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004). We would
like to congratulate the new Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), Mr. Mike Smith, on his appointment. We are
hopeful that he will invigorate the leadership on United
Nations counter-terrorism work and, in particular,
bring greater coherence to the work of the three
Security Council Committees dealing with terrorism.
We understand that the CTC made an important step
last week in approving letters transmitting Preliminary
Implementation Assessments to a number of Member
States. We look forward to working with the CTC in
this next phase of its work.

We have recently received an updated matrix
from the 1540 Committee, accompanied by a request to
provide further information on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We commend the Committee
and its group of experts for their work - and, in
particular, for their working methods, which can serve
as a best practice for other committees as well. In
general, we believe that there is much room to promote
a more integrated approach to United Nations activities
on counter-terrorism, and we do support ideas aimed at
further consolidating the Council's respective
Committees.

As in previous statements on this subject, we
would like to focus our remarks on the work of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee. During the
most recent meeting on this issue, in May 2007
(see S/PV.5679), we commended the members of the
Council for their hard work leading to the adoption of
resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735 (2006). We
considered the establishment of a Secretariat focal
point for de-listing to be an important step to improve
access by listed individuals and entities to the
de-listing procedure. At the same time, we made it
clear that, in our View, the mandate of the focal point
has mainly improved the access of listed individuals
and entities to the de-listing procedures of the
sanctions committees, and does not address other
important rights, such as the right to an effective
remedy. We thus believe that the current system does
not provide sufficient safeguards for international
human rights standards, as identified in the letter of the
Secretary-General of June 2006, to which you yourself
referred, Mr. President, in the statement that you
delivered in your national capacity.

Many Member States still have concerns
regarding the requirement of "fair and clear
procedures", contained in paragraph 109 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), in the Council's use of targeted sanctions. In
order to facilitate a constructive discussion on that
issue, we organized a round table on de-listing on
8 November 2007. The event was sponsored by the
missions of Denmark, Sweden and Switzerland and
was open to all States Members of the United Nations
and invited representatives of the Secretariat,
non-governmental organizations and academia. At that
meeting, participants exchanged views on a discussion
paper based on the research of Professor Michael
Bothe of the University of Frankfurt regarding the
establishment of a review panel to deal with petitions
for de-listing.

We feel encouraged by the broad interest of
Member States in further improving sanctions
procedures and by the support expressed on the
occasion of the workshop, while also noting that some
Council members have reservations about further
measures at this point in time. We will continue to
reach out to those who are sceptical as well as to those
who express support, both members of the Council and
States not currently serving on the Council, in order to
facilitate an informed and substantive discussion
within the Security Council.

We are convinced that the issue will remain on
the agenda of Member States for some time to come, in
particular in the light of domestic and international
court proceedings, which can have an impact on the
effectiveness of sanctions regimes. Our contribution to
this discussion is motivated by the desire to strengthen
sanctions regimes and to enhance the effectiveness and
legitimacy of the Security Council in accordance with
the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit, and
by our commitment to uphold all applicable standards
of human rights.

The fight against terrorism concerns all States
Members of the United Nations and should therefore

benefit from contributions from all partners involved.
We therefore believe that it is a good policy choice for
the Security Council to continue to engage in dialogue
with non-members of the Council. We look forward to
cooperating further with the Council on this important
1ssue.

