Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for their briefings at the outset of our
debate. Also, we listened carefully to the statement of
our colleague, the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.

Let me begin by stating Belgium's grave concern
at recent events in Chad. There is no chance that peace
will return to Darfur unless the Sudan and Chad, with
the support of all countries of the region, work urgently
to normalize their relations. Internal developments in
the Sudan and Chad are a reflection of their bilateral
relations, and vice versa. The constant movement of
rebel movements back and forth across the border can
only exacerbate tension between the two countries.
Normalization of relations between the Sudan and
Chad is thus in their common interest, and we earnestly
hope that we can count on the active commitment of
Khartoum and N'Djamena towards emerging from the
current negative situation.

In that context, Belgium reaffirms its firm
commitment to the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
to the European Union operation in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR Tchad/RCA). We
hope that they will be deployed, as planned, as soon as
circumstances on the ground allow, which we hope will
be in the coming days.

The full and effective deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) remains a considerable challenge to the
international community. Belgium welcomes the
forthcoming deployment of the Egyptian and Ethiopian
contingents, along with that of Thai and Nepalese
units, which will finally enable us to move from the
re-hatted African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS)
to a new hybrid mission, as mandated by the Council.
We regret, however, that the deployment of non-
African units has been so difficult; we cannot accept
the authority that the Sudanese Government claims
over the admissibility of the contributions of countries
to the Council-mandated force.

The UNAMID hybrid mission is unprecedented
and thus an innovation; we are organizing it jointly
with the African Union. Belgium congratulates the new
leaders elected by the African Union, in particular
President Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete as African Union
Chairman and Mr. Jean Ping as Chairman of the
African Union Commission, and urges them to do their
utmost to ensure the success of UNAMID, including by
bringing their full influence to bear on the Sudanese
Government to make the smooth deployment of the
mission possible. We welcome the statement made
earlier by Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
in which she recalled the Union's firm commitment to
discharging its responsibilities.

Belgium notes that the tripartite negotiating
mechanism with the Khartoum Government has borne
some fruit, including in negotiations on the terms of a
status-of-forces agreement. But it is imperative that the
Sudanese Government commit itself further to keeping
President Al-Bashir's promise to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon to accelerate the deployment of the
mission and to resolve all outstanding issues related to
that deployment. We are told that the tension in the
refugee camps is increasing; it is time for UNAMID to
be set on a solid footing and to be able at last to do its
work.

There is hardly any need to recall that UNAMID
must restore a minimum level of security to Darfur,
which would facilitate humanitarian assistance. But it
should also permit progress in the ongoing political
process; Mr. Eliasson has briefed us on the latest
developments in that process, which are unfortunately
not particularly encouraging. For the process to have a
real chance at getting under way, it is imperative that
hostilities on the ground end immediately. As a matter
of urgency, all parties to the conflict must commit
themselves to a lasting ceasefire. It is unacceptable that
the parties should hold the civilian population hostage
by pursuing agendas that have no room for genuine
peace.

I listened very carefully to Mr. Eliasson's briefing
on the most recent developments in the political
process, which we hope will be inclusive and credible.
Like Mr. Eliasson, I deplore the fact that several rebel
movements are not prepared to engage in this process,
and I encourage him and his African Union
counterpart, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, to persevere in
their efforts to convince the movements that the
Government would find them a credible interlocutor if
they pursued common objectives. Belgium regrets in
particular that the Justice and Equality Movement of
Mr. Khalil Ibrahim continues to favour a military
solution over a political process.

Peace in the Sudan is indivisible, and the
question of Darfur is intimately linked to the overall
peace process in the Sudan. Let me only say how much
Belgium welcomes the outcome of last autumn's
governmental crisis; we once again encourage the
parties to continue and hasten the concrete
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace

Agreement. The implementation of the Agreement
could serve as an example for Darfur. Credible and
rapid implementation could convince the movements
that are still hesitating to commit themselves to the
political process towards a peace agreement that would
be to the benefit of all parties.

I cannot conclude without emphasizing once
again a major priority of my delegation: the fight
against impunity. Here, the Sudan has a twofold
obligation: to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005); and to
implement the restrictive measures imposed by the
Security Council. Without wishing to confuse the two
issues, Belgium deplores the recent appointment of
Mr. Musa Hilal - who appears on the sanctions
Committee's list of individuals and entities - as a
Government adviser. That is in addition to the
unfortunate fact that two individuals indicted by the
International Criminal Court, including Mr. Ahmed
Haroun, have yet to be transferred to The Hague.

Before concluding, I wish to join my colleagues
in bidding farewell to our much-respected colleague
from Croatia. We have greatly appreciated not only her
friendship and collegiality here at the United Nations,
but also her personal commitment to the cause of world
peace and the well-being of humanity.

