Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks to Judge
Meron, Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their briefings. We have carefully reviewed the
contents and considerations of the two periodic
reports (see S/2017/434 and S/2017/436). I would like
to commend the progrees made in the implementation
of the mandates of both Tribunals and to underscore
our support of their efforts to complete their mandates,
as scheduled.

The Security Council established the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
to uphold the principles of justice and the rule of
law, to demonstrate the sincerity of the international
community in addressing war crimes and crimes
against humanity, to ensure that the perpetrators are
held accountable for their actions and to anchor the
principle of zero impunity at the international level.
The two Tribunals have played a commendable role
in that respect and will continue to do so through
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in Arusha and The Hague. In that connection,
we salute all efforts to ensure a smooth transition and
handover. The mandate of the ICTY is drawing to a
close. The Council's support of the Tribunal is essential
if it is to optimally fulfil its mandate and duly finalize
the cases of which it is seized.

We urge Member States to continue cooperating
with the Registry of the Tribunal in accordance with
its mandate, as outlined in its Statute. In that respect,
I wish to underscore the need to use all available
financial and administrative resources effectively in
order to facilitate the work of the Residual Mechanism
and the ICTY, as required.

The International Criminal Tribunals are an
important tool for the international community in the
administration of justice and the punishment of those
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. The experiences gained and the
lessons learned from the ICTR, the ICTY and the
International Residual Mechanism, therefore, merit
consideration as a reference for the future. We must
build on the positive aspects and avoid any failures
or shortcomings.

In that respect, the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, in accordance with the mandate of the
Council, reviews the working methods of the
Mechanism and reports thereon, as it did with regard to
the ICTY. That serves our objectives, but it is important
for the group responsible for the review, whether at the
assessment or recommendation level, to pay heed to the
nature of the Mechanism as a judicial institution and
to ensure a balance between improving administrative
performance and efficacy, on the one hand, and not to
prejudice the independence of the international judges,
on the other.
Therefore, seeking the help of seasoned,
experienced judges as part of the group responsible
for the review is essential to fully understanding the
nature of the work of the Mechanism. In that respect,
agreement on a reference methodology for such reviews
will facilitate communication between the Office and
the Mechanism, while preparing future reports. That
will have a positive bearing on the nature of outcomes
and their implementation when the Council establishes
similar tribunals and mechanisms in the future.

In conclusion, I would like to note that Egypt
continues to follow the case of the detention of Judge
Aydin Sefa Akay in Turkey on the grounds of certain
accusations made against him. We look forward to
arriving at a satisfactory solution that preserves the
dignity and independence of the international judiciary
and is in line with the rules of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.

