Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of my delegation and on my own
behalf, I would like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Peru. We are honoured to have him
preside over today's debate, the subject of which is of
great importance to our country.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
this matter (S/2006/826). We support his
recommendations. We would also like to thank
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and Ms. Ann M. Veneman, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their presentations and for the
fundamental role they play in this subject. We also
thank Mr. Gabriel Oling Olang, representative of Save
the Children, for the valuable work of his organization.

The adoption last year of resolution 1612 (2005)
provided the Security Council with a set of useful tools
to advance in the implementation of concrete measures
to improve the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. Today, in reading the report of the Secretary-
General on the reality being lived by those children, we
cannot fail to express our concern about the obstacles
in the way of solving this serious problem. Many
children are still being recruited as combatants by
organizations or parties to situations of armed conflict
under consideration by the Security Council, such as in
Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Myanmar, Somalia and parts of the Sudan.
Other girls and boys continue to be victims of sexual
violence, such as in northern Uganda, and many have
died as a result of the bombing of civilian populations,
schools and hospitals in Lebanon and the Palestinian
territories. Others are kidnapped with different
objectives, and many others, sadly, will die due to
unexploded ordinance.

We must recognize the need to strengthen the
current system by providing it with adequate means to
make it more effective, and to redouble our political
commitment to finding remedies for the victims and to
ending the impunity of the perpetrators. At the same
time, we are aware that we are in the early phases of a
complex and long-term process that moves slowly and
that seeks to ensure the participation of all parties
concerned.

In reading the Secretary-General's report in the
light of resolution 1612 (2005), we can identify several
elements that we believe require more focused
attention.

First, the monitoring and reporting mechanism
could be improved. To that end, we think that the
Working Group should devote a session to thoroughly
studying the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, which carried out the independent
review of the mechanism, in accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005). We also believe that the time
has come for members of the Security Council to
consider the possibility of broadening the scope of the
mechanism in order to ensure the equal treatment of all
conflict situations in which children are victims of
violations or abuses. We further believe that all
violations are of equal gravity and that the mechanism
should attach the same priority to all of them.

Second, concerned States and parties to a conflict
must be even more deeply involved in dialogue
processes with the relevant United Nations entities and
that, as a result of that dynamic, they should engage in
a process of drafting and implementing national action
plans, as requested by resolution 1539 (2004).

Third, it is critical to ensure the continuous and
predictable flow of resources for the implementation of
both the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
national action plans. It is necessary to translate
political will into significant resources and to increase
accountability for those resources.

Fourth, we believe that the issue of resources is
closely linked to the training of staff in charge of
implementing the mechanism, both at the local level
and at the level of United Nations agencies with
competence in that matter. At the same time, we feel
that an adequate influx of resources would allow the
continuation of ongoing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes and the implementation
of new programmes in areas where they have not yet
been developed. It is especially necessary to emphasize
the rehabilitation phase and the reintegration of
children into their families and communities, thus
ensuring a sense of belonging. It is also necessary to
bear in mind the special needs of girls in that process.

Fifth, interaction with civil society is essential at
all levels. We thank France for organizing an Arria
formula meeting, with the participation of members of
civil society working on the situation of children in
armed conflict, both at Headquarters and in the field.
Having heard from the representatives of those
organizations, we believe that it is necessary to ensure
greater interaction with them at both levels.

Sixth, although the monitoring and reporting
mechanism focuses on the collection of trustworthy
data on the recruitment and use of child soldiers and
other abuses against children affected by armed
conflict, we must not overlook the fact that the ultimate
goal of the process must be to identify those
responsible for such violations, such as Charles Taylor,
in order to take steps against them, thus putting an end
to the climate of impunity that allows such atrocities to
continue to be committed. In that context, I reaffirm
the need to support the work of the International
Criminal Court.

Seventh, we must not forget that the issue of
children and armed conflict is linked to other subjects,
such as the need to achieve gender parity, the
empowerment of women and girls, the fight against
impunity, the protection of civilians in conflict, and the
economic development of conflict-affected societies.

Eighth, we believe that, in accordance with
resolution 1612 (2005), the information collected as a
result of the application of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism may be transmitted not only to
the Security Council, but also to the General Assembly
and to other organs of the system with competence in
those matters, such as the Human Rights Council, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the
sanctions committees. It is important to stress that the
Security Council's Group of Experts is working to that
end.

The Security Council Working Group created
under resolution 1612 (2005) met to consider specific

country situations and adopted recommendations for
the first cases considered. That working method has
allowed better interaction with the Office of the
Special Representative, UNICEF and the affected
countries; better knowledge of the cases under
consideration; and, above all, improved continuity in
the Security Council's consideration of the situation of
children and armed conflict. The Working Group is
fully aware that there is no single solution with respect
to this issue and that the particularities of each case
must be taken into account before concrete
recommendations can be formulated.

Argentina does not favour a policy of naming and
shaming, but we believe that the gravity of the
situation merits concrete steps to stop the misconduct
of some parties or organizations in conflict that have
long committed grave abuses against children. From
that perspective, we believe that it is effective to list
the responsible parties in the report of the Secretary-
General, and we would like the Working Group to
move ahead in its consideration of recommending
sanctions against those parties where there is certain
evidence that such violations have been committed
against children in conflict. We cannot continue to be
indifferent when children remain subject to grave
abuses.

Another subject of concern to us is the denial of
humanitarian help to children. Lack of access to
affected areas and the insecurity faced on many
occasions by United Nations personnel during conflicts
negatively affects access to information on recruiting
practices and other grave violations committed against
children. We call upon all parties to conflicts to permit
secure access for personnel charged with providing
humanitarian assistance and protection to children.

Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
concern that a subject of this magnitude not be
confined to action by the Security Council. It must take
on broader dimensions through growing involvement
of the States members of the General Assembly. In this
sense, we urge all members of the General Assembly to
welcome Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) and
to commit themselves to collaborate in its
implementation.
