The President (spoke in French): May I ask
representatives to stand and observe a minute of silence
in tribute to the memory of the United Nations
personnel who were killed in Timor, as well as in deep
solidarity with all United Nations personnel in the field
and all humanitarian personnel in the field everywhere.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Adoption of the agenda

The President (spoke in French): Members of
the Security Council will recall that the date and
agenda for this meeting of the Council were agreed
upon by members of the Council in its prior
consultations.

The agenda was adopted.

Ensuring an effective role of the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa


The President (spoke in French): I am pleased to
acknowledge that at this Summit meeting of the
Security Council Argentina, China, France, Mali,
Namibia, the Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine and
the United States of America are represented by their
Presidents; Bangladesh, Canada, Jamaica, the
Netherlands and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland are represented by their Prime
Ministers; and Malaysia is represented by its Minister
for Foreign Affairs.

I should like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence of other heads of State or Government, as
well as Ministers for Foreign Affairs, together with
their respective delegations, in the Council Chamber
today. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.

The spirit of cooperation demonstrated by all
those present here, which has made this very important
meeting possible, is greatly appreciated by all of us.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is today holding a Summit
meeting on the question of ensuring an effective role of
the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, particularly in Africa.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2000/845, which contains the text of a
draft resolution, and annexed Declaration, prepared in
the course of the Council's prior consultations.

With the consent of my colleagues, I should like
to make a few introductory comments to our meeting
today.

I believe that it is both a great honour and a great
responsibility, for Africa and for Mali, for me to have
the privilege of presiding over a meeting of the
Security Council at the level of head of State or
Government, the second of its type in the history of our
Organization.

Allow me to welcome all of you and to express to
you the gratitude of all of Africa. Your presence here
today attests to your commitment and to your faith in
the missions and the role of the United Nations. This is
a special moment, since, at the dawn of the new
millennium, the entire world - with good reason - is
wondering when peace and security will prevail on our
earth, and in particular in Africa.

One could ask if the Council, since our first
historic meeting in 1992, has effectively discharged its
primary responsibility in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security. Since peace and
prosperity, and security and development go hand in
hand, has the international community done enough to
eradicate poverty and to create the conditions for a
better life for all?

United Nations Development Programme
indicators show how far we are from eliminating
poverty and creating the conditions for a better life for
all, and behind these cold figures is the misery of
millions of men, women and children. Conflicts have
not ceased but have now become internal, particularly
in the form of civil wars- violent and bloody
conflicts that take a heavy toll on civilians in particular
and especially on vulnerable individuals, such as
women and children, conflicts that are characterized by
atrocities that are repugnant to the conscience of
humankind.

To be sure, our Organization has made progress,
but we also must recognize that there have been some
failures over the last 10 years which in some ways have
affected its credibility. Africa, my continent,
unfortunately is all too good an illustration of this.

The tragic events that took place in Sierra Leone,
the need to better protect communities and individuals,
including United Nations and humanitarian personnel,
and the need therefore to better meet the new security
challenges are not in conflict with our shared
determination to fine-tune the actions of the Council to
enhance its ability to prevent crises and to respond to
them in an appropriate fashion.

Africa, which has just adopted a Declaration and
Plan of Action following the Conference on Security,
Stability, Development and Cooperation in Africa,
intends to shoulder its share of responsibility in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. It expects from
the international community the necessary support,
and, from the United Nations, which bears
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, it expects an increased commitment
and specific attention to the promotion of lasting peace
and security in Africa.

Africa has the means to extricate itself from this
situation. It needs to feel that it is not alone. Have
confidence in Africa.

At a time when the world is scrutinizing the role
of the United Nations in the twenty-first century, we
need more than ever to send strong and clear signals to
peoples and States of the determination and ability of
the United Nations to carry out effective peacekeeping
operations in accordance with its principles.

In renewing our commitment to the ideals and
objectives of the Charter and our firm commitment to
make genuine progress in the area of international
peace and security, we need to provide the United
Nations the means to achieve peace.

There are special moments in history when
peoples and individuals can be active or passive. This
extraordinary meeting is an opportunity for us to make
history. We must take advantage of it to build a world
of peace in which future generations will be free from
wars and from poverty. We need to lay the foundations
for that world, and that means providing the human,
financial and material resources necessary for our
Organization more effectively to deal with conflict
situations and shoulder its incomparable responsibility
to ensure and guarantee world peace.

That is the point of our meeting today, and I wish
every success to the work of the Council.

We shall now begin our debate.
I call on the Secretary-General.


