Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Qazi, and Ambassador Bolton of the United States
for their briefings. We have carefully read the report
submitted by Secretary-General Annan (S/2006/706),
which contains comprehensive information and
profound analysis. We endorse his observations.

Over the past three years, the Iraqi people have
achieved important results in the process of political
transition. Within three years, they have held two
national elections, formulated a permanent
constitution, carried out a constitutional referendum
and established a democratically elected Government.
That series of achievements has fully demonstrated the
Iraqi people's strong aspirations and firm commitment
to peace, democracy and prosperity. We hope that the
hard-working and courageous Iraqi people can, through
their tireless efforts, overcome all of the obstacles in
their path and achieve peace and stability at an early
date.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
Iraq is currently at a critical crossroads and is still
faced with formidable political, security and economic
challenges. In the political field, the new Iraqi
Government should do all it can to continue to enhance
the inclusiveness of the political process, promote
national reconciliation and appropriately settle
outstanding problems concerning the constitution.

We welcome the National Reconciliation Plan
promulgated by Prime Minister al-Maliki and hope that
Iraq's various sectarian factions and ethnic groups will
unite and cooperate with the Government in effectively
implementing the Plan, and that they will settle their
differences and deepen their common understanding
through dialogue. In that respect, we support the
initiative of the League of Arab States to convene a
conference on Iraqi national accord.

In the area of security, the Iraqi Government and
the Multinational Force must try hard to eradicate the
root causes of instability. Security and stability
represent the biggest challenges now facing the Iraqi
Government. They are also fundamental for the future
political, economic and social development of Iraq.

Military means alone cannot deal with the root causes
of the problem. They rather tend to exacerbate the
vicious cycle of violence and produce more terror and
instability. We note that the Iraqi Government and the
Multinational Force have taken some measures to
improve the security situation. We hope that the new
Government of Iraq will gradually take more
responsibility for maintaining security within the
country, creating an environment that is favourable to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
militias and improving law and order so as to win the
support of the people. In the economic area, the Iraqi
Government must try hard to achieve early results in
economic reconstruction and to effectively improve the
living standards of the Iraqi people.

We welcome the International Compact with Iraq
jointly launched by Iraq and the United Nations. We
hope that the process will enable Iraq and the
international community to establish a new kind of
cooperative partnership. The International Compact
should be broadly inclusive and should ensure that all
parties participate in the economic reconstruction of
Iraq in an equal and fair manner in order to jointly help
Iraq resolve its practical difficulties in a constructive
spirit.

There can be no political and economic
reconstruction of Iraq without the support and
assistance of the international community. We
appreciate the important role played by the United
Nations in Iraq and we welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative of convening a ministerial meeting
on the question of Iraq. We hope that that meeting will
help consolidate the common understanding of the
international community and speed up the political and
economic reconstruction of Iraq in a joint effort to help
Iraq build a better future.

