Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor in order to
speak on behalf of the group of like-minded States on
targeted sanctions, namely, Austria, Belgium, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein,
the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.
As is well known, our group aims to support efforts
by the Security Council to enhance the fairness and
transparency of its various sanctions regimes, thereby
contributing to their credibility and effectiveness.

We commend the concrete actions taken by the
Security Council so far to address serious due-process
concerns regarding the Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
In particular, the Council has done the right thing
by establishing and subsequently strengthening the
Ombudsperson process. We would like to reiterate
our full support for the work of the Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost. She continues to fulfil her mandate
with remarkable integrity and commitment and has
made a substantial contribution to the fairness and
effectiveness of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. The
fact that the Sanctions Committee has so far resolved
27 cases on the basis of her recommendations, and that
16 new cases are pending, speaks volumes about the
quality of her work. The Ombudsperson process and
the improved listing and de-listing procedures have
significantly contributed to the accuracy and fairness
of the Al-Qaida sanctions list. That has already been
noted by relevant actors, such as the Advocate-General
of the Court of Justice of the European Union. In his
opinion on the Kadi II case, he recently considered that

"the listing and delisting procedures within the
[Al-Qaida] Sanctions Committee provide sufficient
guarantees to presume that the decisions taken
by that body are justified".

We look forward to the European Court of Justice's
final ruling in that case.

The Ombudsperson process is a success story.
Within a few years, it has gone from being a necessary
initiative to a well-established safeguard for due
process. But there is an inevitable next question: what
about other sanctions regimes? How can we explain
that fair and clear procedures are available to persons
who have been found to be associated with the terrorist
group Al-Qaida, but not to other individuals and
entities who may find themselves, rightly or wrongly,
on other sanctions lists? How can we explain a situation
where a person delisted from the Al-Qaida list appears
on another list, is subject to the sanctions of that other
regime, yet deprived of any meaningful recourse to
verify the rightful inclusion on that particular list?

We believe that the time has come for the Security
Council to consider these questions and to improve the
remedies available to individuals and entities targeted by
other sanctions regimes, addressing them on a case-by-
case basis. The urgent attention given to the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime was justified in the light of the nature
and size of its list, and in the light of numerous judicial
challenges. But such challenges are also under way with
respect to other sanctions regimes. More important, the
underlying principles should apply across the board:
every individual or entity put on a Security Council
sanctions list should have the right to be informed of
the reasons for listing, the right to be heard and the
right to an effective remedy. Security Council sanctions
regimes that grant fair and clear review procedures will
benefit from improved credibility and effectiveness.

The good news is that we do not need to re-invent
the wheel. We believe that the Ombudsperson
process should, on a case-by-case basis, be gradually
extended to other appropriate sanctions regimes, in
particular those with broad criteria for listing. We are
of course fully aware that each sanctions regime and
its underlying political situation is unique, and that
some sanctions regimes are more suitable for such an
extension than others. The renewals of the Somalia
and Eritrea sanctions regime in August 2013 and of
the Liberia sanctions regime in December 2013 could
provide useful opportunities to make such progress.
We therefore respectfully call on Council members to
consider that step.

In making that request, we would like to emphasize
that the Ombudsperson process is ultimately a
mechanism to ensure the proper implementation of
Security Council decisions. Extending the mandate
would not allow the Ombudsperson to question the way
in which the Council designs sanctions regimes, nor
to overturn the criteria for listing established by the
Council. Quite to the contrary, extending the mandate
would help ensure that listings under other sanctions
regimes are in full conformity with the respective
criteria established by the Council itself, while
addressing due-process concerns that may hamper
implementation by States Members of the United
Nations.

The group of like-minded States would be glad
to provide any assistance necessary to consider such
steps, in the interest of strengthening fair and clear
procedures, and in the interest of effective sanctions
implementation. We look forward to a constructive
engagement with the Security Council in that regard.

