Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your informative briefing on the work of the Committee over the past four months. The Russian Federation fully supports Mogadishu's efforts to achieve domestic political and socioeconomic stability and to counter the main security threat in Somalia, namely, the terrorist group Al-Shabaab.We note that the arms and charcoal embargoes against Somalia continue to work. Those bans have proved to be a fairly effective tool for cutting off the channels that supply the extremist and terrorist forces. At the same time, the partial lifting of the arms embargo on the supply of weapons to the Somali security forces has had a positive impact. We support further multifaceted assistance to Mogadishu to improve the operational readiness of the Somali army and the African Union Mission in Somalia, which bear the main burden in combating terrorists. Last year, the Council imposed additional restrictions on the supply of improvised explosive device components to the country. We trust that such measures will work smoothly. However, we would like to underscore that we do not see sanctions as an end in and of themselves - only as a way of assisting Somalia's authorities to achieve peace and stability in their country. With regard to relationships between the Committee and its Panel of Experts and the Federal Government of Somalia, we would very much like such contacts once again to take on a normal tone. For this to happen, there is a need to clearly understand that all the concerns of Somalia's sovereign authorities must be given full consideration. The reality on the ground is such that, if we do not do so, Somali stakeholders and external forces are unlikely to deem it necessary to defer to the authority of the central authorities. In that case, all our efforts to provide political, economic and humanitarian assistance will be in vain. The Federal Government in Somalia must not have the impression that the Security Council is biased in its work. In that regard, we welcome your January visit to Somalia, Mr. President, as well as the initial contacts with the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts in Mogadishu. We trust that, with the assistance of the renewed composition of the Panel of Experts, we will be able together to turn the page and to build constructive relationships with our Somali partners.
