Mr. Sharma (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of the important
resolution 2310 (2016). This year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
Today's resolution is both well-timed and an important
contribution to the goals of the Treaty. Today's call for
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty is a tangible step towards a safer and more

stable world.

The United Kingdom was one ofthe first signatories
to the CTBT in 1996 and we ratified it in 1998. We
regret that the Treaty has not yet entered into force,
but further ratifications would demonstrate the global
commitment towards ending nuclear-test explosions.
We welcome the newest ratifications, by Burma and
Swaziland. They joined the 166 States in total to have
done so. Further ratifications would also send a clear
message to the global community that nuclear explosive
testing will not be tolerated.

The entry into force of the Treaty has clear advantages
for all of us. Such benefits include a fully operational
International Monitoring System and an International
Data Centre, as well as the on-site inspection element of
the Treaty. Combined, that would ensure that any State
tempted to conduct a nuclear explosive test would know
that it could not do so without facing detection. It is
worth remembering that, when the Treaty was written,
no one knew if the International Monitoring System
would actually be possible. Today, we know that it is.
All State signatories have equal access to the regular
data it provides, and such monitoring can only improve
as the system continues to grow. It is now 89 per cent
complete. The success of the system depends on the
dedication and collaboration of many countries that
have established stations.

Given the importance of those objectives and
their contribution to effective nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation measures, it is regrettable that
some chose not to vote in favour today. We believe
that it was a well-intentioned and balanced Security
Council resolution and we thank the United States for
introducing it for adoption.

We have come a long way towards ending nuclear
explosive testing. Only one State, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, continues to undertake such
activity. We condemn the recent nuclear test conducted
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which
as well as going against the spirit and purpose of the
Treaty is a direct violation of binding Security Council
resolutions. As the Council agreed only a fortnight ago,
there is now a need to work immediately on further
significant measures in response to provocations
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
The United Kingdom will be consulting with our
international partners to help deliver a robust response,
making clear to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea that it must engage constructively with the
international community.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom calls upon
all those States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Treaty, so as to bring it into force and so end explosive
nuclear testing forever.

