The President (interpretation from Chinese): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of May, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Juan
Somavia, Permanent Representative of Chile to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of April 1996. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Somavia for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia

The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Liberia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ball (Liberia)
took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses once again its
grave concern at the deteriorating situation in
Liberia. The Council strongly deplores the wanton
killing and atrocities committed against innocent
civilians by the forces of the warring factions. The
escalating violence among the factions in violation
of the Abuja Agreement puts the peace process at
grave risk.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties
immediately to cease fighting, to observe the cease-
fire and to return Monrovia to a safe haven under
the protection of the Military Observer Group of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOMOG). It expresses its support for the efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), including the role of ECOMOG, the
bring this conflict to an end.

"The Security Council regrets that the
deterioration of the situation in Liberia has forced
the evacuation of significant numbers of personnel
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia.
The Council reminds all States of their obligation to
comply with the embargo on all deliveries of
weapons and military equipment to Liberia imposed
by resolution 788 (1992).

"The Security Council stresses the importance
it attaches to the ECOWAS Summit meeting to be
held in Accra on 8 May 1996 and urges the leaders
of the Liberian factions to reaffirm by concrete
positive actions their commitment to the Abuja
Agreement."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

