Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I too should like to thank the briefers for their
participation in today's meeting.

Combating terrorism in today's world must be an
absolute priority in the work of the Security Council.
Today, the international community is encountering
increasingly sophisticated forms of terrorist activity
and support. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Jabhat al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and their allies
are adapting themselves to the changing situation,
introducing new forms of financing and expertly
using modern information technologies to develop
their material base and attract recruits. The Security
Council should do everything it can to counter those
new threats.
Guided by those principles, our delegation has put
forward a whole range of initiatives in the Security
Council. In implementing many of those initiatives,
we have relied upon the counter-terrorism structures
of the United Nations and Member States, including,
in particular, a number of measures to combat the
financial resourcing of terrorism, which are set forth
in resolution 2199 (2015). Further, important steps
for combating ISIS and its financing were envisioned
in resolution 2253 (2015), which was put forward by
Russia and the United States.

A number of terrorist threats today remain without
an appropriate response. The coordination of the
efforts of the members of the international community
in that area would contribute to setting up the broad
international anti-terrorism coalition that has been
proposed by the Russian Federation. We have introduced
a draft resolution in the Security Council on combating
terrorist ideology with a focus on the spreading of that
ideology through the Internet. Those approaches have
the support of many members of the Security Council.
Our delegation has also always supported proposals
aimed at finding the most effective measures to combat
the modern challenge of terrorism.

At the same time, we believe that in preparing
new decisions of the Security Council, especially in
as important an area as combating terrorism, the focus
should be on truly important topics, with attention to
added value and the achievement of concrete results. It
is not worthwhile to start negotiations that seek merely
to outline obvious points or reproduce statements
that have already been submitted many times in other
international or national documents. Of course, there is
no harm in that approach, but no real results have ever
come from such efforts.

We call once again on members of the Council to
work resolutely and in a coordinated manner in order to
develop effective and joint responses to the pernicious
challenges of terrorism that come, first and foremost,
from ISIL, Jabhat al-Nusra and Al-Qaida, and the
groups connected with them. The acuteness of those
threats has not diminished.

