Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the Kingdom of
Sweden on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and thank it for convening
today's important open debate on the situation in the
Middle East.

Iraq fully appreciates the Council's united position
in response to racist Israeli settlement-building
policies. That position was reflected by the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), in which the international
community condemned Israeli settlement-building and
lent considerable support to the two-State solution, in
line with 1967 borders. My delegation sincerely thanks
the delegations of New Zealand, Malaysia, Venezuela
and Senegal for pleading in favour of justice and
international law by submitting the text on which the
Council voted on 23 December 2016.

We also thank the United States for abstaining and
not using its right to veto, illustrating the country's
commitment to basic principles and its faith in the two-
State solution, and for acknowledging that, in the eyes
of the international community, the policy of illegal
settlement construction hinders and undermines the
international community's efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the Palestinian cause.

The Palestinian people have the right to enjoy
special international protection, in addition to the
protection to which they are entitled, under the
provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The Security Council
should ensure that Israeli occupation forces do not
violate those international rules and monitor the
horrendous abuses perpetrated against civilians, end
unprecedented violations committed against holy sites
in Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa Mosque and protect
the Palestinian people. It should also ensure the full
withdrawal from occupied territory based on 1967
borders, in accordance with resolution 242 (1967) and
resolution 338 (1973).

We condemn all acts of Israeli settlement-building
as illegitimate and illegal. They are a major obstacle to
the two-State solution and undermine peace efforts in
the region. The Arab party, however, demonstrates a
sincere willingness to end this protracted conflict and
achieve just peace, which would have a positive impact
on the management of natural resources, judicious and

lasting economic governance and on the promotion of
security in the Middle East.

We commend the efforts of some States members of
the Council that seek to launch global peace efforts, in
particular the recent efforts of France that culminated
with the holding of the Paris Middle East Peace
Conference. The outcome of that Conference reaffirmed
the right of Palestinians to a sovereign State and the end
of Israeli occupation that began in 1967, as well as the
settlement of the issue, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We reassert that the Palestinian
people have the right integrate into the international
economy and to have full control over their territory,
natural resources and revenue, which would allow them
to have lasting and predictable income and improve
their overall financial situation.

United Nations reports unequivocally confirm the
adverse impact of the Israeli occupation, which can be
seen in the rise in Palestinian production costs and the
isolation of the Palestinian people who are now excluded
from global value chains. In addition, the inhumane
blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip, the restrictions
on the freedom of movement - a prerequisite for
economic recovery - and the illegal confiscation
of Palestinian land are all factors that exacerbate
the plight of the Palestinian people, undermine the
domestic economy and fuels people's anger and loss of
trust in the international community, which still has not
managed to secure a two-State solution.

We support our brothers in occupied Palestine
territory and in the occupied Syrian Golan in their
legitimate struggle, in accordance with international
law, to establish an independent, viable Palestinian
State that is geographically connected, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, based on 1967 borders. We
call upon the international parties engaged in the peace
talks to speed up efforts and overcome the difficulties
that hinder efforts to achieve a two-State solution.

