Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by welcoming to the Council His
Excellency Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of
Djibouti. His presence here demonstrates his country's
willingness to find a negotiated solution to the
situation in which Eritrea is placing it. We also
welcome the presence of our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea, and of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Djibouti.

Costa Rica deeply regrets that, despite the
sacrifices that continue to be faced by the peoples of
the Horn of Africa, they are seeing their lives
threatened once again by the scourge of another war
that could, as President Guelleh quite rightly stated,
divert resources essential for their development and
well-being. My delegation is concerned at Eritrea's
lack of willingness to establish a dialogue with

Djibouti in order to find a peaceful solution to their
differences, despite the many calls made by the
international community, including the African Union,
the Arab League and the Council itself. On the other
hand, we recognize the actions carried out by Djibouti.
We believe that the position taken by Eritrea in its
dispute with Djibouti reflects serious disregard of its
obligations and a disturbing lack of respect for
international law that threatens international peace and
security.

Costa Rica is convinced that compliance with the
provisions of the Council is not an obligation only for
countries that believe them to be in keeping with their
national interests and intentions. The Charter of the
United Nations deserves respect and attention, and the
international community deserves the peace of mind of
knowing that the countries that participate responsibly
in the Organization are seriously trying to build a
better world.

That is why we believe that we must now appeal
once again to Eritrea and to Djibouti to commit
themselves, in addressing their differences, to
resolving them by engaging in dialogue, adhering to
international law and fully using the peaceful
mechanisms at their disposal. The Council should play
an important role in facilitating such a course of action.
It is only by implementing mechanisms for peaceful
dispute settlement involving both diplomatic and legal
considerations and participation by regional
organizations that we will be able to ensure a lasting
solution to the conflict.

Finally, we would like to stress that it is
important that both parties explore the possibility of
resolving their border dispute through new agreements
resulting from arbitration and mediation and from
recourse to higher legal bodies if necessary.

