It has been great to see Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie Williams this past week and even better to be able to converse with her. I thank her for her time and for the updates that she provided the Security Council today, and we wish her and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) team the best of luck on the ground in the country. To begin, I want to be clear about the following points today. All actors involved in the conflict in Libya must immediately suspend military operations. They must halt the ongoing transfer of foreign military equipment and personnel to Libya, including, as the representative of the United Kingdom mentioned, Wagner Group mercenaries. They must allow local health authorities to respond to the alarming health challenges posed by the coronavirus disease. Additionally, the Security Council must help Libya quickly find a political path to stability, facilitated by UNSMIL. The United States opposes the now more-than-year-long military offensive against Tripoli by the Libyan National Army (LNA), and we strongly reject any unilateral moves to change Libya's governing structures. There is only one legitimate path for Libyan leaders, and that is full buy-in to the United Nations-facilitated three-track process, which encompasses political, security and economic reforms. Any attempt to short-circuit this route would not only disregard existing Security Council resolutions, but it would also short-change the Libyan people. Libya's future governance must be determined through a representative political process and, ultimately, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned elections. The United States endorses the obligation on all Member States to comply with the United Nations-Libya arms embargo, as well as the ban on illicit oil exports and petroleum products. We are supportive of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which is aimed at enforcing the arms embargo in accordance with resolution 2292 (2016), including through the use of aerial, satellite and maritime assets. We urge Member States to share information with the Panel of Experts operating under the auspices of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) related to potential arms embargo violations. Finally, let me reiterate our strong support for the United Nations-facilitated dialogue to achieve a comprehensive political settlement for Libya. We urge both the Government of National Accord and the LNA representatives to return to ceasefire talks as agreed upon in Geneva earlier this year. Acting Special Representative Williams and UNSMIL have our full support in carrying this urgent work forward.
