Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let me
start by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her update on the situation in and around the Sea
of Azov.

At the outset, I would like to support the procedural
point that was put forward by the United Kingdom
and Poland. In line with General Assembly resolution
68/262, adopted by an overwhelming majority on
27 March 2014, let me reiterate our full support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.

Less than a month ago (see S/PV.8386), we sat in
the Chamber to discuss the situation in Ukraine. It is
clear that the volatile security situation in that part of
the world needs to be addressed urgently. I will focus
on three issues today: first, the events of Sunday
25 November; secondly, the context in which those
events are taking place; and, thirdly, steps towards
de-escalation.

With regard to my first point, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is deeply concerned about yesterday's
developments in the Black Sea region. The blocking
of the Kerch Strait by the Russian Federation, denying
access to Ukrainian ports, constitutes a violation of
international law. That is not acceptable. As we stated
in the Council meeting of 30 October, the security
situation in that area has direct consequences for the
broader Black Sea region.

That brings me to my second point. Let us focus
on the root cause of the situation we are discussing
today - the illegal annexation of the Crimean
peninsula by the Russian Federation. That remains a
violation of international law and Ukraine's sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The annexation constitutes an
ongoing threat to international peace and security that
merits the full attention of the Council. Since 2014, the
security situation in the region has been worsening due
to the actions that the Russian Federation has taken. It
has militarized the Crimean peninsula, illegally built
a bridge over the Kerch Strait and imposed unilateral
and unwarranted limitations on maritime shipping in
the Sea of Azov.

Thirdly, any further escalation of tensions must
be prevented. We call on the Russian Federation to
halt all restrictions on the freedom of navigation that
it has imposed both within and into the Sea of Azov,
and refrain from any further military confrontation
with Ukrainian vessels in the region. Such actions are
illegal and violate Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We furthermore reiterate the various calls
from the international community, including from the
European Union, on all parties involved to exercise
the utmost restraint in order to prevent any further
escalation of tensions. The stakes are high, and the
consequences could be grave.

As the Kingdom of the Netherlands said in its
statement on 30 October, it welcomes Ukraine's decision
to seek arbitration under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea. We urge the Russian Federation
and Ukraine to commit to that arbitration process and
seek a peaceful legal settlement to the dispute.

Let me end by reiterating that sustainable peace
and stability in the region will be possible only if and
when the Russian Federation returns to respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.

