Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): As Canada's
Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the
UnitedNations, I am both honoured and humbled to come
before the Security Council on World Humanitarian
Day and the tenth anniversary of the attacks on the
United Nations Canal Hotel headquarters in Baghdad
on 19 August 2003. That event has particular resonance
for Canadians, as two Canadian citizens perished in the
attack. We were moved this morning by the words of
Jason Pronyk, a Canadian staff member of UNICEF,
who spoke on behalf of the survivors. Those who
perished in Baghdad and who have perished United
Nations missions around the world were there working
on behalf of the protection of civilians, which stands at
the very heart of both the values and the actions of the
Organization.

(spoke in French)

Canada is pleased to participate in today's open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The Secretary General's 2012 report on the subject
(S/2012/376) highlights the many protection challenges
faced by civilians in today's conflict situations. In many
cases, civilians continue to be denied the protection
they are entitled to under international and domestic
law.

All civilians deserve protection from deliberate
violence and abuse. We must take action to defend the
rights of vulnerable religious communities that are
persecuted in situations of armed conflict for their
beliefs. In that regard, we strongly encourage United
Nations agencies to better take into account the needs of
persecuted religious communities, including members
of the Christian community, which have been targets
of persecution and forced to flee from conflicts in the
Middle East.

(spoke in English)

Women and girls around the world continue
disproportionately to be victims of sexual violence in
armed conflict situations. We must therefore persevere
in our efforts to prevent sexual violence, including
rape as a weapon of war, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion and
forced sterilization. Canada remains deeply committed
to denouncing violence against women and improving
the lives of women and girls. Through our humanitarian
assistance, we support humanitarian actors who assist in
the protection of women and girls in conflict situations.
Those efforts are complemented by other initiatives,
such as training African women security personnel,
helping women participate more fully in peace
processes and assisting victims of sexual violence by
improving access to the courts and truth commissions.
We urge the Council to ensure that provisions for
the prevention of and response to sexual violence be
included in its mandates and resolutions and to ensure
that such provisions are fully implemented.

(spoke in French)

Canada is deeply concerned by the deadly violence
occurring in Egypt. We are disquieted by recent attacks
on religious institutions in that country, in particular
the unconscionable attacks on Coptic Orthodox and
Anglican churches and on Baptist and Franciscan
institutions. Attacks on places of worship are totally
unacceptable. Canada calls on the Egyptian authorities
to protect worshippers and religious sites from any type
of violence or intimidation. We call for an end to the
violence and for the launching of meaningful political
dialogue for the good of all Egyptians. Our thoughts
go out to the families and friends of those killed in the
violence, and we wish a speedy recovery to the injured.

(spoke in English)

The brutal conflict in Syria is also a stark example
of how much work remains to be done to better protect
civilians who have routinely suffered as victims of
deliberate and targeted attacks, as have hospitals,
medical facilities and health-care workers. The result
is that people in desperate need are denied lifesaving
humanitarian assistance. The worsening situation is
taking a heavy toll on the civilian population, which
accounts for the vast majority of the more than 100,000
casualties to date. Canada calls on all parties to the
conflict in Syria to refrain from attacking civilians and
other protected persons and facilities, in accordance
with their obligations under international law. We
call on the Security Council to implement effective
economic sanctions against the Al-Assad regime and
to adopt a resolution allowing for the cross-border
delivery of humanitarian assistance.

While the crisis in Syria is perhaps the most
prominent example of current challenges to the
protection of civilians, it is far from unique. One need
only look at the situations in Afghanistan, the Sudan
and South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, inter alia, to see that threats to people's basic
human rights, physical security and lives in general
continue unabated. Such emergencies should serve as
stark reminder of the work that remains to be done.

(spoke in French)

In too many instances, humanitarian access is
politicized and deliberately obstructed. Civilians are in
need of assistance and are held hostage to the whims
of Governments and non-State armed groups trying to
achieve their own political goals. Those who commit
violence and deadly attacks against civilians, including
aid workers, must be held to account. The protection
of civilians is one of the most important functions of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Success or
failure in the protection of civilians is perhaps the most
visible and tangible indicator ofa mission's success and
of the effectiveness of multilateral action. Therefore,
it is essential that the Council undertake all efforts,
through close coordination with the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries, to provide United Nations
missions with well-defined and achievable mandates
for the protection of civilians, as well as adequate
resources for carrying out such tasks.

(spoke in English)

We underline that the Council must exercise the
full range of options at its disposal to prevent and halt
the perpetration of violence against civilians in armed
conflict. We must all step up our efforts to protect
the world's most vulnerable people and ensure that
those responsible for violations are brought to justice.
I can assure you, Madam President, that Canada will
not remain silent when it comes to identifying and
condemning those who commit deliberate and barbaric
attacks on civilian populations.

