Mr. Gonzalez Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to convey my
deepest condolences and express the full solidarity
of the Government and the people of the Republic of
Paraguay to our sister nations of Iraq, Lebanon and
France following the barbaric attacks that struck those
three nations during the past week, in which hundreds
of their citizens lost their lives. Those attacks have once
again tested the will and strength of the international
community before the implacable scourge of terrorism.

On behalf of my delegation, I would like to extend
congratulations to the United Kingdom on its presidency
of the Security Council, which has facilitated this open
debate on security, development and the root causes
of conflict - an issue of vital importance to many
societies in the current international circumstances.

The fact that the Security Council has decided
to convene an open debate on this issue not only
reaffirms the crucial importance of the principles set
out in the recently adopted Sustainable Development
Goals, wherein Heads of State and Government again
reaffirmed that sustainable development cannot be
realized without peace and security and, furthermore,
that peace and security is in serious jeopardy without
the essential preconditions of development.

There can be no gainsaying the growing role that
the Council must play in terms of conflict prevention,
through increasingly effective, efficient, decisive and
active efforts, free of the operational constrains that
could imply a political link, or vice versa, with some
root causes of conflict being linked to certain States, or
the marginalization of others.

I believe that many will agree that the root causes
of conflict hamper and sometimes outright prevent
the establishment of the conditions necessary for
development. Building and strengthening development
clearly requires peaceful and sustainable conditions
over a relatively long period of time, during which
a broad base of inclusion and social justice should
develop, including equal access to public services.
Moreover, the fostering of an environment conducive
to development requires the gradual strengthening of
social and political institutions to ensure that the most
vulnerable groups, particularly women and children,
have access to the benefits of development.

We must not forget that the Council, per se, lacks
functions and mandates regarding development. In the
light of that, the Council must renew and strengthen
its partnerships with the General Assembly and its
subsidiary bodies with a view to coordinating policies
and efforts so that the Council's conflict prevention
may have direct and indirect effects, based on its
international peace and security functions. The gradual
implementation of the development commitments is
especially timely now, given the recent adoption here
at Headquarters of the post-2015 development agenda.

It is ourresponsibility, togetherwith the international
community as a whole, to harmonize efforts towards
the gradual strengthening of the progress achieved
in development - just as we did 15 years ago with
the Millennium Development Goals - and thereby
significantly reduce the factors that influence the root
causes of conflict.

