Mr. Jayakumar (Singapore): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to Afghanistan, Ambassador Brahimi,
for their valuable briefings. I also wish to commend the
presidency of Jamaica for convening this important
open debate of the Security Council on Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is a global concern. Given the
spillover effects of the conflict in Afghanistan to
Central Asia, as well as the special role of regional
players in bringing peace to Afghanistan, the views of
members of the "six plus two" group and other key
players would be of particular interest. We hope that
this open debate, with the presence of so many Foreign
Ministers, will contribute to the development of a
global consensus on a coherent and comprehensive
long-term strategy to bring peace to Afghanistan.
Singapore has consistently called for such a
comprehensive strategy since we joined the Council in
January this year.

The United Nations involvement in Afghanistan
is not new. United Nations humanitarian agencies have
been helping Afghanistan for decades. It is a pity that
there has been little global awareness of the good work
the Organization has been doing. Hopefully, this
meeting will contribute to greater awareness of the
pivotal role of the United Nations.

Afghanistan has endured more than 20 years of
devastating conflict. Today the Afghan people are
experiencing another tragedy as a result of Al Qaeda's
decision to seek refuge in their country. The current
military operation in Afghanistan is clearly not directed
against the Afghan people, but against the perpetrators
of the most horrible acts of international terrorism and
those who support them. We welcome the assurances
that civilian casualties will be minimized to help
sustain the global coalition against terrorism.

Singapore agrees that a political solution to
Afghanistan cannot be imposed. We welcome the
efforts undertaken by prominent Afghan leaders and
hope that the Afghan people will put aside their past
differences and work together to build a broad-based,
multi-ethnic, fully representative Government. We
fully support the role of neutral third-party facilitators
like the United Nations in catalyzing the process. We
wish Special Representative Ambassador Brahimi
every success and, indeed, the Afghan people are
counting on him.

Several international reports have documented the
catastrophic humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. The
infant, child and maternal mortality rates in
Afghanistan are among the highest in the world.
Massive humanitarian assistance is needed urgently,
especially before the onset of winter. Singapore is
doing its part to contribute to the humanitarian efforts
in Afghanistan. Our national contribution totals $1.16
million.

It is not surprising that a humanitarian crisis of
such magnitude has generated refugees who have even
tried to reach Australia and Europe. However, the bulk
of the burden has been borne by Afghanistan's
neighbours, especially Pakistan and Iran. Those
countries host one of the largest refugee populations in
the world. They, too, need urgent assistance. More "in
situ" solutions should be found, particularly within
Afghanistan, wherever possible.

Providing humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan, while badly needed, can also be compared
to applying a "band-aid" to a patient suffering many
wounds. Apart from first aid, the patient also needs a
blood transfusion, antibiotics and long-term medical
care. A generation of Afghan people has been
displaced and abandoned, in an impoverished
environment awash in weapons and criminal
enterprises. Without a long-term rehabilitation and
reconstruction programme, any peace process and
transitional government will remain fragile and
reversible.

Therefore, immediate work should start on
developing plans for the comprehensive rehabilitation
of Afghanistan, supported by developmental agencies
like the United Nations Development Programme, the
World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and other
donor communities. We have to convince the Afghan
people that the international community is ready to
help them. If we can win their hearts and minds, we
will advance the logic of peace and change the political
calculus from conflict and strife to that of a stable and
responsible member of the international community.

The challenges facing the international
community in Afghanistan and its region are daunting.
We must show our determination to meet those
challenges. The Security Council should draw from the
important input arising from today's open debate and
start formulating key principles which will guide the
work of the United Nations in drafting a resolution.
After reading this morning's newspapers, it is clear that
the Security Council must work even faster to
formulate these principles. In the past few hours, news
reports indicate that the Taliban forces have withdrawn
from Kabul, and Northern Alliance forces are entering
the city. If we want to avoid a repetition of the civil
wars and the loss of innocent lives that seem to have
accompanied each change of regime, we need to find
the right political formula to avoid disasters, and as
soon as possible.

As Mr. Brahimi stressed this morning, time is of
the essence. This morning, Mr. Brahimi proposed a
concrete set of steps to bring stability to Afghanistan.
We urge the Council to consider his comprehensive
proposals quickly, and we are pleased that the Council
will convene in informal consultations tomorrow to
discuss Mr. Brahimi's proposals.

At the same time, embarking on the difficult task
of rebuilding Afghanistan, we should not forget that it
is one of the world's many trouble spots deserving of
its attention and involvement. The big lesson from
Afghanistan is that the fate of a distant country, so
seemingly detached from the immediate concerns of
most parts of the world, can immediately have a global

impact. I believe this should spur the Security Council
to redouble our efforts in fulfilling our primary
responsibility of ensuring that international peace and
security is maintained. The United Nations and the
international community must stay the course in our
efforts in Afghanistan and elsewhere. It is only all too
clear that tragic consequences can result from a job not
properly completed.

