Mr. Wetland (Norway): Today, I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

Terrorism continues to threaten innocent people
around the world. Terrorism must never be tolerated
and can never be justified. Terrorism can be effectively
countered only by applying a broad range of measures.
It is essential to deny terrorists safe havens, mobility
and financing. It is also essential that we ensure that
terrorists are brought to justice. This is necessary, but
not sufficient. We need to supplement it by improving
education, fostering cultural understanding, promoting
economic and social development, and encouraging
peaceful coexistence, the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and respect for human rights regardless of
background, ethnicity, gender or religion. Our efforts
to combat terrorism will succeed only if they are in full
accordance with the principles of the rule of law and
universal human rights.

Capacity-building is of vital importance in all
those areas. Capacity-building is the responsibility of
every individual State, but the task is not easy. We
must all be prepared to assist, country to country and
through the relevant United Nations institutions. Let
me point in particular to the obligations of Member
States under resolution 1373 (2001) to assist and
promote cooperation among countries in countering
terrorism and those under resolution 1535 (2004),
which set up the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to facilitate technical assistance to Member
States.

If we are to succeed, we need well-coordinated,
strategic and sustained engagement by different parts
of the United Nations system - not only with United
Nations bodies dealing with security, but also with
those dealing with development, such as the United
Nations Development Programme. Security and
development go hand in hand.

The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force is essential, both in coordinating within the
United Nations system and in mobilizing support
among Member States for the universal implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We are
pleased that the Task Force now has its own budget
line and staff. The Task Force is currently assisting two
countries with the integrated implementation of the
Global Strategy. That project might be expanded to
include more countries. We support that effort and look
forward to continued cooperation with the Task Force.

It is important to maintain targeted sanctions as
effective, legitimate and credible tools available to the
Security Council. To that end, the Nordic countries
welcome the progress achieved in enhancing the
transparency and fairness of the listing and de-listing
procedures of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). Resolution 1904 (2009) and
previous resolutions on the issue, such as resolution
1822 (2008), have added transparency and clarity to
the procedures of the Committee by introducing a
number of important innovations.

One of those is the comprehensive review of the
names on the 1267 Committee list and the obligation to
add narrative summaries of reasons for their listing by
June 2010. Unfortunately, we now hear that this
deadline is in danger and might not be kept. By
mid-April, only 136 out of 488 entries had been
reviewed. The Nordic countries encourage all States to
cooperate with the Committee and to respond to
information requests in order to allow the Committee
to complete its review in a timely manner.
The establishment of the office of the
ombudsperson, under resolution 1904 (2009), is
another important innovation. We are pleased to see
that the institution of the ombudsperson, which was
originally suggested by one of the Nordic countries, is
now becoming a reality. Once an ombudsperson is in
office, it will mark an important milestone. Given the
importance of the mandate, the Nordic countries now
encourage the swift appointment of the ombudsperson.

Once the implementation of those measures is
completed, they will further enhance the transparency
of the procedures of the Committee and strengthen the
due process rights of listed individuals and entities.
The Nordic countries believe that the procedures for
listing and de-listing need to be kept under constant
review and that the Council needs to remain open to
further procedural improvements in the regime, such as
the establishment of an independent review panel.

How to limit the appeal of violent extremism is
today a question that many countries are trying to
address. One area that needs increased attention in that
regard is deradicalization and rehabilitation
programmes aimed at bringing groups and individuals
back into society. Several countries in various parts of
the world now have considerable experience with such
programmes. We welcome increased knowledge
sharing on what works and what does not. That will
enable us to develop more effective policies in the
future. The United Nations might be able to facilitate
the exchange of knowledge and experiences between
interested countries and to support those that need
assistance in starting up such programmes. The Nordic
countries believe that this should be discussed at the
second review conference for the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

