Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank the Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the Taliban and Al-Qaida sanctions
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for their briefings. I would also
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. We join all States in the unequivocal
condemnation of all terrorist acts, irrespective of their
motivation, and wherever and by whomever
committed.

Liechtenstein fully supports the work of the CTC
and the 1267 and 1540 Committees. They play a
crucial role in the multilateral response to terrorist
activities, and their effectiveness and efficiency is in
the interests of all Member States. We appreciate the
efforts aimed at increasing coordination among the
three committees, as well as the considerable efforts
made in recent months to improve their respective
performance. This holds particularly true for the
Taliban and Al-Qaida sanctions Committee, which
initiated a number of improvements in its listing and
delisting procedure. The work programme of the CTC,
although submitted rather late, also contains elements
which reflect progress, such as the expected
completion of Preliminary Implementation
Assessments by the end of May 2007. Such
Assessments, including relevant recommendations,
could go a long way towards enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We also
note the CTC's intention to hold periodic informal
briefings by the Chairman, and we would like to
encourage the frequent holding of such informal and
interactive briefings for all Member States.

We believe that the United Nations response to
terrorism could be more effective if it were rendered
less fragmented. An integrated approach to the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy would offer an ideal opportunity to
that end. That was one important conclusion of the
discussions on the implementation of the Strategy held
last week in Vienna at a symposium jointly organized
by the Government of Austria and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. We hope that there will be
a robust follow-up to that meeting so that we can
design an integrated approach and encourage the
Council to take the Strategy fully into account when
conducting its work on counter-terrorism.

We would like to commend the members of the
Council for their hard work on improving the listing
and delisting procedures. The establishment of a focal
point for delisting in the Secretariat is an important
step to improve access by listed individuals and entities
to the delisting procedure. While we look forward to
the evaluation of the implementation of the resolutions,
and while we are aware that the focal point process is
only in its first phase, we have continued concerns
regarding the requirement of fair and clear procedures
in the Council's use of targeted sanctions. The mandate
of the focal point mainly improves access by listed
individuals and entities to the delisting procedure, and
therefore addresses only one aspect of due process. At
the same time, the delisting procedure itself, the
decision-making process and the role of the affected
individual in that process remain, in essence,
unchanged.

We concur with the assessment given by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in a recent report to
the Human Rights Council that resolution 1730 (2006)
is a welcome first step in the right direction, but that
"the measures taken are far from being a
comprehensive solution to the problem" (A/HRC/4/88, para. 28).

We note in particular that the focal point process
does not, and cannot, address the right of listed
individuals to an effective review mechanism, which
requires a certain degree of impartiality and
independence in the decision-making itself. It is
important to note that characterizing the sanctions as
preventive rather than punitive does not bear on the
need to safeguard procedural rights. A worldwide
comprehensive asset freeze and travel ban without any
time limits strongly affects the substantive rights of
individuals, and must therefore be counterbalanced
with appropriate legal protection against error or
misuse.
A recent judgement by the European Court of
First Instance underscores that necessity and, by
extension, highlights the difficulties faced by Member

States in reconciling their obligation to implement
decisions of the Security Council while respecting
constitutional and international standards of human
rights. In the long run, the Security Council should
adopt procedural rules which provide safeguards of a
nature similar to those required from States under
international human rights law. Such procedures will
be beneficial for the accuracy and legitimacy of the
sanctions regime and, therefore, for its effectiveness.

