Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting oer. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. We share
the views and concerns he expressed. We have taken
note of Mr. Thaci's statement, and we thank Mr. Zarif
for his presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/74) on the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and his assessment of the situation in the region.

As a result of the internal political crisis in
Kosovo that lasted until the end of 2014 - owing to
the key parties' inability to form new power structures
independently and without outside involvement after
the elections to the Assembly of Kosovo, held ahead of
schedule on 8 June - the settlement of many pressing
issues, both in the region and in the relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, has come to a standstill.
The situation has once again shown that the facade
of Kosovo's political institutions conceals serious
problems.

The formation ofa coalition ministerial Cabinet that
includes representatives of the Serbian community has
helped to normalize the situation somewhat. However,
on 25 and 27 January the Kosovo Albanian opposition,
mainly nationalists, organized anti-Government
demonstrations in Pristina that escalated into serious
riots and clashes with police and produced dozens of
casualties. As a result, political stability has again come
under threat. Under pressure from the demonstrators,
the Kosovo authorities forced the Minister for
Communities and Returns, Aleksandar Jablanovie,
an ethnic Serb, to resign. In that regard, we support
Serbia's to reach a political solution to the Kosovo
problem. In the current circumstances, establishing a
mutually respectful dialogue between the parties is one
task that cannot be put off. We want to emphasize that
unilateral action is unacceptable, and the fomenting of
anti-Serb sentiment in Kosovo must end immediately.

We are on the Serbian side regarding the issue ofthe
importance of creating a specialist court to prosecute
the egregious crimes committed by the Kosovo
Liberation Army during the years of armed conflict.
The interim results released by the investigation speak
unambiguously to the adequacy of the evidence that has
been collected in support of the allegations of multiple
murders, kidnappings, rape, unlawful detention,
inhumane treatment, trafficking in human organs and
desecration of churches. It was such actions that led to
the mass exodus of Serbs from southern and central
Kosovo, where ethnic cleansing did indeed take place.
We call on the Secretary-General to closely monitor
the situation concerning the creation of the specialist
court and to facilitate completion of the process as soon
as possible. It is strange that the establishment of such
a body should depend on the enactment of legislative
decisions in Pristina, particularly considering the
evident weakness of Kosovo's political institutions.
Nonetheless, we hope that real progress will be made
in that direction in the near future, and that in the end
the guilty parties will be punished regardless of the
position they occupy. It is vital that all witnesses be
duly protected during the course of the trials.

A number of years have passed during which
Kosovo has still not seen progress in the areas ofjustice
and the fight against corruption and organized crime,
including drug trafficking and trafficking in human
beings, as well as freedom of speech and limiting
political influence on the judicial system. Recent reports
of the European Commission and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe testify to this.
Regression in other areas, including the social and
economic fields, is clearly apparent. Unemployment is
very high, and people are leaving Kosovo en masse in
search ofa better life.

Inter-ethnic tensions remain acute, yet we see no
concrete steps being taken to bring those responsible
for anti-Serb actions to justice. The ongoing desecration
of Orthodox monasteries in the region, including
the Visoki Decani monastery, a jewel of the world's
cultural heritage, is seriously disturbing. On 6 January,
the eve of Orthodox Christmas, a bus carrying Serbian
pilgrims, refugees from the town of Gjakove/Dakovica
who were trying to visit a church there, was stoned.
Clearly, in such circumstances Serbs from Gjakove/
Dakovica cannot expect to return to their homes they
abandoned there. Indeed, as the data from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
shows, the already weak rates of refugee return are
falling, while the outflow of representatives of national
minorities is growing. The mere existence of legislation
guaranteeing their rights is therefore not enough; it
must be strictly monitored.

We note Belgrade's constructive attitude and its
continued readiness to maintain contacts with Kosovo
Albanian representatives. We believe that the planned
resumption of a high-level political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina in the next few days will enable
progress to be made on key issues on the agenda
concerning the creation of the association of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo. The fact that the agreement
on this, reached way back in April 2013, has gone
unrealized has had a negative effect on interaction
between the ethnic communities in the region.

Kosovars' participation in conflicts in the Middle
East, including in the ranks of Islamic State and other
radical organizations, should continue to be firmly
suppressed. We call on Pristina to be more active
in countering the spread of extremist ideas and the
fomenting of terrorism, using its recently passed
legislation. We assume that the issue will continue to
be a focus of attention for UNMIK.

The United Nations Mission is still the chief
international presence in Kosovo. The European Union's
mediation of the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
and the transfer of UNMIK's rule-of-law functions to
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo do
not imply a reduction of the role of the United Nations
in the region. Considering the wide range of problems
that exists, we call on the United Nations Mission to
fulfil its mandate fully, in principle and proactively. In
order to that it must clearly be in possession of all the
necessary resources and personnel. We categorically
reject any attempts to devalue UNMIK's role and call
on the Kosovo Albanian side to cooperate fully with the
United Nations presence.

Russia's position on the question of Kosovo and
Serbia's territorial integrity is unchanged. Resolution
1244 (1999) retains its full force and remains essential
to the entire international legal basis for the settlement
in Kosovo. In that regard, we do not support any
proposals that in any way modify the review cycle for
settling the Kosovo issue in the Security Council. The
prerequisites for that are not ready yet.

