Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the situation in
Timor-Leste. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for her briefing and I commend her for the work
done in Timor-Leste. I welcome Ambassador Sofia
Borges, Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste, and
thank her for her remarks.

Brazil attaches great importance to the stability
and development of Timor-Leste. We maintain strong
ties of friendship and cooperation with this fellow
Portuguese-speaking country. Bilateral cooperation
currently covers a wide range of areas, including
education, vocational training, agriculture, reform of
the justice sector, military and police training and
elections.

We welcome the substantial progress Timor-Leste
has made in the past years. The overall political and
security situation is stable and a solid basis for
socio-economic development is being laid down. It is
also true that, "[f]urther efforts are required to
overcome the political, institutional and
socio-economic weaknesses that contributed to the
events of 2006", as the Secretary-General reminds us
in his latest report (S/2010/522). Keeping that in mind,
Brazil will continue to assist the Timorese Government
and people as best we can. We call upon the
international community to also continue to provide its
support.

Four issues deserve our particular attention today:
security, elections, development and the future of
UNMIT. First, with respect to the security situation, I
cannot but commend the progress Timor-Leste has

achieved and the indispensable support provided by
UNMIT and bilateral partners. It is not a small feat
that, since we last met here in February, the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) has resumed primary
policing responsibilities in almost all districts and in
six specialized units. More importantly, the Timorese
police have been discharging their functions
appropriately and efficiently. It is not a coincidence
that there has been neither an increase in the crime rate
nor in the number of major security incidents in
districts where the PNTL has resumed primary policing
activities.

Nevertheless, we should not underestimate the
important role UNMIT must still play in providing
security in Timor-Leste. The three important districts
where the United Nations police (UNPOL) has retained
policing responsibilities are rather sensitive: two of
them are located on the border and the third one, Dili,
is not only the most populated, but also the political
heart of the country. The strategy for a successful
transition in these districts is twofold: enhanced
security and job creation, especially for the youth.
Handing over responsibilities to the PNTL must be
conducted with special prudence and rigour. We are
fully confident in UNMIT's leadership and judgment
on how and when to further transfer responsibility to
the Timorese police.

The most important political test that Timor-Leste
will face in the near future will certainly be the
national elections of 2012. We all expect the voting to
be conducted in such a way as to solidify democratic
values and strengthen Timor-Leste's institutions and
stability. UNMIT must be ready to provide the support
and assistance that the Timorese Government may
require. Brazil praises all political parties in the
country for their continued engagement in the
democratic debate, especially in Parliament, and
encourages them to continue on that path, in particular
during the electoral period.

The third issue on which I wish to comment
briefly is social and economic development. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the advances that
have taken place in Timor-Leste in this regard. We
commend the Timorese Government for having
selected basic infrastructure and energy, rural
development and human resources as the national
priorities for 2011, and we urge donors and partners to
align their assistance behind those priorities. We also
praise Timor-Leste for managing to reconcile strong
economic growth with low inflation. We welcome the
steep reduction in poverty levels and the progress made
towards meeting key Millennium Development Goals,
including the decrease in infant mortality rates. The
efforts on the part of the Timorese authorities to ensure
food security and prevent and combat diseases are also
noteworthy. However, more international assistance
will be required to assist Timor-Leste, expand food
production and improve access to health and education.

My fourth and last point regards the future of
UNMIT, to which Brazil has significantly increased its
contribution by sending several senior police officers.
In a few months, we will be discussing the Mission's
mandate, which is due to expire in February 2011. That
will be the time to assess the progress made, in
particular in the security situation. At the same time, it
will be important to consider the configuration of a
peacekeeping presence that is commensurate with the
remaining challenges, especially the forthcoming
national elections. Brazil agrees with the careful
approach taken by the Secretary-General. We should
continue to draw lessons from the events of 2006,
while recognizing and promoting progress on the
ground. This should be coupled with a continued focus
on training the PNTL, so that it can further strengthen
its capacity.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
political and socio-economic progress made by the
Timorese and the smooth resumption of policing
responsibilities by the PNTL so far show that we are
getting closer to turning UNMIT into a full success
story. We must now stay the course, with prudence and
determination. Completing the good work in a
sustainable manner should be our collective goal. We
must also renew our support to the Timorese, acting
both as an Organization and as individual States. Brazil
will continue to do its part.

