The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. There can be
no doubt of the crucial importance of the global effort
to counter terrorism. At a number of international
meetings Australia has participated in over the past
two weeks - the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Summit, the East Asia Summit and the Group of 20
meeting - all participants expressed grave concern
about the threat posed by terrorism and by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, or Daesh, in particular.
Today's meeting provides the international community
an important opportunity to emphasize its determination
to act against this threat.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Malaysia, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Pakistan, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine and Yemen to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

The number of representatives wishing to
contribute to this debate is a statement in and of itself
on the importance of the matter under discussion.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/787, which contains the text of
a letter dated 4 November 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

