Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on recent developments in the situation in Haiti
and on the implementation of resolution 2410 (2018), in
the context of the Council's discussions on the recently
issued report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/198).

I am pleased to be accompanied today by His
Excellency Mr. Bocchit Edmond, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Ms. Loune
Viaud, who is beside me.

(spoke in English)

Since the briefing by Special Representative La
Lime in February and the publication of the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) on 1 March,
developments in Haiti continue to combine progress in
some areas and volatility or stagnation in others. While
efforts to improve the security situation yield mitigated
results, political uncertainty has continued with the fall
of the Government.

No violent demonstrations have taken place since
the 10 days of unrest in February, which regrettably
led to 41 deaths and 100 injuries, according to the
most recent estimates, and limitations to the enjoyment
of human rights. The repeated mobilization calls
by opposition and activist groups to the population,
demanding the resignation ofthe President, gained little
traction. Nevertheless, rival gang clashes, potentially
mirroring conflicting interests linked to criminality,
continued to disrupt life in the southern neighbourhoods
of Port-au-Prince and to produce isolated incidents in
the North and Artibonite regions. In that context, we
strongly condemn the attack on 27 March by heavily
armed individuals against the Chilean Ambassador's
convoy, which was visiting a project of a Chilean
non-governmental organization in Croix de Bouquets,
leaving one person dead and three individuals injured.

The Haitian National Police (HNP) continued to
demonstrate its capacity to handle security threats
in the country, including through the planning and
execution of anti-gang operations, with limited support
from MINUJUSTH. Furthermore, the reactivation
by President Moise of the National Commission for
Disarmament, Dismantlement and Reintegration on
12 March is an important step towards the assumption
of national ownership in violence reduction efforts.
Through its community violence reduction expertise,
MINUJUSTH is identifying areas of support for the
implementation of the Commission's mandate.

On the political front, on 18 March, in a tumultuous
sequence of events, Prime Minister Ceant's Government
was subjected to a motion of no confidence by
Parliament's Lower Chamber of Deputies, with 93 votes
in favour, 6 against and 3 abstentions, after an earlier
interpellation session at the Senate failed to reach a
quorum. President Moise has initiated consultations
for the selection of his third Government since he took
office in February 2017 and has appointed Minister of
Culture Jean Michel Lapin as an interim Prime Minister
of the caretaker Government.

On the socioeconomic front, an agreement reached
on 8 March among the International Monetary Fund,
the Haitian Government and the Central Bank of Haiti
has initially created a sense of optimism able to boost
the fledging economy, which is characterized by high
inflation, at 17 per cent, and a depreciating national
currency. The concessional zero per-cent, three-year
loan of $229 million was designed to provide support
to the most vulnerable sectors of the population, while
promoting governance reform and anti-corruption
measures. However, it is no longer going forward,
pending the appointment of a new Cabinet. The same
is true for the submission of the draft 2018-19 State
budget to Parliament and an electoral law for the
October elections.

The establishment by President Moise on
25 February of a facilitation committee for an
intra-Haitian dialogue has the potential to revitalize the
national cohesion process. The five-member committee,
including four women, has started consultations with
a broad range of stakeholders and is developing the
dialogue methodology. Its report on the way forward is
to be submitted by the end ofits 90-day mandate. While
MINUJUSTH supports the work of the committee,
including with expertise advising on technical and
procedural aspects, the process of national dialogue
is a complex one, especially in a context of lingering
mistrust and polarization. In that respect, stronger
efforts are required from all key actors to ensure the
success of the committee's work and the crafting of a
national vision able to bring about the economic reform
essential to a healthy economy and to attracting direct
investment, as well as measures for social protection,
improving the rule of law, the fight against corruption,
and, more urgently, the organization of the October
elections in a timely manner and in accordance with
international standards.

(spoke in French)

The end of peacekeeping in Haiti is within reach.
In that context, in order to create the conditions for a
successful transition, MINUJUSTH will continue to
implement its mandate to continue and anchor progress
in the implementation of the benchmarks. While
developments in the situation in Haiti since last July
have underlined the country's political fluidity and
economic fragility, we cannot lose sight of the progress
made over the years and, more recently, in strengthening
the country's institutions, with the Haitian National
Police at the forefront. Looking at the matrix in annex
I of the report before the Council, members can see
that the Haitian National Police's five-year strategic
development plan for 2017-2021 is on track. The ratio
of police officers per 1,000 inhabitants is 1.32, close to
the target of 1.45, and the percentage of HNP personnel
present in the regions has exceeded 35 per cent.

We support the Haitian leaders' wish to end
peacekeeping in Haiti and the mandate of MINUJUSTH
in October of this year, as well as their desire for
the Haitian authorities to take full responsibility for
the country's security and the responsibility that it
entails. We are confident of the Haitian National
Police's ability to manage risks to the security without
international operational support. For its part, the
United Nations will continue to provide strategic
advice to the HNP on its institutional development and
on strengthening its logistical capacities, including
through bilateral assistance.

At the same time, the Secretary-General's
recommendation to continue to support Haiti with good
offices, human rights and advisory capacities is based
on our assessment of the most pressing United Nations
assistance needs. We believe that the recommended
small strategic advisory office, whose functions are
described in the Secretary-General's report, is the ideal
configuration to address such needs in Haiti at this
time. Recent developments have only served to affirm
that assessment. They have also again highlighted the
importance of making parallel progress towards the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
through the activities of the United Nations country
team in order to address the socioeconomic causes of
instability in Haiti.

If the Secretary-General's recommendations
are adopted, MINUJUSTH's work over the next six
months will be devoted to supporting the priorities
of the Haitian leadership and people, as I mentioned
earlier, as well as any other urgent priorities that meet
the benchmarks. At the same time, we would therefore
phase out some activities, withdraw the operational
presence of the United Nations police and prepare for
a smooth transition to a post-peacekeeping presence. It
will be a period of intense work, in which the sustained
attention and political support of the Council to the
Haitian people, the Mission and the preparations for
the transition will help to maximize the impact of our
collective efforts and ensure their continued success.

I would like to call on the members of the Council,
as well as the countries of the region, to increase their
engagement with Haiti during this critical period.
Options for such engagement include bilateral support
to the country's development priorities, as outlined in
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for 2017-2021, in particular to strengthen national
capacities for stability and the rule of law. Support
similar to the humanitarian priorities reflected in the
2019 humanitarian response plan, in particular food
security, disaster management and the interruption of
cholera transmission, which now seems achievable, will
strengthen the resilience and preparedness of the Haitian
people, thereby achieving continued progress towards
the Sustainable Development Goals. In that context, I
welcome the recent request of the Government of Haiti
to the Secretary-General to access the Peacebuilding
Fund. Discussions are ongoing on targeting sectors that
can be catalysts for further strengthening stability in
the country.

The United Nations partnership with Haiti is
expected to develop in the near future, in line with
our discussions with Haitian leaders and other key
stakeholders. However, that partnership will remain
strong and rooted in our ongoing commitment to
democratic progress, security and prosperity for the
Haitian people.
