Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and for
his comprehensive report to the Council (S/2015/300, annex). Since this is Malaysia's first Security Council
meeting with High Representative Inzko, I wish to
express Malaysia's strong support for his work and
commitment to carrying out the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Accords.

Malaysia welcomes the formation of the
Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 2015,
following the seventh general elections in October last
year. The new Government's expressed commitment to
prioritizing a reform agenda, especially in the economic
sector, is a step in the right direction. We urge the
country's leaders and political parties to close ranks
and focus on accelerating efforts based on collective
responsibility towards reforming the country's
economy. The lack of progress in socioeconomic
reforms of recent years, as highlighted in previous
reports of the High Representative, must not be allowed
to fester. Unemployment, particularly among young
people, and the increasing flow of brain-drain in the
country must be addressed as a matter of urgency. We
saw how damaging that can be early last year, when
the population took to the streets to engage in massive
demonstrations and riots, demanding a better future
and quality of life for themselves and their children.

Economic development can take place only when
there is political stability. In that regard, Malaysia
shares the concerns of the High Representative on the
self-serving and divisive politics of certain quarters in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is a dangerous game to be
played with the future of the country, especially in View
of its traumatic history. We therefore urge all parties to
enhance efforts towards national reconciliation with a
View to ensuring political stability in the country.

We take note that this year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords. We hope
that will present a good opportunity for all parties to
renew their commitment to the Dayton Agreement.
Efforts to undermine or revise the Dayton Peace
Accords must cease. We also take note of the priority
accorded by the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to European Union (EU) integration as a cornerstone
of its foreign policy. We welcome the progress made
by Bosnia and Herzegovina towards this aim with the
recent conclusion of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU last month. We believe that will
provide further impetus for the country to accelerate its
reform in the areas of the economy, the rule of law and
good governance towards a future of peace, stability
and prosperity within the EU, as desired by the people.

Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to the
independence, sovereignty, national unity and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have long
supported the country in its reconstruction after the war,
and will continue to do so. Our investment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the areas of real estate, construction,
energy, education and capacity-building are aimed at
strengthening the socioeconomic foundation of the
country towards growth and prosperity. In our effort
to bring the ethnic groups together towards economic
and social integration, Malaysia has sought to involve
the three main ethnicities in the country in our various
investment projects. Based on our own multiracial and
multireligious experience, we believe that is a win-win
formula for all to ensure a united, stable and prosperous
future for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In conclusion, Malaysia stands ready to play
a constructive role in the Council on the issue of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We reiterate our unwavering
commitment to contributing to the country's
nation-building, inclusive democracy, reconciliation
and economic progress.

