Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy for Yemen; and Ambassador Rhonda King, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), for their briefings and updates. A month ago, we discussed in this Chamber (see S/PV.8704) the Yemeni situation, with some encouraging signs. Unfortunately, a surge in hostilities between the parties in Sana'a, Ma'rib, Al-Jawf and other areas during the past few weeks has further complicated the situation and cast a shadow over the fragile de-escalation process. In the meantime, the implementation of the important agreements signed between the parties continues to be delayed in some ways. We share Council members' deep concern about the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Nearly 250,000 Yemeni people have died since 2015, including 100,000 as a direct result of hostilities and 130,000 from hunger and disease. An estimated 4 million people have been displaced within the country owing to the conflict. In recent weeks, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has continued to receive reports of mass-casualty incidents across the country. Viet Nam therefore urges the parties to the conflict, especially the Houthi, to fulfil their obligations under international humanitarian law and international law and to facilitate the humanitarian work of the United Nations and its relevant partners. The necessary steps must be urgently taken to protect civilians and health- care facilities. The provision of humanitarian assistance should continue to be one of our highest priorities, in parallel with efforts to launch constructive dialogues among all Yemeni parties. Access for humanitarian assistance must be provided without any obstructions. We commend the humanitarian flight operations, which, for the first time in three years, brought a group of Yemeni patients from Sana'a to Jordan for specialized medical assistance. In that connection, we would like to express our appreciation to the United Nations, the World Health Organization, Jordan, Egypt and other parties for their dedication and cooperation. We also welcome the recent agreement by the opposing parties in Yemen to implement the prisoner exchange. Given the current fragile situation, we wish to reaffirm that a peaceful political settlement is the only way to resolve the conflict in Yemen. Here I would like to recall Mr. Martin Griffiths's recent statement to the effect that peace depends on political compromise between and among the parties. We call for further efforts to be made by the parties to implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement, with the aim of returning to de-escalation and moving towardsa comprehensive and inclusive political process. In that regard, we would like to express our appreciation for the efforts of the Special Envoy, the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and the Redeployment Coordination Committee. We call on the concerned parties to ensure the safety and mandate-based activities of UNMHA's personnel. The resumption of peace talks is contingent on the political will and efforts of all parties involved in the conflict in Yemen. For its part, the Council should maintain its unity on, and firm support for, a comprehensive political solution while being committed to the sovereignty, independence and _ territorial integrity of Yemen.
