Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by extending
my sincere congratulations to the representative of
the United States of America, who is presiding over
the Security Council in December, as well as the
representatives of Japan, Egypt, Ukraine, Senegal and
Uruguay for their nations' election to the Security
Council beginning in January 2016. I wish them all the
best for a successful tour of duty.

Iwould also like to express the gratitude of the entire
Tribunal to the representatives of Chad, Chile, Jordan,
Lithuania and Nigeria for their nations" service to the
Security Council as they near the completion of their
terms, and to express also my sincere appreciation to
His Excellency Ambassador Cristian Barros Melet and
his team for Chile's effective and smooth management
of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, which has been instrumental in facilitating
the cooperation between the international tribunals and
the members of the Security Council.

Now, after 21 years of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) bringing those most
responsible for the genocide in Rwanda to justice, it
is my distinct honour and privilege to stand before the
Council today and provide the Council with an update
on the Tribunal's impending closure and to speak about
some of the milestones that the Tribunal has achieved
over the past two decades.

I am proud to report that on Monday, 14 December,
the Tribunal will deliver its forty-fifth and final
judgement on appeal in the Nyiramasuhuko et al.
("Butare") case involving six accused. The rendering
of this judgement represents, therefore, the culmination
of more than 21 years ofjudicial work by both the Trial
and Appeals Chambers and marks the completion of the
Tribunal's core judicial functions. With the completion
of this case, the ICTR will formally close its doors on
31 December 2015, and only liquidation activities will
remain to be completed during the first half of 2016.
In so doing, the ICTR will become the first ad hoc
international criminal tribunal to complete its mandate
and hand its remaining functions over to its residual
mechanism, the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

The Tribunal's final report to the Security Council
provides an overview of the work of the ICTR, work that
included 5,800 days of proceedings in which the ICTR
brought indictments against 93 individuals, issued
55 first-instance judgements and 45 appeal judgements
and heard the powerful accounts of more than 3,000
witnesses who bravely recounted some of the most
traumatic events imaginable during ICTR trials.

From the beginning of the Tribunal's establishment
by the Council, thejudges ofthe ICTR were cognizant of
the importance of their role in developing international
legal concepts and providing a model for domestic
judiciaries by codifying numerous facets of international
criminal law and international humanitarian law that,
at the time of the Tribunal's establishment, were either
undeveloped or non-existent. The seminal judgement
in the Akayesu case represented the beginning of this
very task, as the Tribunal issued the first judgement
by an international court on the crime of genocide
and became the first international court to interpret
the definition of genocide set forth in the Genocide
Convention of 1948. The judgement further provided
the first acknowledgment by an international court that
genocide against the Tutsi had occurred in Rwanda in
1994, which was subsequently treated by the Tribunal as
a fact of common knowledge that could not be disputed.

Between its first and lastjudgement, in Akayesu and
Butare, the Tribunal has issued many novel judgements
that have significantly impacted the evolution of
international law, including the first conviction for
rape and sexual violence as a form of genocide and the
first judgement against a Head of Government since
the Nuremburg and Tokyo Tribunals. Furthermore,
by strengthening the jurisprudence on sexual violence
crimes through the extended form of joint criminal
enterprise and by holding those in power accountable,
the ICTR has issued judgements that serve as powerful
deterrents to those who might commit similar crimes
in the future while also sending a clear message to the
international community that all those who commit
genocide or other atrocities, regardless of their position,
will no longer go unpunished.

Those milestones are but a few of the key
jurisprudential contributions that the Tribunal has made
to international justice. However, none would have
been possible without the efforts of all the Tribunal's
judges and staff, who have faithfully served at different
periods over the past 21 years. I would therefore like
to acknowledge and thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, and the Registrar, Mr. Bongani Majola,
and all of the Tribunal's former Presidents, Judges,
Prosecutors and Registrars, for the indispensable work
they have done to ensure that when the Tribunal closes

its doors, at the end of year, it does so with a completed
mandate in hand.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express
a special note of appreciation to the Legal Counsel,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares; the Assistant Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias; and
the staff of the Office of the Legal Counsel for all of
the support they have provided to my Office and to
the Tribunal as a whole. In addition, I would like to
underscore that the Tribunal would not have been able to
complete its mandate successfully without the assistance
of the Government of the Republic of Rwanda. In that
regard, I would like to inform the Council of a recent
delegation, which included myself as President, the
Prosecutor and the Registrar, which travelled to Rwanda
last month to thank its Government for the tremendous
support and cooperation it has provided to the Tribunal
over the years. Without the support from the Rwandan
Government, it would have been impossible to conduct
investigations and obtain evidence of the atrocities
committed during the genocide, o r bring to trial those
indicted by the Tribunal.

Further, the evolution of the Tribunal's referral
programme, which culminated in the transfer of
eight cases from the ICTR to Rwanda, represents a
significant part of the Tribunal's legacy, as it has not
only strengthened the relationship between the ICTR
and Rwanda but has led to substantive and procedural
reforms to the Rwandan judiciary, including the
abolition of the death penalty, which were all aimed
at meeting international fair trial standards. The
Tribunal's referral programme as a whole has provided
the international community with a model on how
an international criminal court can cooperate with
national authorities to rebuildjustice sectors in conflict
and post-conflict environments.

The Tribunal also owes a true debt of gratitude
to its gracious host for the past 21 years, the United
Republic of Tanzania. Since the Security Council
determined that the Tribunal would have its seat in
Arusha, Tanzania, the ICTR has enjoyed unwavering
support from the Government of Tanzania, which
has provided assistance in countless areas, including
assistance related to security, the transfer of witnesses,
the Tribunal's Detention Unit and, more generally, the
Tribunal's capacity-building and outreach programmes.
With the addition of the African Court on Human and
Peoples' Rights, the East African Court of Justice and
the Mechanism, Tanzania continues to act as a hub
for international law and a beacon for the continued
development of international justice throughout Africa.

As I have done in the past, I would now like to
briefly update the Council on the progress being made
with respect to the issue of reparations for victims
of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. As I explained
in my previous briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.7332), the International Organization
for Migration has completed and submitted a draft
assessment study to the Government of Rwanda. The
assessment study identifies options for reparations for
victims and survivors and describes in concrete and
operational terms how those options can be developed
and implemented in Rwanda, as well as how those
programmes may be funded. The final report of the
study will be issued in due course, and thereafter
transmitted to the relevant stakeholders, and follow-up
activities will be planned.

Turning to another important issue, that of
relocating the acquitted and convicted released persons
still residing in Arusha, I wish to inform the Council
that my Office and the Office of the Registrar will
continue to provide the Mechanism, which has already
assumed responsibility for that function, with all
possible support until the end of the year. I believe that
the issue remains a serious challenge to the credibility
of international criminal justice, and I shall call once
again for urgent assistance from the Security Council to
find a sustainable solution to a problem that continues
to result in acquitted and convicted released persons,
some of whom have remained in a safe house in Arusha
for over a decade, without a place to call home.

With respect to the transition to the Mechanism,
I am proud to report that the Mechanism's reliance
on the ICTR for administrative and other services
continues to be significantly reduced. The Tribunal
has to date already transferred the human resources,
travel, procurement and about 80 per cent of its
finance functions to the Mechanism. All remaining
administrative functions will be transferred by the end
of the year.

With respect to the Tribunal's archives, the ICTR
continues to ensure that records are prepared in a
manner that will facilitate their effective management
after being transferred to the Mechanism, and I am
happy to report that the Tribunal has transferred 80 per
cent of its records to Mechanism. Judicial records
relating to the Butare case have been separated for
transfer following the upcoming appeal judgement,
and the Tribunal remains hopeful that the remaining
transfer of its records will be completed upon closure.

As I speak before the Council today, less than one
month before the formal closure of the ICTR, it is hard
not to reflect on the legacy of the Tribunal and what it
will leave behind for posterity. In that regard, events
marking the closure of the Tribunal were held last
week, which included the inauguration of a new Peace
Park in Arusha in memory of the victims and survivors
of the Rwandan genocide and in honour of the work
of the ICTR, and a main closing ceremony. During
those events, representatives from Members States,
along with representatives from other international and
domestic courts, Government officials and scholars
from across the world, came together to discuss the
ICTR'S contribution to peace and reconciliation in the
Great Lakes region, not only through justice but also
through the capacity-building and outreach programmes
it created over the years.

By complementing the Tribunal's core judicial
work with other programmes, especially those
conducted in Rwanda, such as the implementation of
genocide-awareness-raising campaigns, workshops and
trainings focused on strengthening the capacity of the
Rwandan judiciary and the creation of the Umusanzu
mu Bwiyunge Information Centre, in Kigali, as well
as 10 additional provincial centres across Rwanda, the
Tribunal was able to bridge the gap between the Tribunal
and the Rwandan population and ensure that justice
was not only done but also, perhaps equally important,
was seen to be done by those directly affected by the
genocide.

In our final month of operation, the Tribunal
continues to ensure that the knowledge gained and
lessons learned throughout its existence are not only
passed on to its successor, the Mechanism, but are
also shared with other national and international
jurisdictions. Through the Prosecutor's development of
best practices and lessons-learned manuals, including
manuals on the prosecution of sexual and gender-based
violence, on the referral of international criminal cases
to national jurisdictions and on the tracking and arrest
of fugitives from international justice, and by the
Tribunal's sharing of expertise on criminal justice with
countries andjudiciaries throughout Africa and beyond,
the Tribunal has directly strengthened the capacity
of national criminal justice systems to effectively
prosecute international crimes and ensured that the
Tribunal's work will continue to help future triers of
international crimes long after the Closure of the ICTR.

As this marks my final appearance before the
Security Council as President of the ICTR, I would like
to thank once more all those who have supported the
work of the Tribunal and to express my sincere hope
that, as the ICTR closes its doors, part of its legacy will
be the tremendous potential to dispense justice held by
the Council. The success ofthe Tribunal is a success for
the Council as it highlights the possibilities for justice
to address conflicts and fight impunity and to provide
at least some comfort to the victims of heinous crimes.
The ICTR has proved that it is possible. It has been my
honour and privilege to serve in that endeavour.

