Mr. Fulci (Italy): My delegation, like others, has
already had an opportunity, during the formal meeting on
Monday dedicated to the situation in Lebanon, to express
its thoughts and profound concern over what is happening
in the Middle East. On that occasion, speaking on behalf
of the European Union, we reconfirmed our commitment
to the implementation of Security Council resolution 425
(1978). Tonight I wish to reiterate that statement. Italy is
gravely concerned by the continuing escalation in military
activity in Lebanon, an escalation which has led to the
loss of many - too many - innocent lives, and caused
hundreds of thousands of civilians to leave their homes
and wander the roads as displaced persons.

I would ask the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon, Ambassador Samir Moubarak, to convey our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims of this
morning's tragic incident at one of the bases of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), in

 

which more than 100 innocent Lebanese civilians were
killed and more than 100 wounded.

Italy calls once more on all the parties to show the
greatest restraint and above all immediately to cease any
and all military activities. Confronted by the deterioration
of the situation, Italy, as President of the European Union
for the current semester, has immediately taken the
initiative of trying to define a European Union common
platform of action.

The Political Committee of the European Union met
in Brussels on 15 and 16 April. While recognizing the
serious situation created by Hezbollah terrorist activities, as
well as Israel's right to ensure its own security, the Political
Committee expressed its most serious concern over the
level of Israel's reprisals in Lebanon and over a possible
escalation of the violence, which could have negative
consequences for the civilian population and for peace in
the region.

The Political Committee therefore gave a mandate to
the Troika at the political level, headed by Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs Incisa Di Camerana, to make contacts in
Lebanon, Syria, Egypt and Israel for the purpose of urging
the parties to reach an agreement on an immediate cessation
of hostilities and of discussing ways to help the displaced
Lebanese civilian population. The European Troika was in
Damascus today.

In its contacts in the region, the Union intends to base
its action on the following elements: first, the immediate
cessation of all hostilities; secondly, reaffirmation of
Europe's commitment to the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Lebanon, in conformity with Security
Council resolution 425 (1978) and the Taif Agreement;
thirdly, emergency humanitarian relief for the Lebanese
people affected by the fighting, especially refugees; and,
fourthly, condemnation of the acts of violence by Hezbollah
and reaffirmation of Israel's right to security.

Italy continues to hope that the recent events, despite
their gravity and the irretrievable loss of so many human
lives, will not jeopardize the peace process, which remains
of fundamental importance to all Members of the United
Nations and to the entire world.

Finally, allow me to quote a statement of Mrs.
Susanna Agnelli, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy.
In a declaration issued in Rome a few hours ago, Minister
Agnelli said:

"The news of so many dead and wounded
Lebanese refugees and of the 120 wounded in the
UNIFIL camp has been received by the European
Union with shock and profound consternation. The
European Union believes that this escalation of
senseless violence, which is taking so many innocent
lives, must be absolutely stopped and renews its
appeal to all parties concerned to cease immediately
all military activities in the area."

Mrs. Agnelli is flying to Beirut tomorrow morning
in her capacity as current President of the European
Council.

