Mr. McNee (Canada): Before I begin, Canada
wishes to join others in expressing our deepest
condolences to the United States delegation on the death
of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke who, as others have
said, worked with such great dedication and skill to bring
a better future to the peoples of Afghanistan and
Pakistan. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura,
for his very clear and penetrating report and for his
extremely dedicated and effective work in Afghanistan.

As 2010 draws to a close, it is natural to look
back and evaluate progress in Afghanistan over the
past year. To be very honest, the results have been
mixed. There has been significant progress, but also
some setbacks. One of the most worrying trends in
2010 was the increased level of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General has indicated in
his report (S/2010/630), total civilian deaths and
injuries rose by 20 per cent in the first 10 months of
the year, as compared to the same period last year. The
overwhelming majority of those deaths and injuries, of
course, were caused by insurgent forces.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan also
continues to deteriorate. In particular, we remain
concerned about the increasing number of internally
displaced persons as a result of conflict and about the
potential effect of volatile regional grain markets on the
food security of millions of Afghans. These issues -
civilian casualties caused by the insurgency, risk of
displacement and food insecurity - are clear obstacles
to a stable Afghanistan.

Central to combating the insurgency is for the
Government of Afghanistan to provide security and
basic services to its citizens. However, the
Government's credibility and effectiveness are
impeded by persistent corruption. Although the Kabul
Conference commitments to combating corruption are
a positive step forward, much is needed for their
implementation, including the establishment of a legal
committee to ensure Afghan laws comply with the
United Nations Convention against Corruption, the
drafting and adoption of an audit law, and the provision
of a statutory basis for the Major Crimes Task Force
and the Anti-Corruption Tribunal.

Furthermore, credible representation in their
Government will also help give Afghans the confidence
to support that Government. Canada is pleased with the
work of the Independent Election Commission and the

Electoral Complaints Commission in delivering the
recent parliamentary elections. We encourage all
parties to move forward in a collaborative manner that
aims to ensure a Parliament that reflects the will of the
Afghan people. So that the Wolesi Jirga can move
ahead with its important work, an early date for the
inauguration will be critical.

Despite the setbacks and challenges, 2010 was
marked by successes as well. The Kabul process was
launched to guide Afghanistan's transition towards the
full exercise of its sovereign authority. The process
thus far has been positive; the Government of
Afghanistan presented an update on progress at the last
month's Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
meeting; Afghan ministries with mutual areas of
interest have come together to address common
overarching issues; and drafts of the national priority
programmes are now being consulted in concert with
the international community. Much work remains to
finalize these plans so that they will address the most
pressing needs that exist in Afghanistan.

At the NATO summit in Lisbon, Afghanistan and
the international community affirmed their commitment
to the transition of security responsibility to the Afghan
National Security Forces by 2014. In this context,
UNAMA will continue to play the very important role
of coordinating the international engagement. It is
therefore essential to provide UNAMA with the
necessary resources to fulfil its important mandate.

(spoke in French)

We are encouraged by the progress and believe
that Canada's continued engagement is important and
worthwhile. As Canada's combat mission ends in 2011,
a new country-wide engagement based out of Kabul
from 2011 to 2014 will focus on four priorities:
investing in the future of Afghan children and youth,
especially girls, through programming in education and
health; advancing security, the rule of law and human
rights; promoting regional diplomacy; and delivering
humanitarian assistance. An important part of Canada's
engagement will be a Canadian Forces training mission
of up to 950 members, in addition to a civil police
training component.

Canada's overall objective in Afghanistan
remains the same - to help build a more secure and
stable Afghanistan that is no longer a safe haven for
terrorists. We look forward to working in partnership
with Afghans and the international community
throughout 2011 towards making it a reality.

