Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Although today's meeting is being held within the
framework of the periodic review of the situation in the
Middle East, in particular the occupied Palestinian
territories, it has particular significance, as it is being
held at a critical time for the Middle East - a time of
tragic violent incidents from which innocent civilians
are suffering. The gravity of the situation is
intensifying daily.

The current source of threat and tension is not
only the continuous military operations by Israeli
forces in Palestine and Lebanon - the region has

witnessed more violent wars in the past. The real
problem is the feelings of frustration among the Arab
peoples vis-a-vis the feeble positions taken by the
Security Council in the face of these repeated Israeli
aggressions, which seek to achieve long-term strategic
goals through military force, in total contradiction with
what all of us here - including, I would hope, the
permanent members of the Security Council - are
striving for: a comprehensive and sustainable peace
through negotiation, based on justice, equality and
mutual interests.

The core issue is not the capture of one Israeli
soldier in Gaza, or two others in Lebanon, but the
continued occupation by Israel of Arab lands in
Palestine, Lebanon and Syria since 1967, as well as its
determined effort to change the facts on the ground in a
manner that does away with any opportunity for the
Arab parties to regain their legitimate rights to their
usurped occupied lands. That is the issue that the
Security Council has completely failed to address,
despite numerous Council resolutions confirming that
the only solution to the vicious circle of violence and
counter-violence is to put an end to the Israeli
occupation of Arab lands.

In this context, it must be made clear that Arab
States have accepted mediation efforts outside the
scope of the United Nations, as a way to bridge the
differences in opinion, with the aim of reaching a just
peace that responds to the interests of both the Arabs
and the Israelis. That does not in any way imply that
the Council or any of its permanent members should
relinquish their responsibility towards the Middle East
peace process as an issue that affects and poses a threat
to international peace and security, including violence
against civilians. The Council has held meeting after
meeting on the protection of civilians and of children
in armed conflict. Indeed, it is planning to hold another
meeting on the subject on Monday.

It is regrettable, therefore, that the Council has
failed to provide a minimal level of concrete protection
to civilians and children in Palestine and Lebanon only,
among other conflict areas all over the world. This
raises questions about the supposed link between the
Council's theoretical discussions on these issues and its
ability to address them on the ground.

Egypt has worked over the past years with
various parties to prevent escalation and to achieve
peace, focusing on diplomacy to contain repeated
threats in the region. Egypt will continue those efforts,
whether between the Israelis and Palestinians, or
between Israel and Lebanon, with a view to achieving
an immediate ceasefire that opens the door for a
comprehensive political settlement.

In this context, we have closely followed the
ongoing consultations in the Security Council
concerning the elements that the Secretary-General
proposed yesterday, 20 July, as a potential basis for a
settlement. However, Egypt believes that any
negotiations on a settlement requires a firm decision by
the Council today for an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire on both the Palestinian and Lebanese fronts.

At the same time, the Council must address, as
quickly as possible, the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly in Gaza, in addition to responding to
Lebanon's call for relief and for the lifting of the land
and sea blockade imposed on it by Israel, and to allow
Lebanon to receive the much-needed humanitarian
assistance.

Once this is done, it will be possible to negotiate
some of the elements that can constitute a basis for
temporary arrangements between the parties
concerned, including the exchange of prisoners and
detainees, asserting Lebanese sovereignty over all its
territories, thus allowing it to implement the Armistice
Agreement of 1949 and the Taif Agreement, in addition
to Israel's acknowledgment of its own responsibility
for the destruction that it has inflicted on Palestine and
Lebanon, and its responsibility to provide
compensation for such damages. All these elements
should be a prelude to commencing the final status
negotiations on all tracks, as quickly as possible, under
the auspices of the United Nations, and in accordance
with a plan of action to be elaborated and monitored by
this international Organization as an honest and trusted
broker, one entrusted with fully implementing the
relevant resolutions of the international community
related to the settlement of the conflict, particularly
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1515
(2003) and the principle of land for peace.

The current situation places additional
responsibility on the Council, not just in terms of
expressing sympathy for the victims, condemning the
targeting of civilians and infrastructure, or providing
humanitarian assistance, but also in terms of resolving
the key problem, which generates one crisis after
another. This is to be achieved by ending the continued
Israeli occupation of Arab lands in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon.

Today's crisis is yet another test for the Council
and its role in the region. We believe in the Council's
ability to succeed in the face of this challenge and to
assume its responsibilities in achieving peace and
security in the Middle East through undertaking
credible measures leading to the end of the Israeli
occupation and the achievement of a comprehensive
peace - a peace that will guarantee all countries of the
region the security and stability for which they strive.

