I thank Secretary-General Guterres and President Issoufou for hosting this important conversation. You know, shame on each of you. I am astonished and disgusted by the content of today's discussion. I am actually quite ashamed of the Security Council, in particular the members of the Council who took this opportunity to focus on political grudges rather than the critical issue at hand. I can only say "my goodness". Moreover, I am disappointed on behalf of the people you are trying to reach, by squandering this opportunity for political purposes. President Trump has made it very clear that we will do whatever is right, even if it is unpopular, because - let me tell members of the Council what - this is not a popularity contest. Having said that, I intend to make my remarks today responsible and responsive to the content of the topic at hand today. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) remains a threat to the daily lives and livelihoods of billions around the world, and every life lost, every family harmed, every school closed and every business shuttered is a reason for sorrow. We, as a global community, must continue the battle and keep our sights focused keenly on the return of better days. The United States has been unrelenting in its efforts to combat COVID-19, both at home and abroad. As President Trump noted in his address to the General Assembly at the general debate at its seventy-fifth session (A/75/PV.4, annex II), our nation launched the most aggressive national mobilization since the Second World War to address the pandemic. That has meant huge investments in treatment and care, as well as activating a nationwide vaccine-development effort. Those actions have saved countless lives and hold the prospect of bringing the pandemic to a swift end. To date, we have also allocated more than $20 billion to benefit the international response, including commitments for vaccine development, therapeutics and medical infrastructure. This funding, provided by generous American taxpayers, is saving lives in more than 120 countries around the world. In addition, we are actively supporting the Secretary-General's call to provide resources for the United Nations response. The United States has contributed more than $900 million to the United Nations response, by far the most of any country to date, and let me just name the most recent contributions of a few of those countries: the Niger, $4.6 million; South Africa, $8.4 million; Indonesia, $5 million; Viet Nam, $9.5 million; and Tunisia, $600,000. However, as our spending continues to outpace available resources, it is not sustainable for any country or handful of countries to meet the lion's share of the growing needs. The Trump Administration will continue to catalyse the international response to this pandemic, and we encourage others to join us by devoting greater resources to common objectives. As we continue to mobilize resources, we must also reinforce the Secretary- General's appeal for a global ceasefire as expressed in resolution 2532 (2020), with the understanding that legitimate and necessary counter-terrorism efforts will continue. Faithfully implemented, ceasefires would provide a necessary respite for women, children and men on the front lines of violence and conflict, who are therefore particularly vulnerable to the virus. Unfortunately, early signs show a slipping of compliance in conflict zones, and many countries are in fact now experiencing an escalation of violence. We condemn in the strongest possible terms terrorist organizations that have taken advantage of this difficult situation to escalate fighting and violence, and we call upon State sponsors of terror, most notably the Islamic Republic of Iran, to finally and completely cease funding and arming terrorists around the world. As President Trump clearly stated in his speech before the General Assembly on Tuesday, to chart out a better future, "we must hold accountable the nation which unleashed this plague onto the world: China" (4/75/PV.4, p. 17). The Chinese Communist Party's decision to hide the origins of this virus, minimize its danger and suppress scientific cooperation transformed a local epidemic into a global pandemic. More importantly, those decisions have cost hundreds of thousands - hundreds of thousands - of lives around the world. The actions of the Chinese Communist Party prove that not all States Members of the United Nations are equally committed to public health, transparency and their international obligations. This fact should deeply trouble all of the responsible nations of the world that are working in good faith to defeat COVID-19 and keep future pandemics from emerging. We must all recommit to the full and rapid sharing of public health data with each other; that is essential from both a containment perspective and a moral perspective. Equally troubling is the danger posed by corrupt international organizations. The World Health Organization (WHO) was for many years considered a centre of science over politics and of data over bias. That is why the United States was always the single-largest funder. That reputation lies in tatters today after the WHO assisted in the Chinese campaign to withhold cooperation and lie to the world. To this day, the world's scientists still do not have a complete understanding of the origins, characteristics and spread of the virus - an understanding that only the Chinese Communist Party can provide. Going forward, the international community must place accountability and transparency at the centre of our efforts to address threats to global health. Its lack of independence, transparency and accountability is why President Trump made the decision for the United States to withdraw from the WHO and why we will continue to call for reform of the organization while we shift our global health resources to support other, more credible partners and more credible countries. This pandemic spares us little time to absorb its lessons, but we must try to do so, nevertheless. The impacts of COVID-19 have been felt by all of us and must be a source of unity, not division. Each of us must commit to working together in transparency and in good faith. The United States - the Trump Administration - will continue to lead the way, as we always have done. We remain firmly committed to a safer and more secure world.
