The Secretary-General: I thank the Russian
Federation for providing this important opportunity
to collectively examine trends in United Nations
peacekeeping. I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
very kind words of encouragement and support. I am
deeply touched by such strong official and personal
support for my work as Secretary-General. I can assure
you, the members of the Council and the other Members
of the United Nations that I will devote all my energy
and time to working with you to achieve everything
that we are working together to achieve in terms of
peace, stability, development and human rights. I count
on your continuing support and leadership.

This is a key moment for this flagship United Nations
activity. We face huge peacekeeping challenges. New
phenomena are affecting our work and new approaches
are on display. I would therefore like to highlight four
aspects of peacekeeping that are particularly important
for discussion at this time.

First, United Nations peacekeeping operations are
increasingly mandated to operate where there is no
peace to keep. We see significant levels of violence
in Darfur, South Sudan, Mali, the Central African
Republic and the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where more than two-thirds of all our military,
police and civilian personnel are operating.

Secondly, some United Nations peacekeeping
operations are being authorized in the absence of
clearly identifiable parties to the conflict or a viable
political process. When there is no clear path towards
peace, crises will inevitably recur and peacekeeping
operations are much more likely to struggle to meet
their mandates. In Mali, no comprehensive agreement
was in place and the situation remains precarious. In the
Central African Republic, while there was a political
framework for transition, the process has been gravely
undermined by intercommunal violence. In South
Sudan, conflict has re-emerged.

Thirdly, UnitedNations peacekeeping operations are
increasingly operating in more complex environments
that feature asymmetric and unconventional threats.
Whether acting in self-defence or implementing our
mandate to protect civilians, we need to ensure that
United Nations peacekeeping operations are undertaken
in full compliance with international human rights and
humanitarian law obligations.

Fourthly, we need to build on what I see as the
renewed commitment of the Security Council to
responding to our changing world. Resolution 2098
(2013), on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, was
a milestone. It signalled the resolve of the Security
Council to address the changing nature of conflict
and the operating environment of United Nations
peacekeeping, and it matched that resolve with credible
capabilities, provided thanks to the contribution of
troop -contributing countries. The results are tangible
improvements in the lives ofpeople living in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

However, a broader discussion is needed on how
United Nations peacekeeping should adapt to new
demands and what capabilities and resources it needs
to adapt. We must also ask what are the limits of United
Nations peacekeeping and whether it is always the
right tool. As we approach the 15-year anniversary of
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), it may be necessary
to again take stock of evolving expectations of United
Nations peacekeeping and how the Organization can
work towards a shared view of the way forward. To this
end, I have asked the Secretariat to initiate work on a
review of United Nations peacekeeping.

Mandates, political leverage, logistical support,
training, accountability, rules of engagement,
technological innovation, and clarity on the caveats of
troop- and police-contributing countries are just a few
areas that may warrant review. Laying the groundwork
for the extension of State authority, including building
justice and corrections capacities, is also essential in
the first phases until national and other partners are
able to take over. Reinforced efforts to ensure adequate
force protection and capabilities may be required.

We must also use all possible forms of technology
that can enable our peacekeeping personnel to operate
more safely and cost-effectively. We will continue to
consult with the legislative bodies on the deployment
of unmanned, unarmed aerial vehicles based on the
experience we have gained with their deployment to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Speed is also critical. When civilians are under
imminent threat, every minute counts. While there
have been improvements in the mechanisms and speed
with which the United Nations deploys uniformed
personnel, it does not have a standing reserve force that
it can deploy on short notice once a Council decision
is taken. It must rely on its Member States for force
generation, coupled with its own strengthened planning.
It is important that we all work together to ensure that
we are able to deploy or reinforce our missions, when
necessary, as quickly as possible.

We need to have a clear-sighted View of what
capabilities peacekeeping will need if it is to the meet
the challenges ahead. Peacekeeping will need to be more
mobile, flexible and adaptable. It will be important for
the Security Council to address significant capacity
gaps. With the recent establishment of the Office
for Peacekeeping Partnership, we now have in place
a further means of assessing the deployments of
uniformed personnel, and we have a mechanism to
identify areas that require adaptation and improvement,
in partnership with Member States.

Ensuring effective command and control is another
key challenge. When they choose to contribute a
contingent to a particular operation, troop and police
contributors should work with the mission leadership as
one. We need cohesive and unified command structures,
and we count on our troop and police contributors to
work towards this common objective.

Finally, in addressing these new challenges, our
engagement with regional organizations must continue
to deepen and diversify. Arrangements that will allow
us to draw more effectively from regional standby
capacities could help us meet the need to respond rapidly
in new and changing environments. We are engaged in
a dialogue with the African Union, European Union and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization to that end.

The continued use of United Nations peacekeeping
by the Security Council testifies to its continuing
relevance and its unique universality and legitimacy.
The demand for peacekeeping will remain, but
this has also raised concern as the global budget to
support operations approaches $8 billion. We must be
responsible and accountable stewards of the financial
and human resources entrusted to us.

But we should also recall that United Nations
peacekeeping is a strong and effective tool that is
protecting people, saving lives and helping countries
to emerge from conflict. These effects are real and
measurable. We must be prepared to make the necessary
investments in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and we
must bring to bear the full range of tools at the disposal
of the international community to consolidate peace
and achieve an enduring political solution to conflicts
wherever we are called to act.

