Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
pursued a policy of promoting progress in the Middle
East peace process. Our country actively worked for
agreement between the parties on conditions that made
possible the Madrid peace conference and enabled direct
Arab-Israeli talks to be begun. In particular, an
understanding was reached that the most complex and
sensitive issues for a Palestinian-Israeli settlement,
including the question of Jerusalem and the settlements,
would be held over to a subsequent stage, namely, until
the talks on the final status of the Palestinian territories.

At the time, the international community took a very
favourable view of the signing of the Palestinian-Israeli
Declaration of Principles, which marked a long-awaited
breakthrough in the Middle East settlement process. The
Russian sponsor of the peace process in the Middle East
believes in the importance of timely and complete
compliance, in good faith, with the letter and the spirit of
this fundamental document.

In this context, we have learned with regret of the
recent exacerbation of the differences between the
Palestinians and the Israelis over the question of the
expansion of settlements, primarily those around
Jerusalem. There can be no doubt that this problem has
had an adverse effect on the talks, which were already
fraught with difficulties without that, on further steps
towards implementing the Declaration of Principles.

In the terms of that document, as members are
aware, it is considered desirable to avoid bringing up the
sort of particularly sensitive problem that would simply
add fuel to the fire to discuss and lead to an escalation of
tension, all to the detriment of the atmosphere of trust at
the talks.

We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our condemnation of the violations of human rights in the

 

occupied territories and also of the terrorist methods
employed by certain extremist groups. If an end is to be put
to the acts of terrorism and Violence in the Middle East,
which are dangerously destabilizing the situation and
imperilling the entire peace process, drastic steps must be
taken, and by joint effort.

We favour timely and effective measures to maintain
the impetus of the peace process and to ensure that it
continues to make progress. We are certain that a
continuation of concentrated efforts towards implementing
the Palestinian-Israeli Declaration of Principles in full and
towards establishing reliable machinery for coexistence
between the Palestinian and Israeli peoples would be in the
interests of the whole Middle East region. We believe that
it is essential for the parties to refrain from any acts that
would prejudice a Palestinian-Israeli settlement and disturb
the status quo. Avoidance both of practical measures and
public statements that could undermine the atmosphere of
businesslike cooperation between the parties should be
studiously avoided.

We believe that the best way of resolving the
problems that have arisen is through direct dialogue
between the Israelis and the Palestinians using the
machinery that has been set up in the course of the peace
process. For its part, Russia, as a sponsor of the Middle
East peace process, intends to go on actively promoting a
settlement in every detail, in the interests of establishing a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East and
establishing wide-ranging international cooperation in the
region.

