Mr. Rinkevics (Latvia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this very timely debate on the
protection ofjournalists in conflict situations. Let me
also thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Mr. Christophe Deloire
and Ms. Mariane Pearl for their informative briefings
and tireless work on this very complex subject.

As early as 1946, at its very first session, the
General Assembly adopted resolution 59 (I), affirming
that freedom of information is the cornerstone of all the
freedoms to which the United Nations is committed. The
right of freedom of expression depends upon the safety
of journalists and media professionals. Furthermore,
the work done by journalists contributes to increased
accountability, transparency and the rule of law.

Dramatic changes in the media landscape, in
particular the introduction of new technologies, have
resulted in an unprecedented flow of information,
including from conflict settings. The independent
voices of journalists and reports from conflict zones
give the international community a unique insight
into realities on the ground. They serve as a catalyst
for rapid and effective response, and are therefore vital
to the survival of a conflict-affected society. In this
context, it is extremely important not only to safeguard
but to strengthen the ability of the media to provide
independent and reliable information.

Freedom of expression, both offline and online,
and strengthening the independence of media are long-
standing priorities of Latvia. We promote them as a
part of our presidency of the Council of the European
Union and in international organizations, including at
the Human Rights Council. At the beginning of May,
a conference to mark UNESCO World Press Freedom
Day took place in Riga. The resulting Riga declaration
underlines our commitment to promote a legal and
institutional environment that ensures the safety of
journalists, the urgent need to end impunity for crimes
againstjournalists and media workers, and the essential
contribution of journalists to the enjoyment of all human
rights and the pursuit of sustainable development.
The international community has addressed the
protection of journalists in conflict areas on numerous
occasions. In 2006, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1738 (2006), which calls for urgent action.
More recently, the Human Rights Council and UNESCO
have made the protection of journalists a top priority.
Latvia endorses those efforts, especially the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, which is not only a statement of
ideals, but a tool for change. Unfortunately, today the
safety of journalists and the issue of impunity are once
again at the top of the international agenda.

Deliberate attempts to targetjournalists in conflict
zones continue to increase in scale and number. Even
though journalists working in conflict zones have
the status of civilians and enjoy a range of protection
guarantees, they continue to face manifold threats,
including assassination, harassment, intimidation and
kidnapping. Such attacks constitute a clear breach
of international humanitarian law. Threats posed by
terrorist and radical extremist groups against journalists
have also become a major challenge. Nor should we
ignore the fact that women journalists are particularly
vulnerable and require special attention. For all those
reasons, the adoption of the resolution 2222 (2015)
today, which addresses the new challenges to the safety
ofjournalists, is of particular importance and we praise
this achievement.

While there is clarity on what we would like to
achieve, there is uncertainty on how to accomplish it.
I believe that there are four elements that are essential.
First, there must be clear political will, which is at
the heart of any successful Government strategy.
Secondly, there must be a comprehensive, coherent
and action-oriented approach to the protection of all
civilians, including journalists, in conflict situations.
Thirdly, there must be a broad strategy for conflict
prevention that includes as its cornerstone the promotion
of freedom of expression and access to information and
media freedom. Such an approach calls for training
programmes for journalists and the active involvement
of civil society. And fourthly, there must be an enhanced
role for United Nations peacekeeping operations and
strengthened international and regional cooperation.

Now is the time when international organizations,
Governments, media and others should work together
to strengthen the means and mechanisms for protecting
journalists and holding accountable those who attack
them. If there is one message today's meeting sends to
journalists in conflict zones, this is it. Only through
our common efforts will we ensure that no journalist in
the twenty-first century, offline or online, is attacked,
intimidated and/or sealed off from the rest of the world
by a new iron curtain.

