Ms. Khvan (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In his statement, the representative of
Ukraine did not agree with information about the
loss of children's lives in south-eastern Ukraine as a
result of firing by the Ukrainian military, and accused
Russia of having done that. In order to avoid the usual
accusations of propaganda, let us look at the report
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. One
need only look at recent reports. The report of 6 June
talks about the mission's visit to Telmanove, which was
shelled by artillery on 4 June. The mission looked at
13 shell traces; seven ofthem, they concluded, originated
from the west. They also Visited the local hospital,
where the deputy head doctor said that the shelling
had killed a 4-year-old boy in his home. The report of
28 May talks about the artillery shelling of Horlivka
on 26 May. According to the mission's assessment, in
this case the shells came from the north and north-west.
That is where territory is located that is under Kyiv's
control. Not only adults but also an 11-year-old girl
died, and the monitors concluded that she died because
of the shelling. Furthermore, on that day two children
were injured, leading to their hospitalization. Mission
representatives spoke to the children's mother, who was
also wounded. These two localities, Telmanove and
Horlivka, are located on territory that is not under the
control of the authorities in Kyiv. We do not think that
this information needs to be additionally commented
upon.

As regards the destruction, a United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
report stated that in the Luhansk region, which is not
under the control of the Ukrainian Government, about
60 per cent of schools were damaged and five schools
destroyed. Nonetheless, according to OCHA the local
authorities have managed to ensure that the children are
attending school and receiving food.

On the issue of abductions, the Secretary-General's
report (S/2015/409) talks about the horrendous
abduction of hundreds of children by the Islamic State in
Iraq and Syria and Boko Haram, as well as the physical
violence against them, their sexual enslavement and the
ideological propaganda to which they are subjected.
Many of the participants in today's meeting have spoken
about the importance of putting an end to those crimes.

If the delegation of the Ukraine does not see the
difference between these crimes and removing children
from an area of armed conflict for medical care, then
we have nothing more to say.

We are convinced that those children who were
seriously injured, or those who needed, for example,
dialysis, which is impossible to provide in many areas,
do not consider themselves to have been abducted.

It is also out of place to make such statements
against Russia as those made by the representative
of Georgia. The root of the problem, in that case, is
Georgia's refusal to normalize relations with the newly
independent States of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

