Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, allow me to
commend you, Sir, on your initiative to make the
formal wrap-up sessions more interactive by inviting
the membership to ask the presidency questions that
Security Council members may attempt to answer
during the meeting. This is a positive step towards
updating and improving our working methods.

Before briefly addressing some of those questions,
allow me to focus on one issue that has emerged as a
common theme in many of our meetings this month
and in January - illicit trafficking, including in
cultural property, arms, drugs and human beings. In
the first two months of our term, my delegation has
consistently raised that issue and proposed language on
it as appropriate in consultations, and when negotiating
products of the Council. We have brought it up, for
example, in our debate on Western Africa and Central
Asia, the terms of reference for the mission to the Lake
Chad basin, Guinea-Bissau, counter-terrorism efforts
and the priorities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. We must be well aware
of the challenges that illicit trafficking poses to the
international community and of its dual nature as a
potential cause and consequence of conflicts.

We are concerned about the growing links
between transnational organized crime and terrorist
organizations. Illicit trafficking has become a growing
source of revenue for terrorists. It exacerbates conflict
and fuels insecurity and instability. Trafficking in
human beings offends our collective engagement and
may amount to war crimes when committed in conflict
situations, or crimes against humanity. This is why my
delegation welcomes the Council's strong involvement
with the issue, particularly in areas affected by
conflict, as underlined most recently in the presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2015/25 and
resolution 2331 (2016).

My delegation has consistently raised this challenge

when discussing a specific country or region so as to
emphasize the complexity of the security scenario and
the critical importance of consolidating ourjoint efforts
to prevent and tackle all forms of illicit trafficking and
its impact on international peace and security. Allow
me to recall in particular the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and resolutions 2195 (2014) and
2331 (2016), which stress the direct linkages between
trafficking and large movements of persons and aim
to prevent the financing of terrorism through all forms
of illicit trafficking. Looking ahead to the visit of the
Security Council to the Lake Chad basin, we are eager
to hear assessments on the effectiveness of measures
to prevent trafficking in weapons to armed groups and
any other forms of trafficking.

Naturally, international cooperation is crucial since
it is simply beyond the capacity of any single State to
take on pre-emptive action to address a problem that
typically involves different countries of origin, transit
and destination. This is why we believe Council
involvement is so important. In this respect, Italy is
also promoting the organization of high-level debate on
the Palermo Convention and its implementation, which
will be held at the United Nations in New York in June.

Turning briefly to some of the questions raised by
the membership, in particular on working methods, and
offering our perception as an incoming member - we
have been here for two months - I must say that I
have found the Security Council to be very effective
and more united than I had been told it would be. Of
course, political differences do remain, and Japan,
incidentally, is working very hard with the assistance
of all delegations to improve and update our working
methods, which is a crucial element in our endeavours.

With regard to consultations, I have found Council
members to be very constructive. Everyone is well
aware of the need to manage time efficiently and
has an interest in having an interactive discussion,
going beyond talking points, thus enabling a better
understanding of where delegations stand on the issues
being debated. Preparing briefers in advance for a
focused discussion and summing up the meeting with
press elements are good examples of how we are trying
to improve our working methods. I think both the
Swedish presidency and that of Ukraine have been very
effective in this regard.

In our view, a game-changer has been the
Secretary-General's direct involvement in Council
proceedings and the Secretariat's taking a more
proactive role in providing policy options to Council
members. The meetings with the Secretary-General on
3 and 24 February on his recent trips to Africa and the
Middle East stand out, in our view, as best practices
that the Council should pursue as often as possible in
order to make its proceedings more goal-oriented and
policy-driven.

In closing, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and congratulate you on your stewardship of this still-
unfinished, very busy month of February. At the same
time, we of course wish all the best to the incoming
United Kingdom presidency.

