Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Please accept my congratulations, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of February. I would also like to convey our appreciation to the representative of Viet Nam for an extremely successful presidency last month. I also thank the High Representative forDisarmament Affairs for presenting the biennial report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/1011), as well as Mr. Spleeters for the excellent briefing he delivered to the Council. Despite the numerous initiatives constantly being developed by the international community, the impact of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons continues to be a matter of grave concern throughout the world, as they fuel various conflicts, as the Secretary- General and the High Representative so aptly pointed out. The issue is extremely important for the Sahel in general, and for the Niger in particular, given the prevailing security situation. The Niger duly commends the Secretary-General's Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament, published in May 2018, which seeks to contribute to saving lives through a far-reaching programme that supports national, subregional and regional efforts to control illicit weapons. I would also like to commend all such efforts and initiatives aimed at strengthening control over the illicit flows of small arms and light weapons at the national, subregional and regional levels. In Africa, those initiatives include the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative; the African Union's Agenda 2063; the Economic Community of West African States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials; and the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, to name just a few. Since the establishment of the Niger's National Commission for the Collection and Control of Illicit Arms, on 28 November 1994, the Commission has significantly contributed to the control of illicit weapons, despite the fact that the porous nature of the country's borders does not make it easy. Those efforts are continuing thanks to the support of bilateral and multilateral partners, including the United Nations. However, despite the considerable progress made over the past two years, as mentioned in the report, much work remains to be done, commensurate with the harmful consequences of the proliferation of small arms, especially in the current context of an increasing number of conflicts and the expansion of international terrorism. In March 2000, Kofi Annan, in one of his many statements on the subject, said that, "In terms of the carnage they cause, small arms, indeed, could well be described as 'weapons of mass destruction'" (4/54/2000, para.238). That observation is unfortunately still valid today. Furthermore, the report stresses the fact that small arms remain the primary cause of human suffering, particularly among women and children, who are generally the innocent victims of the perpetrators of violence. That reality obliges us to be fully aware of the situation in order to take the necessary actions to avoid the humanitarian crises flowing from the violence caused by the illicit circulation of small arms and the conflicts that they provoke, perpetuate and fuel. The Niger welcomes the special attention that the Secretary-General is paying to the Central African region, and in particular the Sahel, where the impact of the trafficking in small arms has been magnified by the Libyan crisis. Since the diversion in 2011 of the Libyan arsenal to terrorist groups, the situation in the Sahel has only worsened. Continuing to supply arms to Libya, despite the embargo, is to continue inundate the Sahel with weapons, contributing to the destabilization of the region and encouraging serious violations of human security and human rights. My delegation once again takes the opportunity of this meeting to appeal for strict compliance with the arms embargo on Libya, which is one of the indispensable conditions for the return to peace and stability in both Libya and the Sahel. The impact of conflicts also compromises the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and imposes exorbitant costs on the States, communities and individuals who suffer from them on a daily basis. Hence the need to take that dimension into consideration in assessing the implementation of the SDGs by the countries affected. The scale of the damage caused by the proliferation and circulation of small arms and light weapons should be a concern to all countries around the world. That is why the Niger calls for greater mobilization of the international community on the issue, with a view to reducing the harmful impacts of the proliferation of small arms on human security in general and development in particular. From that standpoint, while recalling the need for cross-border cooperation to strengthen measures to control small arms and light weapons, the Niger encourages and supports all subregional, regional and international initiatives on the issue. We particularly welcome the efforts made by the United Nations toensure the protection of civilians, especially in conflict zones, including through the management of weapon and ammunition stockpiles and the development of strategies to ensure enhanced protection for civilians and peacekeepers, some of whom, unfortunately, have paid the ultimate price in discharging their duties. In conclusion, the Niger calls on all Member States, especially manufacturing countries, to shoulder more responsibility and give greater consideration to the involvement of women and children in national strategies and to establish an effective system for the control and management of those types of weapons and their ammunition.
