Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Ithank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
I also listened very carefully to the presentations of
Mr. Bromberg and Ms. Majdalani.

There are complex and intertwined hotspot
issues in the Middle East with ongoing conflicts and
confrontations. The developing situation is cause for
increased concern. The question of Palestine is at
the core of the Middle East issue and is fundamental
to the region. It is the common responsibility of the
international community to safeguard the legitimate
rights and interests of Palestinian people.

The current situation in Palestine remains dire,
with the ongoing construction of settlements, the
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks at an impasse and a
grave humanitarian crisis. China is deeply concerned
about the situation. I would like to highlight the
following points.
First, we must preserve the two-State solution and
resolve the root cause of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Based on the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle ofland
for peace and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the international community should work to resolve
the question of Palestine with a view to establishing
a fully sovereign State of Palestine based on the 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as the capital. Any new
initiative should be in line with the above-mentioned
international parameters.

Secondly, we must remain united and strive for an
early resumption of the peace talks between Israel and
Palestine. The settlement construction must stop. The
parties concerned should avoid any action or rhetoric
that may exacerbate the situation or any move that may
undermine trust so as to create the necessary conditions
for the resumption of dialogue. The parties with
influence in the Middle East should play a constructive
role and refrain from any unilateral action that could
further escalate the tension in the region. Greater efforts
should be made to accelerate the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process and to actively explore new ways
to facilitate peace in the Middle East so as to overcome
the deadlock in the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks.

Thirdly, we should pay close attention to and work
to improve the economic and humanitarian situation in
Palestine. The withholding by the relevant authorities of
the transfer oftaxes collected on behalf of Palestine is a
matter of concern to China. We welcome the financial
support to Palestine reaffirmed at the recent Foreign
Ministers meeting ofthe League ofArab States. We call
on the parties concerned to fully implement obligations
under international treaties, including the Paris
Protocol, and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The international community should increase its
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and improve the
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian refugees.

With regard for other hotspot issues in the Middle
East, it is imperative that the international community
remain committed to a political solution, facilitate
dialogue and negotiations, deal with the situation
constructively and take into account the legitimate
rights and interests of all parties.

The Syrian Golan is internationally recognized as
an occupied territory. The Security Council has adopted
several resolutions calling for Israel's withdrawal from
Syrian Golan. China opposes any unilateral action to
change that status quo and does not wish to see any
further escalation of regional tensions.

Development is the key to achieving peace. In
mid-April China hosted the second China-Arab States
Forum on Reform and Development. Recently, China
also successfully hosted the second Belt and Road
Forum for International Cooperation. The Middle
Eastern and Arab countries actively participated in
those events. China stands ready to leverage extensive
involvement in the Belt and Road Initiative to strengthen
cooperation and promote mutual benefit for regional
countries so as to provide opportunities and a platform
for development in the Middle East and to jointly build
a community of shared future for humankind.

