Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
let me commend you, Sir, for holding today's Security
Council briefing on the tragic situation that the people
of Mali are going through. We would also like to
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his very useful briefing. We
also wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Mali, Ambassador Oumar Daou, for the additional
information that he was kind enough to bring to the
attention of this body.

My delegation fully endorses the statement that
was just made on behalf of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) by Ambassador
Youssoufou Bamba, Permanent Representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

Mali is the victim of aggression accompanied by
serious and unacceptable violence against its people.
That fraternal country, which no doubt is enduring
one of the darkest periods in its otherwise storied
history, will suffer forever the destruction of a portion
of its cultural and religious heritage at the hands of
obscurantist gangs. That cynical enterprise, under the
devious, covert guise of religion, poses a serious threat
to the peace and security of the entire West African
region and, beyond that, of the entire world.

In order to grasp the reprehensible nature and scale
of the plot taking shape in the region, I would call on
each Member of the Organization, in particularly of
this body, to pay heed to the number ofIslamist groups
involved in the war in Mali. Close to 10 groups are
wreaking havoc with full impunity in that area, as they
seek to turn Mali into a hub for narco-terrorism and
every kind of smuggling in Africa and beyond.

It is in that light that we should understand and
welcome the rapid intervention by one of Mali's
historic allies - France - upon that country's request
and with the support of countries of the subregion, to
halt and neutralize the jihadists' offensive against the
large urban centres of the country. While the French
intervention has already allowed the Malian army to
retake the towns of Konna and Diabaly, the deployment
of African troops, which was confirmed during the
recent ECOWAS summit, will decidedly contribute to
stepping up the pace of operations for retaking northern
Mali.

I would like here to welcome the decision taken
by Chad, a brotherly country that, although it is not a
member of ECOWAS, wanted to share this heavy burden
by deploying a large contingent. That is irrefutable
proof of the growing international solidarity being
shown in support of this crusade against international
terrorism.

For its part, ECOWAS has already deployed
hundreds of enabling elements, to be joined by others
to complete the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA), which is predicted to reach
a strength of over 5,000 troops.

In order to remain true to its ideals of regional
solidarity, and given its historic, cultural and political
ties with Mali, Senegal will deploy a contingent
of 500 troops, made up of a command element, an
artillery battery, an engineering company, a company
for command, support and services, and a motorized
company. In addition, as part of its participation in
AFISMA, Senegal will fill nine command posts, seven
of whom are already in Bamako. An initial group of
enablers was sent out to the field on 20 January in order
to prepare for the arrival of the rest of the contingent.

Since the beginning ofthe crisis in Mali, the Security
Council has exhibited commendable willingness to
find appropriate solutions to the crisis, as evidenced
by its many statements and resolutions on the matter,
the most recent of which is resolution 2085 (2012), of
20 December 2012, which authorized the deployment of
a military force under African command. My country
welcomes the positive attitude of all Council members
in dealing with the risks of the terrorist threat.

I would like to take the opportunity provided by
this briefing to call on all peace-loving countries, which
have been dedicated to curbing the terrorist threat for
some time now, to support, finance and arm the African
troops engaged in that theatre of operations. In that
regard, the donors conference for Mali scheduled to be
held on 29 January in Addis Ababa will certainly be
a watershed moment that will gauge the international
community's determination to fight that scourge.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
gravity of the situation in Mali requires ~ and even
demands - a reaction that is commensurate with the
threat looming over an already unstable region. The
success of the international force remains dependent,
to a large extent, on the support that a unified and
determined international community will show for
the people of Mali in order to see the ideals of peace,
liberty and justice prevail throughout the world.

The recent hostage-taking at the Algerian gas
refinery on the border with Libya is clear proof of the
collateral damage that will be incurred by the plot to
turn the Sahelo-Saharan region into a new sanctuary
for international terrorism. If we allow that to happen,
no country, region or continent will be spared.

