Ms. Young (Belize): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island
States (AOSIS).

Allow me to congratulate the Dominican Republic,
a fellow small island developing State (SIDS), on its
election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, and to commend you, Mr. President, for the
bold decision to start your tenure in the Security Council
with a debate on a topic that encompasses an issue that
is - irrefutably - a defining issue of our time.

I can say that with absolute conviction because
I represent a group of countries on the front line of
climate change. If the people from our islands and
low-lying coastal States could sit with us here today,
they would tell us about the daily challenges they are
confronting to sustain their humble livelihoods: salt-
water intrusion, which infiltrates their drinking water
and water for irrigation; farmers forced into more
debt as they try to adapt to changing rainfall patterns;
fisherfolk forced to go further and further afield in order
to get even one day's catch, as marine life migrates to
areas beyond their traditional grounds; and families
confronting rising seas and super hurricanes denied
home, work and, sadly, sometimes even their loved
ones. That reality is being replicated across the globe
at an alarming pace and with unprecedented impacts.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), in its special report entitled Global Warming
of 1.5 "C, concluded that the effects of human-induced
climate change are worse than previously projected
and that the associated risks have increased immensely
for our ecosystems, economies and social well-being.
Therefore, what we witness in the conflicts over scarce
resources, the large-scale displacement of people and
loss of territory are the manifestation of the associated
risks referred to in the IPCC's special report. Those are
the experiences of the climate-vulnerable in our world
today, whose already fragile hope for peace and security
continues on a path to depletion. The IPCC findings
confirm that, without drastic systems-transitions, the
current human-induced global-warming trajectory
will cause severe and often irreversible impacts to our
planet, with inevitable humanitarian consequences.

Faced with those prospects and the impacts already
having dire consequences for people and planet, we
have but one urgent global imperative, and that is to act
now. Our first line of response to climate change and to
attenuate climate-related risks is definitive ambitious
climate action in line with the science of 1.5°C.

Of paramount importance is ensuring that
developing countries have the support they need to
adapt, and, where our adaptive capacities have been
exhausted, that we have the support to address loss
and damage. We reaffirm that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and its related process, including the Paris Agreement, is
the primary forum for negotiating and coordinating the
global response to climate change. AOSIS underscores
that increased near-term ambition is urgently required
to limit global warming to 1.5°C. We also underscore
the urgent need for remedying the persistent funding
gap for adaptation. Likewise, we emphasize the need
for a strong international mechanism to address loss
and damage.

We hope that the outcome of today's debate will
include issuing an urgent call to the international
community to take the ambitious action needed in line
with the Paris Agreement goals and 1.5°C pathways. The
outcome should also involve calling upon our developed
country partners to marshal the necessary resources so
that developing countries, in particular SIDS, can be
assured access to adequate, predictable and additional
finance, technology and capacity-building.

Notwithstanding the necessary climate action and
support under the UNFCCC, we must also acknowledge
that climate change has multidimensional implications,
even outside the purview of the UNFCCC, and
therefore must be addressed in a coordinated and
concerted manner across all the relevant frameworks,
mechanisms and United Nations bodies. In that context,
it has become increasingly necessary for the Security
Council to have a more comprehensive understanding
of the international peace and security risks arising
from climate change and climate-related disasters, to
be in a position to act appropriately.

We are pleased to note initial efforts to include
climate-risk assessments in the reports ofthe Secretary-
General to the Council, as well as efforts to provide
information and training to peacekeeping operations
on climate-related security-risk implications. AOSIS
urges the Council to use this debate to muster the
political will to ensure that these initial efforts will be
standardized and improved. To that end, we propose
three factors for consideration.

A preliminary factor is to ensure that the work of
the Security Council in ascertaining risks is guided by
the best available science on climate change, such as
the IPCC assessment reports. A second related factor
is the need for the analytical capacities of the United
Nations system to be improved in order to assess
climate-change-related security threats according to
the specific circumstances, needs and situations on the
ground. The third factor is the need to coordinate the
work of other United Nations entities and international
organizations so as to improve the United Nations
system's overall capacity to support States and other
stakeholders, including the most vulnerable groups,
such as women, youth and indigenous communities, to
mitigate those threats. In that way the United Nations
system, including the Security Council, would be better
positioned to identify the security threats arising from
climate-change impacts, prepare for them and harness
complementary roles in order to prevent escalation of
those threats to the level where international peace and
security is at risk.

A more comprehensive understanding of the
implications of climate change on international peace
and security must be seen as a critical link in the chain
of a global response to climate change. That response
includes actions to mitigate global warming through
more ambitious emission-reduction targets, build
resilience to disasters and adapt, in both the short and
long term, to the impacts of climate change. Because of
their interlinkages and interdependence, further steps
are required to defragment the United Nations system
so as to harmonize those actions and ensure that our
chain of response suffers no gap or weakness.

Climate change is an issue that transcends not only
nations and borders, but also customary institutional
norms and mandates. It is a fundamental threat to the
future of our planet and the existence of all humankind
as we know it. We hope that this debate will constitute
a stepping stone to reinforcing the global response to
climate change, with the Security Council resolved to
do its part.

I take this opportunity to inform participants of the
side event entitled "Building resilience and expanding
development horizons through global partnerships",
which AOSIS will host on 19 February. All are invited
to attend.

