Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): I thank the
Chinese delegation for convening today's open debate.

Portugal is firmly engaged in a multilateral
system based on the primacy of international law and
the principles and values of the Charter. Multilateral
organizations continue to be privileged platforms for
constructive and inclusive dialogue among States
for the purpose of tackling the increasingly complex
challenges facing the world. Whereas no country can
address all threats on its own, we have to build bridges
and broaden dialogue by strengthening interregional
alliances and international cooperation.

Against this background, it is crucial to preserve
and strengthen the multilateral system, especially the
irreplaceable role of the United Nations and its capacity
to advance a comprehensive and transversal concept of
peace that simultaneously promotes human rights and
sustainable development. Several international bodies
are faced with declining budgets. The lack of funding
and political support impairs the implementation of the
reforms needed to improve their effectiveness for the
benefit of all.

At the outset, we must strengthen conflict
prevention by developing early-warning systems that
can trigger immediate action by the international
community. Similarly, we must support the ongoing
reforms to improve the United Nations peace and
security pillar under which peacekeeping operations
take place. Aware of the interdependence between
security and development, we are convinced that
lasting peace will be achieved only if we address the
root causes of conflicts. Underdevelopment and the
imbalance of wealth distribution are the most obvious
causes. Finally, it is important to integrate our action
by including the perspective of gender balance and the
contribution of young people in conflict prevention and
resolution.
Within the United Nations system, Portugal
has defined a consistent approach that encompasses
responsibilities in missions around the world. Portugal
is currently engaged in seven United Nations missions,
notably the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
where 178 Portuguese peacekeepers are on the ground
in the Central African Republic, embodying our strong
commitment to contributing to the effort of stabilizing
the country and the region.

As I conclude, I wish to recall the last time Portugal
held the presidency of the Security Council, precisely
seven years ago. Our main initiatives then were,
coincidentally, a discussion on new challenges to security
(see S/PV.6668) and an open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council (see S/PV.6672). Apart
from the new threats and risks to international security,
which were then being increasingly acknowledged,
such as terrorism, transnational organized crime and
climate change, just to name a few, we were also very
much aware of the importance of addressing the well-
grounded demands for a more transparent, efficient and
operational Security Council as the collective security
mechanism.

Finally, allow me to quote the words of His
Excellency the President of the Portuguese Republic
in his speech at the general debate of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly:

"Portugal believes that multilateral action,
political dialogue and diplomatic wisdom are the
only possible path to harmonious coexistence
among nations and peoples" (A/73/PV9, p. 26).

