Mr. Apakan: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
security situation in eastern Ukraine. I will provide
members with an update on the observations of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
(SMM), in particular with regard to the implementation
of the Minsk agreements and the outcome of the recent
discussions in Minsk.

On 24 April, the sides did not reach any agreement
in Minsk on a recommitment to the ceasefire on the
occasion of the Easter holiday period. Ukraine had
announced a unilateral decision to implement a ceasefire
as of 18 April. I still believe that a mutual agreement
can be reached for that important holiday.

Achieving a sustainable ceasefire is a critical first
step to addressing the broader security situation on the
ground. Since the last recommitment to the ceasefire
on International Women's Day, which was one of the
shortest to date, the Mission has recorded more than
50,000 ceasefire violations, including about 15,000
explosions. Ceasefire violations were concentrated
in four areas, namely, areas east and north-east of
Mariupol, the Popasna-Pervomaisk-Zolote area, the
Avdiivka-Yasynuvata-Donetsk airport area and the areas
south and south-east of Svitlodarsk. Since 8 March, the
SMM. has recorded 238 instances of the use of weapons
that should have been withdrawn in accordance with
the Minsk agreements.
The discussion on the security provisions of the
Minsk agreements did not yield substantial progress.
Although some recommitments to the ceasefire were
mutually agreed, they were short-lived, as I mentioned.
Additional measures to strengthen the ceasefire are
needed. Some concrete steps on humanitarian mine
action, in particular around schools and kindergartens,
have been taken in recent months. While such steps
are encouraging, progress in other areas has remained
limited since I last briefed the Council in February (see S/PV. 8461).

No remedial action has been taken to address the
worsening security situation in the disengagement
areas. Particularly in the disengagement area of Zolote,
civilians living in nearby villages have continued to be
affected by the gradual re-engagement of forces and
hardware. We have reported on casualties and damage
to civilian infrastructure there, and I have called on the
participants in the Working Group on Security Issues
to enable the SMM. to have full access to the area.
They are encouraging the sides to implement a phased
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the populated areas.

On Monday, I returned from a visit to Luhansk,
where I joined a commemorative event marking the
anniversary of the tragic incident in which our colleague
Joseph Stone lost his life. On 23 April 2017, an SMM
patrol hit what appeared to be an anti-tank mine on an
unpaved road.

Mine-related incidents have continued to claim
the lives of civilians. This year alone, the Mission has
recorded 15 civilian casualties due to mines, unexploded
ordinance and improvised explosive devices, four of
whom were killed and 11 injured. As I travelled in the
Luhansk region, I saw people preparing for the Easter
celebrations and visiting cemeteries. Those sites,
located close to the contact line, need to be safe. We
are calling on the sides to ensure that, as a matter of
urgency, the sites are demined in the coming days.

The SMM. remains a comprehensive security
instrument. Its presence in the field is reassuring for
those caught in the conflict. Through its monitoring,
verification and reporting, the Mission contributes
to the stabilization of the situation and facilitates the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. The protection
of civilians continues to be an issue. Much needs to be
urgently done to improve the conditions of those living
close to the conflict-affected areas. That is especially
important with regard to vital civilian infrastructure.

Incidents close to civilian infrastructure sites,
including the Donetsk filtration station and the pumping
station in Vasylivka, occur with increasing frequency.
For six days, beginning on 12 April, tens of thousands
of civilians on both sides of the line of contact in the
Donetsk region were left with limited access to water due
to the damage to the pumping station's water pipelines.
As I have mentioned in the past, sustainable solutions
to ensure the protection of civilian infrastructure
include the full withdrawal of heavy weapons from
those areas as well as from populated areas. The SMM-
facilitated local ceasefires used for the repair of civilian
infrastructure must also be respected.

In the past, I described the hardship faced by
civilians. Their situation has unfortunately not
improved. The existing entry-exit checkpoints are
insufficient to support the large volume of people
moving across the contact line on a daily basis.

I have described the struggle of men, women,
children and in particular the elderly, having to move
across precarious wooden ramps connecting the
broken bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska. That remains
the only entry-exit checkpoint in the entire Luhansk
region. As members may recall, in February, the OSCE
Chairman-in-Office, Slovak Foreign Minister Lajeak,
visited the bridge and the area and highlighted the urgent
priority of repairing it. A solution to that pressing issue
needs to be found.

The Mission continues to face a challenging
security environment. Targeting of SMM. unmanned
aerial vehicles and signal interference take place with
worrying frequency. The situation regarding access and
freedom of movement for the SMM. has not improved.
On the contrary, impediments remain, in particular
in areas outside Government control in the southern
Donetsk region and in areas close to the border. All those
impediments are steadily eroding the Mission's ability
to fulfil its mandated tasks. It is the responsibility ofthe
sides to ensure effective monitoring and verification by
the OSCE.

I wish to thank the Security Council once again
for the opportunity to share the observations of the
OSCE SMM. I also wish to express my gratitude for the
close cooperation with the United Nations agencies in
Ukraine, both in Kyiv and in the field. I am also grateful
to Ambassador Sajdik for his support to the SMM. I
would like to acknowledge the work of my colleagues,
SMM. members and the dedicated men and women with
whom I have the honour to work.

Before closing, I would like to underline that
civilians deserve the chance to celebrate the current
Easter period in peace. Weapons can be silenced if
there is the will.

