Allow me to thank the presidency for convening the traditional briefing of the Chairs of the three Committees with a mandate related to counter-terrorism issues. It is almost a year and a half since our last meeting in this format (see S/PV.8528). During that time, counter-terrorism security has changed. The pandemic has had an impact on the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Nonetheless, over the past six months, we generally managed to adapt to the changing conditions, and the Security Council continued its intense work in the areas of counter-terrorism and non-proliferation. We would like to wish the Chairs of the three Committees continued success and thank them for their briefings on the implementation of their respective mandates. Restrictions on air travel as well as quarantine measures imposed by States have forced the Counter-Terrorism Committee to suspend all monitoring visits. In order to support work in this priority area, we agreed to try an unusual solution. On 19 November, the CTC approved temporary procedures for conducting hybrid visits - virtual meetings. We believe that it is crucial that, despite the virtual component, such visits be conducted on the ground by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and with the participation of other specialized entities of the United Nations. It is important that all agreed rules and regulations for such visits be followed. This is a temporary measure. In six months, we will consider the possibility of extending it or returning to the regular work of the Committee. It should be borne in mind that the monitoring of the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions in the first few months of the pandemic did not stop, even in the absence of country visits. Furthermore, CTED managed to significantly increase its assessment rate of States on the basis of detailed and evaluative reviews of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). During the current cycle, 177 countries have already been reviewed. In the near future, the Committee will be approving reviewed procedures for analysing States' anti- terrorist systems. It is important to maintain the balanced nature of the instruments used for review without being distracted by secondary topics. At the same time, the key criterion for the effectiveness of the fight against terrorism remains the ability of States to create safeguards against financial and ideological support for terrorists, as well as to ensure that there is no statute of limitations for the punishment of crimes committed. Unfortunately, this year it was not possible to hold two central CTC events that would have been dedicated to the topics I mentioned. We hope that a joint briefing with the 1267 Committee on countering the financing of terrorism and an open meeting of the CTC on combating the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes will be held as soon as the pandemic-related restrictions are lifted. We note the efforts of CTED in the analytical field, in particular in cooperation with the Global Research Network - for example, a summary of the impact of the coronavirus on terrorist activity was very useful. The report mentioned today on the implementation of resolution 2462 (2019), which was prepared by CTED and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2020/493, annex), further confirmed the high expertise and potential of those structures. Unfortunately, the approaches of Member States have not been so closely coordinated on all thematic clusters discussed by the CTC in recent months. We are particularly concerned about the high level of politicization of issues related to the protection of human rights and the fight against violent extremism and extremist ideology, as well as the issue of collecting evidence of terrorist crimes in conflict zones. In our view, at this stage it would be more useful to focus on the more pressing problem of the repatriation of terrorists and their family members from Syria and Iraq. We acknowledge the work of the 1267 Sanctions Committee, which remains one of the Council's most effective counter-terrorism mechanisms. The key task at hand remains the effective implementation of Security Council resolutions on the anti-terrorist sanctions regime against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida. Russia attaches paramount importance to the fulfilment of that goal. We also note the continued terrorist activity by ISIL in Afghanistan. Despite some losses by the group in the north, it remains one of the major factors in destabilizing the situation in the country. An additional danger is posed by their expanding ideological, propaganda and recruitment activities with the skilful use of information and communication technologies. Currently on our radar are the activities of foreign terrorist fighters who received combat experience in Syria and Iraq and in various regions of the world, including Afghanistan. In that connection, we stress the need to continue to focus on the problem of foreign terrorist fighters on the anti-terrorist sanctions lists in order to prevent and suppress their criminal activity. We support the effective work of the Monitoring Team, the reports of which form an important basis for the work of the Committee. We call on Member States to work in close collaboration with the experts. For our part, we stand ready to continue providing the experts with appropriate assistance. At the same time, we hope that the reports of the Monitoring Team will be as objective as possible and rely only on verified sources of information. Country visits by the Monitoring Team are of particular importance but, unfortunately, due to the pandemic, this year's trips were cancelled. As soon as the epidemiological situation allows, we expect them to resume immediately. At the same time, we believe that visits to countries in situations of armed confrontation with international terrorism and States that are directly impacted by manifestations of terrorism should remain a priority. Resolution 1540 (2004) remains the only universal international document in the area of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destructions (WMDs), as it obliges all countries to create effective national control systems in order to prevent WMDs, their means of delivery and related materials from falling into the possession of non-State actors. Coordinated work among all Member States is the key to the successful implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), an issue to which Russia attaches priority importance. We are interested in finding common ground with our partners in order to advance the non-proliferation agenda. Overall, we are satisfied with the progress made in the implementation of the document and the international community's recognition of its importance. We also greatly appreciate the efforts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), chaired by Indonesia. Providing technical assistance to States remains a priority in the 1540 Committee's work. It is of fundamental importance that the Committee can effectively act as a central coordinator of global efforts to implement the resolution, while defining the goals and priorities of such work. The value of resolution 1540 (2004) also lies in the fact that it is an instrument of cooperation. It is important to remember that, while the 1540 Committee operates on the basis of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, its mandate does not include coercing or imposing so-called services on Member States. Such practices will only undermine the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Much remains to be done to implement that basic premise, namely the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), by all and in full. Unfortunately, this year the force majeure circumstances of the pandemic have had a negative effect, causing many areas of the non-proliferation agenda to suffer, in particular the comprehensive review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which has been postponed to 2021. However, we are convinced that the current circumstances will not undermine the effectiveness of the Committee's efforts, and we hope that it will continue to work as dynamically as it has done in the past. In the light of the activities of ISIL and other terrorist groups in the Middle East that have mastered the technology to produce chemical weapons, which they are actively using, decisive collective measures are needed to prevent the horrific phenomenon of chemical terrorism. There is a real risk that, once the situation in one country is normalized, terrorists with practical experience in that area will try to hide in other countries. The spread of such knowledge is no less a threat than the very use of that type of weapon of mass destruction. In that context, Russia's initiative to develop and adopt a convention on combating acts of chemical and biological terrorism is gaining increasing relevance. Perhaps then we would not hear such irresponsible declarations as those we have heard from the representative of the United States regarding so-called examples of the use of chemical weapons. Such issues will be resolved only through the legal sphere, not loud political declarations.
