Mr. Zbogar (Slovenia): Slovenia appreciates the
leadership of the United Kingdom in the convening of this
action-oriented open debate today on the United Nations
partnership with Africa. We believe that the Security
Council should be innovative in searching for ways to
address better the responsibilities conferred on it by the
Charter in this constantly changing international
environment.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
analysis of the challenges which face the United Nations in
Africa. His analysis and recommendations provide valuable
insights and show that the problems of Africa are very
much at the centre of attention and action of the Secretary-
General.

The Security Council in turn has been giving much of
its attention to specific situations in Africa and at the same
time has tried to establish the necessary conceptual
framework for its own future action. Much of that work
was accomplished in the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Security Council, chaired by the Ambassador of Gabon,
and the Security Council also affirmed its willingness to
act at the recent 29 and 30 September open debate on the
situation in Africa.

Despite all the work that has been done so far, there
is no doubt that further action is necessary. It is especially
important to improve inter-institutional cooperation, in
particular the cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the key
subregional organizations, as several speakers have
already mentioned.

The Security Council is consistently supporting the
efforts of the OAU and the subregional organizations and
is prepared to enhance the effectiveness of that support.
A good example of this preparedness is the recent
deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping force in
Sierra Leone. This deployment is important for a number
of reasons, including symbolic ones. As recently as
several years ago Sierra Leone was being used as a prime
example of the so-called coming anarchy in the world and
as an excuse for the complacency of the international
community in addressing African crises.

The current successful cooperation between the
United Nations and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) therefore goes a long way in
dispelling what the Secretary-General referred to as
"Afro-pessimism" in his progress report on Africa.

Another area where the Security Council needs to
engage in further specific action relates to sanctions. It is
indicative of the tragedy of Africa that the majority of
sanctions imposed by the Security Council have been
directed against Member States or specific groups in
Africa. We especially support efforts aimed at improving
the implementation of arms embargoes and stemming
illicit arms flows to and within Africa.

In this connection, we would like to recognize the
indefatigable efforts of Ambassador Robert Fowler of
Canada to facilitate a political solution of the Angolan
crisis by limiting the ability of UNITA to pursue the war
option. We believe that Ambassador Fowler's initiatives,
including the establishment of the experts' panels, provide
important innovations for the Council's method of work
and could be used in the work of other sanctions
committees on situations in Africa.

 

Lastly, we would like to refer to the presidential
statement on the prevention of armed conflict that the
Security Council adopted just recently and which is still
very fresh in our minds. Several delegations referred earlier
to the need for prevention, and we would like to emphasize
three elements of that statement.

First, the Security Council recognized that early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive deployment,
preventive disarmament and post-conflict peace-building are
interdependent and complementary components of a
comprehensive conflict-prevention strategy.

Secondly, periodic reports were requested from the
Secretary-General on disputes that may endanger
international peace and security, including early warnings
and proposals for preventive measures.

Thirdly, the important role of regional organizations in
the prevention of armed conflict was welcomed, as were the
meetings between the United Nations, including the
Security Council, and regional organizations.

We believe the Security Council could take a first step
in the implementation of those elements of the statement in
the case of Africa. We propose, for the consideration of the
Security Council, to request from the Secretary-General his
first periodic regional early warning report on Africa. Once
it receives the report, the Security Council could engage in
a dialogue with the OAU and key subregional
organizations, possibly in Africa, on the substance of the
report and on the recommendations contained therein. The
Security Council would then subsequently have to seriously
consider which of a wide range of preventive measures
would best suit specific situations.
The problems of peace in Africa require constant
attention. The current action-oriented open debate is an
important phase in that process. The Security Council
should not only be able to offer vision in addressing the
underlying causes of conflict in Africa, but also
demonstrate the ability to address specific crisis situations
in Africa effectively.

