Ms. Juul (Norway): 1 would like to take a few
moments to address the situation in the region. Norway is
deeply concerned about the situation in northern Syria.
We note the recent agreement reached between Turkey
and Russia but remain worried about the consequences
for both the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the humanitarian situation, which
is already deteriorating. Protection and access remain
critical to the humanitarian response in north-eastern
Syria, and whoever exercises control there will face
the expectation and close scrutiny of the international
community, including with regard to safeguarding
detention centres for ISIL prisoners. We strongly
support the work of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
welcome the convening of the important first meeting
of the Constitutional Committee.
The increased tensions in the Gulf region remain
a matter of great concern. We urge all actors to refrain
from actions and statements that could contribute to any
further escalation. Norway is deeply concerned about
the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. We acknowledge the
recent pledges of humanitarian assistance while also
noting that a substantial funding gap remains. However,
we are encouraged by the reports of progress being
made in the Jeddah talks and by the recent decrease in
violence and release ofprisoners. We support the efforts
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. The participation of
more women in political talks will be important. Only
an inclusive political solution can resolve the conflict
and bring lasting peace and stability to Yemen and
the region.

The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians, the
international donor group to Palestine, met at the
ministerial level in New York on 26 September. The
meeting, which was hosted by the United Nations and
chaired by Norway's Foreign Minister, emphasized the
broad international support for a negotiated two-State
solution as the basis for resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The members of the Liaison Committee called
for taking immediate steps to resume the transfer of
revenues collected by Israel to the Palestinian Authority.
In that regard, Norway welcomes the recent arrangement
reached between the parties. We encourage Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to extend their dialogue with
a view to finding durable solutions to other outstanding
economic issues. Furthermore, the members of the
Liaison Committee urged donors to step up their
humanitarian support for Gaza. Ending the blockade of
Gaza, facilitating trade and opening up Area C in the
West Bank for Palestinian use are all preconditions for
achieving a sustainable Palestinian economy.

Norway is concerned about the recent Israeli
calls for annexing large areas of the West Bank. As
determined by the Security Council, any future decision
by Israel to change the status of the occupied West Bank
or impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration in
the area will have no international legal effect. Actions
such as settlement expansion, house demolition, the use
of violence and the unilateral use of force, including in
East Jerusalem, are unacceptable. They undermine the
possibility of a two-State solution, the peace process
and the Palestinian economy and threaten regional
stability. We call on the parties to comply with their
obligations under international law. Norway has a long-
standing and continuing commitment to enabling and
improving the conditions for peace and security in the
Middle East. Promoting the resolution and mediation
of conflicts in the region remains a key priority of
Norwegian foreign policy. If elected to the Security
Council for the 2021-2022 term, we will accord that
issue the highest possible priority.

