Mr. Skau (Sweden) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
team on assuming the presidency. We wish you great
success in your work. I also wish to thank our friends
from Uruguay for their exemplary work last month.

(spoke in English)

Let me begin by thanking the Special Representative

of the Secretary-General, Ms. Mindaoudou, for her
comprehensive briefing this afternoon. As this is
likely to be our last opportunity to take the floor on the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI),
we would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the valuable efforts and important work
of the mission over the past 13 years and to pay tribute
to the women and men who have served in that mission
over the years. I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her leadership and personal
commitment during this important last and final phase.

Today is a day of transition for Cote d'Ivoire. We
are gathered here this afternoon to discuss the closing
ofa peacekeeping mission, while only a few short hours
ago Cote d'Ivoire was elected to serve on the Security
Council. I congratulate Minister Marcel Amon-Tanoh
and his team here in New York on their election this
morning and we look forward to working with them
next year in the Council.

We welcome the continued progress of peace and
security in Cote d'Ivoire. The closing of UNOCI at the
end of the month represents an important milestone
and a new chapter in the history of the country. As the
country begins to chart its way forward, I would like
to make three points.

First of all, while we have many reasons to
celebrate, this is not the end of the road for Cote
d'Ivoire as it works to consolidate a stable and secure
society for all Ivorians. It is important that we pay
attention to the latest developments on the ground, in
particular the second incidence of mutiny by soldiers,
which occurred last month. Those developments
are serious and demand a serious response. They
underline the clear need for the Government to carry
out meaningful reform of the security sector, including
restructuring forces and enhancing cohesion,
discipline and accountability. A reformed security
sector will help build the population's confidence in
the security institutions.

In addition, women's participation is of paramount
importance to fostering sustainable and inclusive
peace. The final report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/89) illustrates the potential for the increased
participation of women in the political process, and we
urge the United Nations country team to contribute to
ensuring the participation of women and youth in the
transition process.

Secondly, as UNOCI closes its mission, there
is a need for continued international engagement.
It is important that Cote d'Ivoire's partners provide
ongoing support to the Government's efforts to sustain
peace and safeguard the investments already made
in a sustainable future. The African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States have
played a key role in achieving a successful outcome
to the Ivorian peace process. Going forward, regional
actors will continue to have an essential role to play.
Thirdly, regarding the transition from UNOCI
to the United Nations country team, we welcome the
robust transition plan developed by the United Nations
and agreed with the Government at the end oflast year,
but we note that the closing of UNOCI means that the
United Nations presence in the country will face a
financial cliff, which jeopardizes the sustainability
of the gains achieved. We believe that the United
Nations can do even better in ensuring that transitions
in general are transformative and forward-looking
processes. More systematic and integrated work across
the United Nations system is needed sooner. We have
a joint responsibility to ensure that United Nations
country teams have that capability.

In conclusion, I would like to join the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in
commending the Government and the people of Cote
d'Ivoire for their resilience and their efforts to restore
peace and stability to their country, with the support of
the international community. The closure of the UNOCI
mission underlines the remarkable journey the country
has made since 2004. The international community
must now continue to support the Government and the
people of Cote d'Ivoire as they work to build a peaceful,
equitable and prosperous country for all Ivorians.

