Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
introduction to our debate and to welcome the presence
among us of Ms. Frechette.

I would also like to welcome the presence at the
Council table of Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, the new President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
whose striking statement sheds light on our discussions. In
addition, I would like to pay heartfelt tribute to the unique
and irreplaceable role all our countries have conferred upon
the ICRC, whose members do their job with remarkable
courage and professionalism.

Our debate is at once essential - for we are talking
about protecting whole populations - and also very
technical, because it entails defining the most effective
means of ensuring that protection. The Security Council
held a very in-depth debate on 16 and 17 September on
the whole host of issues raised by the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. There is no point in repeating
that debate today, yet we must agree that our recent work
has confirmed just how important this subject is. That
importance has been specifically borne out by the
discussion we had last week on the Carlsson report,
regarding genocide in Rwanda. Following the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999, we are
called upon today to adopt a new draft resolution that
should make it possible to follow through on a number of
major recommendations contained in the Secretary-
General's report of last September.

First of all, the draft resolution rivets our attention
in the way it couches the matter of protecting civilians in
armed conflict at the very heart of the Council's
concerns - and indeed at the heart of its work. The first
operative paragraph states that the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General of 8
September will be taken into account by the Council in
carrying out its work. This means that that report is to be
an ongoing point of reference for us. Moreover, the draft
resolution clearly points out that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is an issue that covers most of
the activities of the Council, whether we are talking of
prevention, peacekeeping or coercive action.

The draft resolution also stresses the determination
of the Council to secure all necessary information about
the status of civilians in armed conflict. Under operative
paragraphs 4, 6, 8, 24 and 25, the Secretary-General and
the Member States are invited to provide the Council with
such information. That information may come from any
pertinent source, among which we know are included
humanitarian agencies and many different non-
governmental organizations present at the sites of conflict.
It will be up to the Council to deal with such information.
That task presupposes, as has been highlighted in the
debate on Rwanda, that we in the Council will have more
time to do this and that we will undoubtedly dedicate less
time to thematic debates.

Finally and most importantly, the draft resolution
stresses the Council's readiness to face up to its
responsibilities and to act with all the means at its
disposal to make a contribution to better protecting
civilians in armed conflict.

One of the means envisaged by the draft resolution,
notably in operative paragraphs 8 and 12, involves

 

appeals issued by the Council to the parties to a conflict. A
second means, addressed in operative paragraph 4, is the
establishment of operations designed to prevent conflict; the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force in Macedonia
and the United Nations Mission of Observers observers in
Prevlaka have shown what the Council can do in preventive
terms. I also wish to mention the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic, which afforded a very
good recent example of United Nations success.

A third means involves peacekeeping operations of the
more conventional variety. These operations may play a
major role in protecting civilians. To that end, we must
ensure a better definition of their mandates, which is
addressed in operative paragraphs 13, 16, 17 and 18 of the
draft resolution. We must also ensure a speedier
deployment capability for such operations, as has just been
emphasized by the Secretary-General. We look forward
with interest to the outcome of work under way in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on this vital
topic. Finally, we must devote special attention to training
personnel involved in such operations, particularly in
humanitarian law, as recalled in operative paragraph 19 of
the draft resolution.

A fourth instrument that deserves our attention is
sanctions. The adoption of sanctions by the Council during
an armed conflict must not contribute to the deterioration of
the conditions of civilians. The Secretary-General's report
contains recommendations on this score, as does General
Assembly resolution 51/242. It will be the responsibility of
the Working Group on sanctions, which we have recently
established, to take these into account, as specified in
operative paragraph 22.

The issue of sanctions bears on the work of the
Council within the context of Chapter VII of the Charter.
The draft resolution contains very important provisions in
this regard. Operative paragraph 5 provides that a threat to
international peace and security can result from attacks
against the civilian population and from systematic, flagrant
and widespread violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. This is an especially important assertion.
In effect, it means that in the face of such violations, the
Council intends to place its work within the framework of
Chapter VII and, depending on the circumstances, to resort
to the possible measures referred to in that Chapter.

We attach great importance to the provisions of the
draft resolution relating to actions taken in the struggle
against anti-personnel mines and against the dissemination
of light and small weapons.

The resolution we are about to adopt thus constitutes
an important phase in our efforts to avoid the recurrence
of the humanitarian tragedies of the last decade. I
therefore wish to pay tribute to Canada's activity in this
very important arena. We deem particularly encouraging
the fact that our debate will be pursued next year on the
basis of new recommendations of the Secretary-General.

