Ms. Wallstrom (Sweden): I begin by thanking you,
Sir, and the Peruvian presidency for hosting today's
meeting and the Secretary-General for his statement.
He knows that he has our full support.

Let me also thank our briefers: Mr. Dan Neculaescu,
State Secretary for Regional Affairs and Multilateral
Global Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Romania, as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
members of the Security Council for their participation
in the Secretary-General's retreat at the estate of Dag
Hammarskjold at Backakra this past weekend and
thank them for taking the trouble to come.

Today's date, 25 April, is a special day as we
commemorate the Carnation Revolution, which ended
dictatorship in Portugal and colonial rule in many
Lusophone countries. It set Portugal on the path to
European integration, together with Spain and Greece.
Indeed, that example, which inspired a generation of
Europeans, including me, compels us to reflect on
the fabric of sustaining peace. Fostering the same
commitment to sustain peace that inspired European
leaders following two devastating world wars could
hardly be more urgent.

In 2016, more countries were affected by conflict
than at any time in almost 30 years. The types of
security challenges facing the world have become more
complex and are often interrelated. Once ignited, such
conflicts can take years to quench, thereby requiring
investments in peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance,
resilience, peacebuilding and development - not to
mention the cost in human lives and human potential.
That, if anything, provides a strong incentive for us to
increase investments in prevention. Can we afford not
to prevent conflicts?

The Secretary-General has made sustaining
peace the overarching purpose of the reforms of the
United Nations system, and his follow-up report to the
resolutions of 2016 offers a clear road map (S/2018/43).
Now we must take action. Let me briefly outline
today three core commitments that are needed to
operationalize the sustaining peace agenda.

First, we must boost equality and inclusive national
ownership. Multidimensional poverty, abuses and
violations of human rights and growing inequality are
challenges increasingly influencing the situations that
appear on the Council's agenda. Addressing exclusion
and structural discrimination is therefore critical
for prevention.

Importantly, no peace is sustainable, just or
legitimate if it shuts out half the population. The full
and effective participation of women in peace and
security is core Council business - not for the sake of
women, but for the sake of peace and security. Gender
equality benefits everyone.
Similarly, violations and abuses of human rights
erode trust within societies and are root causes of
conflict. Human rights are not optional extras. Building
inclusive societies requires States to abide by their
obligations under international law and to respect,
protect and promote all human rights i civil, political,
economic, social and cultural.

Secondly, we must improve our ability to consider
early warnings and commit to preventive action.
Within the Council we must establish a practice of
early discussions on situations at risk of escalating into
violent conflict, as we have heard examples of before
in this Chamber, with a view to preventing them from
emerging. There are a number of tools at our disposal
that would allow us to engage in early action. Those
include the Peacebuilding Commission, the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Security Council on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa and the many
informal meeting formats at the Council's disposal. We
must utilize them.

We need independent, authoritative and candid
advice from the Secretary-General based on
comprehensive analysis. That includes analysis on
emerging threats, such as climate change, which is still
propelling so many ongoing problems and conflicts,
as well as new threats, to improve our collective
understanding, strategic planning and response.

Thirdly, we must target drivers of conflict through
collaborative action. If conflicts have multiple drivers,
then no single action alone can prevent them.

Cross-pillar cooperation and a system-wide
approach are essential. That means going beyond
sharing individual country plans to being jointly
accountable for delivering on a common goal. It means
true collaboration that delivers enhanced synergies
and leads to results that are greater than the sum of the
individual parts.

Furthermore, as we have heard already, we must
enhance our partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. They are the eyes and the ears on the
ground. They understand their neighbours, and can
intervene when we cannot.

The Peacebuilding Commission is a vehicle for
collaborative action and partnerships. It is uniquely
placed to convene international actors for coordinated
and strategic responses for sustaining peace. We can
unlock the full potential of the Commission through
more informal and frequent interactions between
the Council and the Commission. The catalytic role
played by the Peacebuilding Fund has been extremely
useful, and Sweden is therefore doubling its support to
the Fund.

In conclusion, preventing violent conflict is a
Charter obligation. The sustaining peace approach
allows us to improve the Council's ability to do its part in
delivering on that responsibility. Today, we as Member
States must play our part by mustering political will
and wholeheartedly supporting the Secretary-General
and his vision of putting conflict prevention at the
centre of the Organization.

