Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
We also welcome Ms. Louise Frechette, Deputy
Secretary-General, and Mr. John Howard, Prime
Minister of Australia, to today's important debate.

We also wish to express our satisfaction at the
excellent work undertaken by UNTAET in East Timor.
Allow us further to convey our thanks and appreciation
to Special Representative Sergio Vieira de Mello and to
all the staff of UNTAET for their efforts to implement
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

We cannot fail to welcome Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of East Timor.

Syria has followed the long road taken by the
parties concerned towards 20 May 2002 and wishes to
express its appreciation for the roles of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and of the Constituent
Assembly through its decision to convene direct
presidential elections on 14 April this year. We believe
that this is an excellent initiative and a decisive step on
the road to East Timor's independence.

We welcome the elements in the report on
progress achieved towards independence, particularly
concerning constitutional and legislative measures,
security conditions, the implementation of policies to
encourage economic and social development, the issue
of relations with Indonesia, East Timor's closest and
historically most important neighbour, and steps taken
by both parties to build mutual relations.

We would express our appreciation to the
Indonesian Government for its determination to fulfil
its commitments and for the measures it has taken to
that end. In this regard, we believe that special
relations should be fostered between Indonesia and
East Timor, focusing on the best possible future for the
peoples of both countries.

We are satisfied at the increasing role being
played by the Administration in East Timor in
governing the daily affairs of that country. We also
express our appreciation for the encouraging results
achieved by the Administration in economic and social
development, particularly in generating income,
improving the situation of poverty and unemployment
and reforming the country's infrastructure, while
stressing the need to focus on the role of women in
peace and development in East Timor.

We stress the references in the report to the urgent
need for resources to provide the necessary technical
support for the development of the judiciary and the
Police Service, as well as to international security
assistance, which has a crucial role to play in
promoting stability locally and regionally. We welcome
the accelerated return of refugees despite
misinformation and propaganda campaigns and hope
that all obstacles in the way of the return of those
refugees will be eliminated.

We fully understand that the future of East Timor
can be guaranteed only by full reconciliation among all
Timorese. We believe that this is crucial to the stability
of the country. We also believe that development can
be achieved in East Timor through such national
reconciliation. The United Nations experience in East
Timor is a success story by any standards and we hope
that all the aforementioned efforts will be crowned
with success and ensure the best possible future for the
people of that country.

We support the recommendations in the report on
extending UNTAET's mandate until the date of
independence on 20 May 2002 and on the successor
mission and its mandate to support the Administration
in the post-independence period. We also wish to
express our support for the independence of East
Timor. We wish the people of that emerging country
every success in the future.

