At the outset, I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. My thanks also go to Mr. Levy and Mr. Shikaki for sharing their views. We remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian challenges facing Palestinians. It is deeply worrisome that the number of daily new cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has been growing substantially since late June. The pandemic is having a severe impact on Palestinian socioeconomic development. Businesses, factories and shops, previously only enough to maintain basic subsistence, have been closed. Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians are threatened by risks of unemployment and food insecurity. The budget and daily functioning of the Palestinian Authority are on the verge of severe disruption. We commend the steps taken by the State of Palestine to fight the COVID-19 pandemic and alleviate its impacts. The efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), working closely with the World Health Organization, in the last few months have also been critical in providing medical, hygiene, sanitation and other general support services for the Palestinian people. Given the mounting challenges, as the risks facing Palestinian communities could be compounded further still by the second wave of infections in the region, we call on the authorities in Israel and the State of Palestine to continue their cooperation with a view to getting the pandemic under control and lessening its devastating impact. Although tremendous in terms of impact, the pandemic is just one among several deep-rooted concerns of the international community regarding the prospects of Palestinian people. The most serious concern continues to centre on plans by Israel to annex large swaths of the occupied Palestinian territory. If realized, the plans would exact severe and irreversible impacts on the viability of the two-State solution, as well as on peace and stability in the Middle East region. Such annexation would be a serious violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations and would also run counter to the long-term interests of the Israelis themselves. The announcement of such plans in the last few months has caused much anxiety, rising tension and rhetoric. It is detrimental to the search for a long-lasting solution for the Middle East peace process and exacerbates the dire humanitarian situation that Palestinians have been enduring. Against that backdrop, it is high time to redouble efforts to defuse tension and resume dialogue. We therefore call on Israel to stop all unilateral actions and abandon all annexation plans. We also call on all other parties concerned to refrain from any unilateral action, use of force or incitement to violence that may complicate the situation or escalate ongoing tensions. We welcome the recent statement by President Mahmoud Abbas that the Palestinian Authority is ready to resume the long-stalled peace talks with Israel. We express our appreciation for the determination of the Secretary-General and the Special Coordinator in engaging with all related parties to restart dialogue and alleviate Palestinians' hardship. We commend the multiple efforts by various interested parties, including the Quartet, to resume negotiations in a creative and sustainable manner. We call on the international community to step up assistance to the Palestinian people in this time of challenges, including to strengthen budgetary support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order to provide adequate and timely humanitarian assistance. Let me conclude by reiterating once again our full support for efforts aimed at reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Israeli- Palestinian conflict through dialogue and negotiation. It is critical to strive to ensure the legitimate interests of the parties concerned, as well as promote peace, stability and development in the Middle East. The only option towards that end is two-State solution.
