Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Area country member of the European
Economic Area Iceland align themselves with this
statement.

I would like begin by welcoming to the Council
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional
National Government of Somalia, Mr. Yusuf Hassan
Ibrahim.

The European Union welcomes today's public
debate in the Security Council and the opportunity it
provides to assess the situation in Somalia in the light
of the Secretary-General's report and to focus our
attention, for the second time in less than a week, on
the Horn of Africa f a region of particular concern to
the European Union.

The future of Somalia depends, first and
foremost, on the Somali people themselves. The
international community must help the Somalis to turn
around the dangerous and unusual situation in Somalia,
which, for more than a decade, has had to manage
without governmental structures. Years of civil war,
poverty and social disintegration have led to a situation
that constitutes a security threat and a potential source
of instability and extremism in the region. Investing in
peace and in the comprehensive reconstruction of
Somalia will contribute to regional security and
prevent future conflict.

The European Union underlines the need for a
unified approach to the peace process and for greater
consistency in its policy towards Somalia so as to
achieve a comprehensive and lasting settlement. In this
regard, the European Union welcomes with satisfaction
the timely resolution adopted on Somalia at the 9th
Summit of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), held in Khartoum on 10 and 11
January, and the recommendations contained therein.

The European Union would like to emphasize the
need for a firm commitment against terrorism, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). In this context, the European Union attaches
special importance to, and welcomes in particular,
IGAD's recommendation urging the Transitional
National Government and all other de facto authorities
and political forces to commit themselves to combat
terrorism in all its forms. We note the establishment by
the Transitional National Government of an anti-
terrorism task force and its stated intention to take
further steps in that regard. The Union is currently
providing Somalia with assistance in specific areas so
as to enable it to meet the requirements of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

The European Union welcomes the decision on
Somalia taken on 14 February by the IGAD Committee
of Foreign Ministers to convene, in the second half of
April at Nairobi, a national reconciliation conference,
to include, without preconditions, the Transitional
National Government and all other Somali de facto
authorities and political forces. We wish the conference
every success and encourage all the Somali parties to
participate in it. We also welcome IGAD's call for
cooperation among the three front-line States -
Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti - which gives us cause
for hope that the peace and reconciliation process will
gain renewed impetus.

The Somalis themselves are the main participants
in the national reconciliation dialogue. The parties
must put aside their differences and participate in the
IGAD-facilitated dialogue without preconditions and
with a genuine resolve to broaden and complete the
national reconciliation process that began in Arta so as
to make it truly inclusive. We encourage the United
Nations to work closely with and provide every
assistance to the countries members of IGAD and to
the Somali parties in preparing for and participating in
that conference.

The European Union emphasizes its readiness to
examine ways and means of supporting IGAD's efforts
to help the Somalis achieve peace and national
reconciliation and to put an end to a situation that is
causing great distress and suffering among the civilian
population. In this regard, a meeting of the IGAD
Partners Forum on Somalia is scheduled to take place
in Rome on 11 April.

We call once again on all States and other parties
involved to respect the arms embargo established by
Security Council resolution 733 (1992). All States, and
in particular those of the region, must refrain from any
military involvement in Somalia and from taking any
other initiative that could seriously infringe on the
sovereignty, political independence, unity and
prospects for peace of this country. The territory of
Somalia should not be used to undermine stability in
the region.

The European Union takes note of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report, and in particular of the assessment of the
security situation carried out by the inter-agency
mission dispatched to Somalia. The Secretary-General
considers that the current security situation in
Mogadishu does not allow for a long-term United
Nations presence. The European Union fully shares
these security concerns. It is nonetheless absolutely
essential that there be active United Nations
involvement in the Somali peace process, in the
rehabilitation process and in the restoration of peace
and stability. We must look at ways in which the
United Nations and the international community can
contribute to breaking this cycle of insecurity and help
create the necessary security conditions in Somalia.

In that regard, we encourage further proposals on
post-conflict peace-building activities and institution-
building in Somalia, including assistance in the
demobilization of militia members and in the training
of police personnel, as set out in the Security Council
presidential statement of 31 October 2001
(S/PRST/2001/30). We look forward to the
establishment of a Committee of Friends of Somalia by
the Secretary-General to coordinate efforts and gather
support for peace and the reconstruction of the country.

We want to stress that it is necessary to support
and promote the role of civil society in the process of
national reconciliation and social and economic
reconstruction, as well as women's participation in
peace-building at all levels. Further attention should be
given to the education and training of young people.

All parties in Somalia must fully respect the
security and safety of the personnel of the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and non-governmental organizations, and must
guarantee their complete freedom of movement and
access throughout Somalia. In that regard, it is
necessary to reopen the airport and port of Mogadishu
to allow for increased humanitarian assistance. It is
also important that Somali leaders heed the call of the
Secretary-General to welcome and assist in the
implementation of humanitarian and socio-economic
development projects.

The catastrophic situation of human rights in the
country deserves our attention. In particular, steps must
be taken to end the widespread impunity for, among
other things, arbitrary and summary executions and
acts of torture, as well as to improve the human rights
of women and the rights of the child. The widespread
abominable practice of recruiting children as soldiers
still continues. The European Union is deeply
concerned at the absence of an effective judicial
system.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia, caused by
conflict, food insecurity and the current drought,
remains a deep concern. In that regard, the European
Union stands ready to continue its contribution to the
international effort. Where security conditions permit,
we are currently providing humanitarian and
rehabilitation assistance to local communities,
particularly through non-governmental organizations.

Finally, the European Union remains committed
to continuing its support for the peace process in
Somalia, and in particular to the efforts of IGAD. A
lasting solution for Somalia requires the political will
of all Somali parties, the constructive role and the
support of its immediate neighbours, the full
cooperation of other interested countries and active
engagement by the wider international community.

