Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me too start by
expressing my gratitude for the briefing the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar. I
commend her for all her efforts over the past month. As I
said earlier today, with regard to the new Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Syria (see S/PV.8475), it
is so important that he be in contact with all of the
parties involved. From what has been said and what
we have heard, I congratulate Ms. Schraner Burgener
on building the necessary contacts to open her Office
in the capital of Myanmar. As we know, Myanmar is
a rather reclusive country. Entering the country and
being accepted as a partner is very important.

I would also like to recognize the positive steps
that have been taken. However, I would like to again
touch on remarks made by my Kuwaiti colleague in
his intervention. He recalled the trip that the Security
Council made last year to see at first hand the conflict,
the suffering of the people and the situation in Cox's
Bazar. We must admit that almost one year later, we
have made hardly any progress. I would also echo those
who have expressed gratitude to Bangladesh. I would
like to thank Bangladesh, through its Foreign Secretary.
Bangladesh has a number of challenges in hosting the
refugees and the fact that it continues to do so warrants
our gratitude.

We are afraid that, perhaps in a year or two or
three, we will still be meeting to discuss the refugees
in Cox's Bazar. We have heard that the situation there
is extremely dire. The risk is that those in the camps
will radicalize and become more extreme. Under such
circumstances, providing proper education to the many
children living there is quite a challenge. If they are
not educated, they will become radicalized. What kind
of generation will grow up there? There are no jobs.
We must therefore do everything possible to allow
the refugees to return. When I say that we must do
everything possible, it means we must have the proper
conditions. There can be no alternative to the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of the refugees. They
must have their legal documents, including those that
prove their citizenship, and they must also be able to
move around freely.

I would like to touch upon one of the activities
underlined by the Special Envoy - one which I believe
is key - and that is taking into consideration the many
ethnic groups in the country in order to establish a
sustained intercommunal dialogue. We must strengthen
mutual understanding among the various ethnic groups.
The Rohingya must be accepted on an equal basis
with the other population groups. The hatred that the
majority of the population has expressed towards the
Rohingya must cease. I come back to what I said earlier
today about accountability in Syria. There is no need
for me to go into detail.

My colleagues from Belgium, the Dominican
Republic and the United Kingdom have all stressed the
importance of accountability. Those responsible for the
terrible crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity must be brought to justice, including the
military responsible for them. We have to make progress
on the issue. The mechanism must be complementary.
In that context and because women were especially
targeted in such crimes, I fully support the proposal
made by our French colleague to have Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, brief the Council on what
is being done to alleviate the suffering of the victims.

Last but not least, I would like to thank my
colleague from Indonesia, a member of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), for all of
ASEAN's efforts. I think it is wonderful that ASEAN
is active and plays a key role. I would also like to
commend ASEAN's neighbours, in particular China,
its largest neighbour, for their role. The representative
of China said no pressure should be brought to bear. I
would say that China should do its utmost to encourage
the Government of Myanmar to do the homework the
international community expects it to do.

I would like to thank the President of the Council
and his team. I will not be long because we would like
to go to your party later, Sir. You leave big shoes for
the French and German presidencies to fill in March
and April.

