Mr. Martinsen (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation associates itself with the previous
expressions of thanks to the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi
Annabi, for the detailed report he has given us about
the situation in Kosovo and on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

As we have said before, we believe that
communities are the foundation of democracy. The
upcoming municipal elections, scheduled for 28
October, will mark a good opportunity for the almost
1 million people who are registered voters to
understand the value of full participation in democratic
life. Though it is disappointing that just 1,000 Kosovo
Serbs have registered, we believe that one must stress
the courage of these individuals because they made that
decision notwithstanding the existing difficulties and
Belgrade's negative influence in this regard.

We hope, moreover, that UNMIK will take all the
steps necessary to see to it that these elections will, as
faithfully as possible, reflect the will of all of the
people of Kosovo. The commitment arrived at by
representatives of various sectors of political life in
Kosovo in the Airlie House Declaration as to the need
to scrupulously respect the outcome of the elections
and the need to halt ethnic violence and promote
democratic values shows that tolerance is possible and
allows us to be optimistic about the prospects for
success of the approaching electoral process.

As the date for holding the elections draws closer,
new challenges in terms of security may arise. The
kidnapping and killing, at the beginning of this month,
of the political leader Shaban Manaj of the Democratic
League of Kosovo is an act that must be categorically
condemned. An atmosphere dominated by intimidation
and violence can work against the holding of free and
fair elections.

We are also concerned with the ever-present
tension in Mitrovica, something also highlighted by
Mr. Annabi in his presentation. A major political
development, such as the recent Declaration issued by
the leaders of the Serbian and Albanian communities of
Mitrovica exhorting everyone to calm and tolerance,
was quickly overshadowed by the actions of extremists
from both communities. We strongly condemn such
acts, which seek only to undermine the efforts of
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR). Also
deserving of our denunciation are the recent murders of
three members of a Roma family and of a five-year-old
Albanian child, and other attacks against ethnic groups.
We hope that those responsible for these deeds will be
quickly identified and brought to justice.

To keep a culture of impunity from taking root in
Kosovo, we must have an impartial, independent,
multi-ethnic judiciary. To that end, the decision taken
by Mr. Kouchner to appoint 139 new judges and
prosecutors for the municipal courts of Kosovo is
noteworthy.

The announcement of the leader of the Serb
National Council of Mitrovica, Oliver Ivanovic, of his
intention to join the Joint Committee on Returns is a
positive development that we appreciate. We hope that
announcement will contribute to creating the
conditions necessary for spurring forward the
programme for getting people back to their homes in
Kosovo.

As to some of the other issues mentioned by Mr.
Annabi in his statement, my delegation also expresses
its hope, along the lines also indicated by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, that those
countries that have received members of ethnic
minorities from Kosovo take into account the security
interests of those people before they proceed to deport
them by force.

Finally, we associate ourselves with the
comments made by the delegations of the United
Kingdom, Canada and the Netherlands with regard to
the detention of their citizens by the Belgrade
authorities. This concerns not only those Governments,
but the United Nations as a whole, in the light of the
functions carried out by those detained.

In conclusion, my delegation endorses the earlier
expressions of appreciation to Mr. Kouchner for the
constant and tireless efforts he has been making for
inter-ethnic coexistence in Kosovo.

