Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me, first of all, to convey my
delegation's congratulations to you for the excellent
manner in which you have guided the work of the
Council during the month of March and to thank you
for convening this meeting.

Once again the Security Council has to meet on
an emergency basis in order to examine the deplorable
consequences of a conflict that has lasted for several
decades without any just and honourable solution being
found to the satisfaction of all parties. The escalation
of violence has reached unprecedented levels of danger
in the dramatic and sorrowful history ofthis conflict.

Those of us who have been following the events
of recent hours see a veritable nightmare that begs us to
ask different questions. From virtual house arrest we
have moved to armed aggression against the legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people. How much
longer will the Security Council flagrantly shirk its
responsibilities? How much longer will we be victims
of paralysing vetoes or the threat of vetoes that prevent
this organ, supposedly entrusted with carrying out
functions clearly enshrined in the United Nations
Charter as regards peacekeeping and international
security, from taking immediate and emergency
measures? In addition to the genocide that has been
committed for so many years against an oppressed and
occupied people, are we now to allow regicide to
occur? The paralysis of the Council with respect to the
question of Palestine and the Middle East in general is
manifest not only when it fails to adopt resolutions that
are urgently needed, but also when it fails to act to
ensure compliance with those that it has already
adopted.

The cycle of uncontrolled violence has reached
unheard levels. We wonder how many more deaths
there will be, how much more suffering and destruction
before we put an end to this escalation of violence. Is it
even possible? My delegation reiterates the need to
establish a protection force or some other analogous,
impartial mechanism that can protect the civilian
population, observe the ceasefire and monitor the
situation on the ground.

Cuba fully supports the heroic struggle of the
Arab people, and the Palestinian people in particular,
against Israel's occupation and aggression. We feel
solidarity with their resistance and their rebellion. We
reiterate our condemnation of all suicidal acts with
bombs or other acts against Israeli civilians, who
become innocent victims of their Government's policy.
We also reject the clumsy manipulation being made of
these isolated acts in order to attempt to justify the
disproportionate response by an army that is equipped
and funded by the United States of America and that,
with the most modern means, is trying to crush the
spirit of rebellion of the heroic Palestinian people in its
struggle to gain the exercise of its most legitimate
rights.

Cuba demands full respect for the physical
integrity and dignity of President Arafat. We demand
the immediate and unconditional cessation of Israeli
aggression against the headquarters of the Palestinian
National Authority in Ramallah and the re-
establishment of power and telecommunications
service to the offices of President Arafat, whose
example of valour and struggle have already found a
page in history.

Presidential statements that solve nothing are not
enough, nor are hollow commitments and new
promises that are never kept. The Security Council
must act decisively and firmly. It must discharge its
obligations without delay or it will quite simply cloak
itself in shame once again by virtue ofits impotence.

