Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand associates
itself with the statement just made by the representative
of Malaysia, and we compliment his country on that
particular initiative.

It is no secret that over the past four days the
Security Council has struggled to negotiate a mutually
acceptable text for resolution 2202 (2015). Given the
history of the matter, given the bitterness of the conflict
and given the active support of troops and materiel that
continues to be provided to the separatists, that struggle
was hardly surprising. However, those problems should
not obscure the very simple truth: that above all
our combined objective must be to see an end to the
fighting in eastern Ukraine and a genuine and holding
ceasefire with lives saved as a result, to see respect for
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and to
see an end to external support for the separatists. That
is the standard by which we have judged this resolution
and voted accordingly.

New Zealand really does appreciate the fact that
Europeans have at last been able to come together and
act together to address this crisis, and, as a result ofthis
resolution, can now be seen to do so with the unequivocal
support of the Council. That is what we understand in
what negotiating parties sought to achieve in Minsk last
week, and indeed in that same city in September 2014.
We have therefore supported the outcome they agreed.

We might not like the compromises. We might
identify shortcomings. We know that ceasefires do
not always hold and, certainly, as events right now in
Debaltseve clearly demonstrate, they do not always
hold with consistency at all times and in all places. But
it has been agreed by those most directly affected. We
have now sent a signal of the Council's support for a
ceasefire, which is another step towards the long-needed
political settlement. We have done so unanimously as
the Security Council.

Along with fellow Council member Malaysia,
New Zealand has a direct interest in respect of the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 - a
victim of the Ukrainian conflict i an interest we share
with non-Council members Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Germany, Indonesia, the Netherlands and the
Philippines, with whom both countries have actively
consulted over the past few days. The Council's previous
decisions on Flight MH-17 are absolutely clear, so we
welcome the reaffirmation of resolution 2166 (2014),
which is the primary statement ofthe Council regarding
the accountability of those who illegally launched a
surface-to-air missile at a civilian passenger aircraft,
murdering 298 people on board.

We thank the primary sponsors of the resolution
for taking up and incorporating the language proposed
by Malaysia and New Zealand during the negotiations,
thus ensuring that the victims are not forgotten and that
those responsible may be ultimately held to account.
New Zealand agrees with the United Kingdom that the
amnesty agreed in Minsk does not and cannot apply to
those responsible for that crime.

The adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) does not
take place in a vacuum, which is a point that is implicit
in the press statement issued by the Council only an
hour or so ago (SC/11784). The Council is keenly aware
of the fragility of the present ceasefire, of instances
where it is only partly observed and of places like
Debaltseve where right now it is being outright ignored
so that one side can secure a territorial advantage on
the ground, after which they might presumably then
make as though they are observing what has previously
been agreed. That can only be deplored, but it does not
alter the fact that the parties have solemnly agreed and
committed to a ceasefire and that it is holding in most
places, and that is saving lives.

All ofus must therefore continue to urge compliance
with the agreement and with resolution 2202 (2015),
particularly Russia, as a party to the Minsk agreements,
which agreed the ceasefire. It is in that capacity that we
call upon Russia to use its undoubted and considerable
influence on the separatists to require them to honour
that which has been agreed. If that happens, more lives
will be saved as a result.

