Mr. Feltman: We meet today in light of worrisome
developments in Jerusalem, including growing violence
and renewed settlement activities. On 27 October, the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine to the
United Nations submitted two identical letters to the
Secretary-General and to the Security Council

"to demand that Israel rescind its plans and cease
forthwith all of its illegal settlement activities and
all other provocations and incitement throughout
the Palestinian land, including in occupied East
Jerusalem".

Most recently, in his 21 October briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.7281), the Secretary-General stressed
his deep concerns about continued Israeli settlement
activity, particularly plans to construct residential
housing in occupied East Jerusalem. He also urged
the Israeli Government to reverse these activities.
Regrettably, since then there have been troubling new
reports of settlement activity taking place in East
Jerusalem.

The Secretary-General is alarmed by new reports
about the advancement of planning for some 1,000
Israeli settlements units in occupied East Jerusalem.
These include approximately 400 units in Har Homa
and 600 in Ramat Shlomo. This latest development
follows on the heels of Israel's decision at the end of
September to accelerate the process of constructing
some 2,600 residential units in Givat Hamatos, also
in East Jerusalem. If pursued, these plans would once
again raise grave doubts about Israel's commitment to
achieving durable peace with the Palestinians, as the
new settlements threaten the very viability of the future
State of Palestine.

As affirmed by the Council and determined by
the International Court of Justice, Israel's policy and
practices of settling parts of its population and new
immigrants in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including occupied East Jerusalem, are in violation
of international law. As the Secretary-General has
consistently reiterated, it also runs contrary to the two-
State solution. Once again, the Secretary-General calls
on Israel to reverse these activities, heed the calls of the
international community to freeze settlement activity
and abide by its commitments under international law
and the Quartet Road Map.

Heightened tensions over unilateral actions,
provocations and access restrictions at the holy sites
in Jerusalem are continuing and the situation remains
volatile. In the past week, some 13 Palestinians have
reportedly been arrested at the Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount compound, including one Palestinian
on 22 October for allegedly throwing stones at Jewish
visitors. Israeli police officers have also been injured
as a result of clashes. We note that, in the aftermath of
these clashes, Prime Minister Hamdallah visited Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount on 27 October.

The Secretary-General has reiterated the importance
of respect for the religious freedom of all, and for
worshippers ofall faiths to have access to their holy sites,
while noting that religious and other leaders should also
refrain from making inflammatory statements. In this
regard, the Government of Israel's reassurances to the
Secretary-General, and reportedly to Jordan, that it has
no plans to change long-standing policies governing the
holy sites are noted. We also note that Israel, as per its
agreement with the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, has
committed to working to ensure the protection of the
Muslim and Christian holy sites in the Old City and
the safety of worshippers. Incitement to violence from
any quarter must cease and the sanctity of the holy sites
of all faiths must be respected. The Secretary-General
will be closely following developments at these sacred
places that have such significance to millions around
the world.
The situation in the rest of East Jerusalem has
grown more tense since 21 October. On 22 October,
a Palestinian man drove his car into a light rail train
station near Ammunition Hill and ran over passengers
disembarking from the train, killing a three-month-
old baby and injuring six other people, one of whom
succumbed to her injuries later. The driver was shot
dead by Israeli police as he tried to flee the scene.
It is our understanding that Israeli authorities are
investigating this incident as what they describe as a
potential terrorist attack. Regrettably, some on the
Palestinian side have praised this attack.

Clashes took place during the burial of the Palestinian
man on 26 October. On the same day, Prime Minister
Netanyahu stated at a cabinet meeting that Israel would
not allow the stone- and firebomb-throwing to continue
and that an additional 1,000 security forces would be
deployed in East Jerusalem. The Prime Minister also
reportedly requested legislation to raise the terms of
punishment for stone-throwing, including criteria for
the possible imposition of economic sanctions on the
parents of minors who throw stones.

Tensions have also escalated in the rest of the West
Bank, where Israeli forces shot and killed a Palestinian-
American teenager on 24 October in Silwad village
near Ramallah, reportedly following stone- and
Molotov cocktail-throwing during a demonstration.
On 27 October, Israeli forces detained 14 Palestinians
for alleged stone-throwing. On 28 October, four
Palestinians were reportedly shot and injured by Israeli
security forces in Jenin, including one who is in critical
condition.

Tensions also rose from the reported demolition
in the past week of five Palestinian homes in the East
Jerusalem neighbourhoods of Al-Tur and Silwan, as
well as in Salah Eddine Street, and following news that
a Palestinian held under administrative detention in
Israel and on hunger strike for 37 days was moved to
hospital on 27 October after his health had deteriorated.

I would like to underscore the criticality of
immediately diffusing the escalating tensions in
East Jerusalem Without delay. The wounds from the
devastating conflict in Gaza are only just beginning to
heal, with the tripartite temporary mechanism for the
delivery of reconstruction materials into Gaza brokered

by the United Nations only starting to take effect. The
parties can ill afford to once more take unilateral actions
that serve only to inflame tensions and further entrench
the suspicion and hostility that have been the tragic
narrative of this conflict for decades. The reality is that
continued settlement activity in occupied Palestinian
territory is doing significant damage to any possibility
of a lasting peace between the two sides and is moving
the situation ever closer to a one-State reality.

Ongoing tensions in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank cannot be separated from the larger reality that
remains unresolved. As the Secretary-General has
frequently conveyed, any enduring peace will require
starting dialogue to address the root causes of the
conflict, including an end to the occupation that has
lasted close to 50 years and effectively addressing
Israel's legitimate security concerns.

I Wish to recall that on 26 September 2008, during
the high-level meeting of the Security Council on
settlements, the then Secretary-General of League of
Arab States, Mr. Amre Moussa, recalled that two years
earlier the Security Council had

"recorded a clear consensus on the necessity of
reviving the peace process with the express goal of
establishing a viable Palestinian State in the West
Bank and Gaza, with, of course, East Jerusalem as
its capital" (S/PV5983, p. 3).

Such consensus was echoed in the Arab Peace initiative
and the understanding that there would be an immediate
and complete halt to settlement activities, as per the
Road Map. Eight years later, we must ask ourselves
why there has been little progress and how to move the
peace process forward.

We have heard that some members of the Council
have again started discussing the possibility of adopting
a new draft resolution on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
For our part, we wonder if the current paradigm, almost
50 years into the conflict, does not require revisiting
our engagement thus far, consistent with the decisions
of the Security Council and the relentless efforts of
the international community. Palestinian and Israeli
leaders and people should make no mistake - there
will never be a substitute to their own responsibility in
bringing the change necessary to achieving peace. The
United Nations stands ready to lend its full support to
such collective efforts.
In conclusion, the status quo is not a viable
option. Further delay in the pursuit of peace will only
exacerbate the conflict further and deepen divisions.
Now is the time for bold leadership and for both sides
to fully commit to meaningful negotiations that will
allow the establishment of two States, living side by
side in peace and security. Ignoring the calls of the
international community for such negotiations, for
whatever reason, will only breed more violence in the
region that has already seen too much of it.

