The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamad
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39, of the
provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Darfur.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Eliasson to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
2
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, document S/2007/653.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ian Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, and Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

I now give the floor to Mr. Eliasson.


