Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate, and Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing, in which he gave us a
detailed explanation of the recent developments in the
Middle East. We are meeting in this Chamber once again
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, and the events whose impact
is a source of concern for the international community
and which requires particular attention.

Two months ago, the world saw an improvement with
the resumption of negotiations between the Israelis and
Palestinians following an effort by the United States led
by Secretary of State John Kerry. That effort enabled
the resumption on 14 August of negotiations with a
view to reaching a comprehensive agreement in nine
months. Whereas that is a promising sign that brought
an end to the paralysis that plagued the peace process
for some three years, it does indeed represent a real
opportunity 4 and possibly the last - for achieving a
two-State solution.

However, some positions seek to undermine
confidence in the two parties and prevent from making
progress in promoting peace and coexistence. The
opportunity to restart the peace process must not be
dismissed by any of the parties. They must all commit
to a negotiating process with deadlines and a clear plan
while refraining from doing anything that could hamper
the process or present obstacles to it, in particular,
the ongoing settlement activity and attacks on Haram
Al-Sharif.

The Palestinian parties have shown their good faith
and a great degree ofwisdom and sense ofresponsibility
to ensure the success of the negotiations under way. The
Palestinian people throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories have shown patience and restraint, despite
the disastrous situation caused by the oppressive
embargo. Arab States have also shown their good faith
by proposing the Arab Peace Initiative.

Morocco has for decades contributed effectively
to promoting negotiations and constructive dialogue
between all parties to the conflict in the Middle East
in order to achieve a solution that would respect the
legitimate rights of Palestinians to establish their
independent, viable State in the Palestinian territories
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the return
of Palestinian and Lebanese territories. The Kingdom
of Morocco has always considered the question to
be linked to the issue of Al-Quds, whose symbolic
identity must be preserved. That has been the goal of
the Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His Majesty the
King, which has sought to preserve the city's religious
and civilizational heritage as commons shared by the
three monotheistic religions and to promote the city as
a symbol of cooperation and assistance.

We are pleased that the Quartet met in New
York and welcome its contribution to the ongoing
negotiations. We hope that the Council will play a more
active role in reaching a comprehensive solution, which
is what that the international community has sought
to achieve since the Organization was created. The
Security Council proved itself able to speak in a unified
voice in adopting resolution 2118 (2013) and by the way
in which it has dealt with the humanitarian aspects of
the Syrian conflict.
We are aware of the difficulties and complications
regarding the implementation of that resolution and
the convening of a second Geneva conference, which
would be a means for attaining a peaceful solution and
bringing an end to the violence and further provocations.
It should allow for the building of a society based on
peace and reconciliation that encompasses all Syrians
and thereby alleviate the burden on neighbouring
countries which are suffering the repercussions of the
Syrian crisis.

