Mr. Valle (Brazil): Some 15 days ago the Security
Council adopted resolution 1165 (1998) authorizing the
creation of an additional Trial Chamber for the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. It is with the same spirit
that prevailed then that Brazil supports the idea of an
additional trial chamber for the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia to bring to justice those responsible
for serious violations of international humanitarian law and
thus contribute to the restoration and maintenance of peace
in the subregion.

Indeed, we must not forget that those indicted by the
Tribunal have been charged with extremely serious crimes,
and that unless the Tribunal is given appropriate working
conditions it will not be able to satisfactorily fulfil the
mandate ascribed to it by the Security Council.

It is also true, however, that the financial implications
of the decision we are about to take are not entirely clear.
Therefore Brazil's support for the creation of a third trial
chamber should not be construed as approval of any
amount of additional resources for the Tribunal. We should
consider the financial issue in the appropriate forum, taking
into account the specific demands of the Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia as well as the need to dispense
equitable treatment to both ad hoc Tribunals.

Brazil has supported the creation of the ad hoc
Tribunals as an exceptional action on the part of the United
Nations and of Member States in the face of the
exceptionally grave circumstances that demanded their
creation. Since then, the United Nations and the
international community as a whole have put forward a
strong effort to make sure that atrocities such as the ones
we have witnessed in the former Yugoslavia and in
Rwanda will not go unpunished.

Weeks away from the Rome Conference on the
Establishment of an International Criminal Court, we
believe that we must concentrate our efforts on the
creation of a permanent institutional mechanism of
administration of justice that is independent, impartial and
efficient. Thus, it is our understanding that with the
establishment of the International Criminal Court there
will be no more need for the United Nations to resort to
ad hoc tribunals.

