Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

The European Union is extremely concerned
about the situation which has evolved in recent days
between Israel and the Palestinians, and it calls on all
parties to abstain from any actions that are in violation
of international law. We call for the immediate and
unconditional release of the kidnapped Israeli soldier.
The European Union strongly condemns the murder of
the Israeli victim of a kidnapping in the West Bank. We
call on the Palestinian leadership to put an end to
violence and terrorist activities, including the firing of
rockets at Israeli territory.

We express our particular concern about the
detention of elected members of the Palestinian
Government and legislature. Those detained should be
accorded their full legal rights. The European Union
reminds all parties of their responsibility to protect
civilian lives. Notwithstanding Israel's legitimate right
of self-defence, ongoing military operations should be
in accordance with international law. We call on Israel
to exercise the utmost restraint and to avoid
disproportionate action. We regret the destruction of
essential infrastructure, which is contributing to the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Restoring electricity and water supplies and access for
humanitarian organizations must be a priority now in
order to avoid a humanitarian crisis.
The European Union emphasizes the primacy of
diplomatic means and calls upon all parties in the
region to make every effort possible to resolve the
current situation by peaceful means. We reaffirm our
conviction that only a negotiated two State solution can
bring peace and security to the Israeli and Palestinian
people. A return to the peace process and to the
implementation of the road map is therefore
imperative. We ask that both parties meet their
responsibilities and demonstrate urgently an active
commitment to the search for a negotiated solution.

On 15 June, our heads of State or Government
endorsed a proposed temporary international
mechanism to channel assistance directly to the
Palestinian people, which has been drawn up by the
European Commission following consultations within
the EU, as well as with Quartet members, major
donors, international financial institutions and partners
in the region. The European Union, through the
European Commission, will continue urgently to
establish the mechanism, in conjunction with Quartet
members, other key international partners and the
Palestinian Authority President's Office.

We agree that, in order to have an immediate
impact, the mechanism will focus on essential supplies
and running costs for social services and health case,
supply of utilities, including fuel, and social
allowances. Other donors, including Arab States, are
invited to provide funding and to consider early and
substantial contributions. The European Union will
contribute a substantial amount to the international
mechanism.

