The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Tajikistan, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan,
document S/ 1996/212.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan
of 22 March 1996 (S/l996/212).

"The Security Council regrets that insufficient
progress has been achieved during the continual round
of the inter-Tajik talks in Ashgabad towards the
solution of fundamental political and institutional
issues. It calls upon the Tajik parties to accelerate
substantially their efforts to reach agreement on the
basis of the Protocol on the fundamental principles for
establishing peace and national accord in Tajikistan of

17 August 1995 (S/l995/720, annex). It urges them
to negotiate constructively and in good faith and to
search for solutions on the basis of mutual
concessions and compromises.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
about the Violations of the Tehran cease-fire
agreement of 17 September 1994 (S/l994/llO2, annex I), and in particular about the ongoing
fighting in the Tavildara region. It appeals to the
Tajik parties to comply strictly with all their
obligations undertaken under this agreement. It
reminds them that the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) is
subject to the proviso that the Tehran cease-fire
agreement remains in force and the parties continue
to be committed to an effective cease-fire, to
national reconciliation and to the promotion of
democracy. The Council notes with concern that the
ongoing military operations and other violations of
the cease-fire create doubt regarding the parties'
commitment to an effective cease-fire.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
extension of the cease-fire by the parties for a
further three months until 26 May 1996. It is
concerned, however, that the cease-fire has only
been extended for this short period. The Council
fully supports the appeal by the Secretary-General to
the Tajik opposition contained in his report
(S/ 1996/212) to agree to the extension of the cease-
fire agreement for the duration of the inter-Tajik
talks.

"The Security Council reiterates the importance
of direct political dialogue between the President of
the Republic of Tajikistan and the leader of the
Islamic Revival Movement of Tajikistan (IRMT) for
the peace process and encourages them to hold the
next meeting as soon as possible. The Security
Council welcomes the position of the Majlisi Oli
(Parliament) of Tajikistan which at its special
session on 11-12 March 1996 expressed its strong
support for the efforts to achieve national
reconciliation and for the search for compromise at
the inter-Tajik talks held under the auspices of the
United Nations. It regrets that the leaders of the
IRMT declined to participate in the special session
of the Majlisi Oli.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over the kidnapping on 24 February 1996 of

 

the opposition co-chair of the Joint Commission and
calls on the Tajik Government to intensify its
investigation into this incident. The Council joins the
Secretary-General in calling on the Government to
provide the necessary security guarantees to allow the
Joint Commission to function safely and effectively.

"The Security Council expresses its hope that the
Agreement on social accord in Tajikistan signed on
9 March 1996 in Dushanbe by the leaders of
Tajikistan and of political parties, social movements
and ethnic communities (S/ 1996/ 187, annex) will
contribute to national reconciliation.

"The Security Council expresses its serious
concern at the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Tajikistan. It calls upon Member States
and others concerned to respond promptly in support
of the humanitarian relief efforts of the United Nations
and other international organizations.

"The Security Council welcomes the positive role
played by UNMOT under difficult circumstances. The
Council expresses deep concern over recent incidents
in which UNMOT personnel were harassed and
threatened and reiterates its call to the parties to
cooperate fully with UNMOT and to ensure the safety
and freedom of movement of the personnel of the
United Nations and other international organizations.

"The Security Council is concerned about
delays in the establishment of a liaison post of
UNMOT at Taloqan (northern Afghanistan) and
encourages the relevant Afghan authorities to
facilitate its opening.

"The Security Council welcomes the creation of
the office of an independent ombudsman for human
rights in Tajikistan with the help of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
expresses the hope that his activities will contribute
to a lessening of tensions.

"The Security Council commends the tireless
efforts of the Secretary-General's former Special
Envoy in Tajikistan, Mr. Piriz-Ballon. It understands
that his successor will be appointed promptly and
expresses the hope that the new Special Envoy will
begin without delay the preparation of the next
phase of the continual round of the inter-Tajik talks
which should be convened as soon as possible."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/ 14.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.

