Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Burkina Faso,
Mr. Bassole, and the Secretary of State for Cooperation
and Francophony of France, Mr. Bockel. We note the
detailed contributions of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), chaired by Burkina
Faso, and of France to the process of an Ivorian
settlement.

We are grateful to the Principal Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for cote
d'Ivoire, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his information on the
activities of United Nations operations in Cote d'Ivoire
and the latest developments in that country, and for his
efforts to achieve a settlement.

In our view, the Secretary-General's report
contains a balanced and objective assessment of the
situation in C6te d'Ivoire. Given the ongoing unstable
security situation, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the utility of maintaining the
present numbers of the United Nations Operation in
C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

We have closely followed developments in the
peace process in the country. Moscow welcomed the
Ouagadougou Agreement, reached at the initiative of
the Ivorian parties themselves. We feel that it
represents a unique opportunity to achieve a
comprehensive settlement, provided that the parties
implement the obligations they have assumed within
the established time frame.

We strongly condemn any attempt to destabilize
the peace process, such as the attempt on the life of
Ivorian Prime Minister Guillaume Soro on 29 June,
which is evidence of the presence of destructive forces
in the country, of the vulnerability of the peace
process, and of the need for the international
community to lend it further support.

We note with satisfaction several positive steps
recently taken towards a peaceful settlement, such as
the deployment of mixed police units to maintain law
and order and the establishment of UNOCI observer
posts. We note with regret, however, the slowing pace
of the implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement.
The Ivorian sides must display greater resolve in the
further implementation of key tasks, including the
disarmament and disbanding of former combatants, the
restoration of civilian law, the reform of the security
sector, and the reassertion of State authority throughout
the territory.

In the context of the importance of the
forthcoming electoral process in C6te d'Ivoire, we feel
that the international community must ensure that the
country receives timely assistance in the preparation
and conduct of open, free and fair elections in
accordance with international standards.

We are sure that subsequent action by the
country's leaders aimed at effective implementation of
the Agreement will lead in the near future to a lasting,
final internal political settlement. The United Nations
has an important role to play in the efforts aimed at the
achievement of that goal, and we welcome the
appointment by the Secretary-General of his new
Special Representative, Ambassador Choi. He can
count on the full support of the Russian Federation in
the discharge of his mandate.

