Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): May I say how pleased we
are to see you, Sir, presiding over this important meeting of
the Security Council. We would also like to welcome the
participation of the Minister for External Relations of
Angola in this debate.

On behalf of the Bulgarian Government, I would like
to welcome the forthcoming adoption of the Security
Council's draft resolution on Angola. We believe that this
draft resolution will further strengthen the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime against UNITA and will contribute to
putting an end to the bloody civil war in Angola. We are
confident that the role of the Security Council is
instrumental in bringing peace and reconciliation to that
country, as well as more stability to the whole African
continent.

Allow me also, through you, Mr. President, to
congratulate Ambassador Robert Fowler, Chairman of the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola, for his
ability to guide the Council towards final agreement on
what appeared to be a complex and multifaceted text by
accommodating a large number of views and proposals.
Bulgaria very much hopes that this balanced and realistic
document will be diligently implemented and will serve
as an efficient tool for improving the implementation of
sanctions and curtailing violations of relevant Security
Council resolutions.

My delegation aligned itself with the statement made
by the representative of Portugal on behalf of the
European Union, and fully subscribes to the positions
expressed therein on the situation in Angola. Therefore,
I will confine my intervention today to some issues of
particular importance to my country.

Let me reiterate that Bulgaria entirely shares the
noble motives and goals that inspired the Council's
decision to entrust qualitatively new tasks to the Panel of
Experts created by resolution 1237 (1999). The Panel
succeeded in increasing the awareness of United Nations
Member States about the urgent need to curb illegal arms
transfers and other support to UNITA. In fact, today's
session demonstrates that following the Panel's report the
international community is stronger and more united in its
will to achieve compliance with the sanctions and to hold
violators accountable.

My Government on several occasions had the
opportunity to express its comments and observations,
particularly on the parts of the Panel's report pertaining
to Bulgaria. It is worth mentioning that serious doubts
were raised not only by Bulgaria but by a number of
delegations, including Security Council members, about
the working methods and credibility of sources used by
the Panel, as well as its objectivity and ability to
substantiate its findings by concrete evidence. Now I
would like to offer some additional comments to the
views already put forward on this matter.

We are of the opinion that when there are grounds
to suppose that a Member State could be involved in
sanctions violation, all relevant evidence should be made
available to the that Government for consideration and
reply. We are not satisfied by the explanation given to our

 

written request submitted in this respect that the Panel's
report is "a self-contained document". Such an argument
simply does not and cannot suffice, especially when a
country's good name is, without foundation, unfairly
damaged.

We believe that only an impartial and balanced
approach could contribute to putting an end to the
violations of United Nations sanctions, not against UNITA
only but in a global context as well. It seems that such an
approach has gradually evolved as a result of the recent
deliberations in the Security Council and on the application
of the sanctions against UNIT A. The established six-month
period will allow for additional analysis and monitoring of
the implementation of the sanctions and, hopefully, for
more precise conclusions.

Despite its reservations and rejection of the
unsubstantiated accusations against Bulgaria, my
Government has given serious consideration to the Panel's
report. A governmental commission was promptly
established to investigate all circumstances related to
possible involvement of Bulgarian institutions and
individuals in activities that might constitute violations of
Security Council sanctions against UNITA. A number of
preliminary results of its ongoing investigation have been
made available and duly communicated to the Council
members with a view to facilitating their work.

Having already cooperated in good faith with the
Panel of Experts, Bulgaria is now ready to offer its full
cooperation and support to the future monitoring
mechanism. Needless to say, we shall provide it with all
relevant information available to us in order to facilitate its
work and further clarify the facts related to the conclusions
and recommendations of the former Panel's report. Bulgaria
is confident that such a transparent and responsible
approach will be duly appreciated and will help consolidate
its reputation as a reliable member of the United Nations
community.

At the same time we very much hope that a number
of lessons learned from the former Panel's report will be
taken into account in the activities of the new monitoring
mechanism. We expect it to work by combining
transparency with confidentiality and using only trustworthy
and verified information from reliable sources. We also
expect it to pursue its mandate in close cooperation and
consultation with the Governments concerned. Furthermore,
the established procedure should be strictly observed so as
not to allow any irresponsible and untimely "leakage" to the
media.

The composition and activities of the future
monitoring body should also reflect the principles of
objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity, which we
deem to be essential for the final outcome of its work. It
is our view that none of the countries referred to in the
report should be represented in the new body. Given the
serious reservations shared by various delegations, we
even doubt whether it would be appropriate for experts
who participated in the former Panel to be included into
the new one.

We fully share and support the provisions of the
draft resolution on measures to be taken at the national,
regional and international levels in order to curb illicit
arms supplies to UNITA. However, the tasks we are
facing not only in Angola but in Africa as a whole are
obviously of broader magnitude. Alleged violations of
UNITA sanctions have once again brought up the
challenging issue of illicit arms brokering. In view of its
complexity and global nature, this challenge cannot be
addressed by a single country but should be tackled
comprehensively through the concerted efforts of the
entire international community. In this respect the present
resolution will contribute to strengthening national and
international control over conventional and small arms
and their proliferation to Angola/UNITA and other
African States. We are looking forward to the major input
of the United Nations conference on illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons to be held in 2001.

In concluding, let me assure you, Mr. President, of
my Government's willingness to continue its cooperation
with the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies on
monitoring sanctions against UNITA and to contribute to
the collective efforts of the international community for
preventing illicit arms trafficking, including through
measures at national, subregional and regional levels.

