Ms. Mindaoudou: I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak before the Council in
order to present the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire (8/2014/892), dated
12 December 2014, and to provide an update on recent
developments in the country.

I am optimistic for Cote d'Ivoire. During the
past six months, Cote d'Ivoire has continued to make
important progress towards sustainable peace and
sustained economic recovery. The completion of
several important infrastructure projects, as well as the
return to Abidjan of the headquarters of the African
Development Bank and the successful organization of
several regional and international events in the country,
are an indication of the confidence of the international
community in Cote d'Ivoire's recovery and potential.
As noted in the report before the Council,
President Ouattara and his Government continue to
take steps towards consolidating national cohesion and
reconciliation. Concrete measures have been taken,
including the release on bail of some 300 persons
detained in connection with the post-election crisis,
the unfreezing of bank accounts, the return to their
legal owners of illegally occupied properties, and the
reintegration into public service of those associated
with the former regime. A significant number of
Ivorians affiliated with the former regime, including
former top officials, have also returned to the country.
Political dialogue with the former ruling party, the
Front populaire ivoirien (FPI), which had stalled since
22 May 2014, resumed on 29 December 2014, and has
been reinvigorated. The Government is committed to
finding concrete solutions to all the concerns raised by
the FPI.

A new Independent Electoral Commission
comprised of 17 commissioners, four of whom are
women, was inaugurated on 11 August 2014. The
Commission, with the participation of the opposition,
has initiated its work and is moving forward in
implementing its mandate. With presidential elections
on the horizon, political positioning and pre-campaign
activities have begun. So far, eight personalities across
the political spectrum have announced their intention
to run for the presidency next October.

With the support of international partners, I hosted

a consultative platform at the headquarters of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) in Abidjan,
on 18 and 19 December 2014, aimed at enhancing
dialogue among a wide spectrum of political actors.
This was an important opportunity to constructively
engage on ways to ensure the conduct of successful
elections. All participants, representing 23 different
political parties and civil society organizations, agreed
that certain measures were warranted to address
the shortfalls of the 2010 elections. These measures
were, inter alia, reducing the number of arms in the
hands of non-State actors, impartial treatment for all
alleged perpetrators of the 2010 post-election violence;
compensation for victims, the return of those living in
exile; impartial justice, the release or trials of detainees
linked to the 2010 post-electoral crisis, and the updating
of electoral lists. These are important concerns that
shall be fully engaged.

UNOCI will continue to work closely with all
concerned actors to ensure the conduct of a transparent
and inclusive election. We will also continue to engage
with international partners to ensure coordinated
support to the work of the Commission. In addition,
the Mission will continue its close engagement with
the Government to ensure that the necessary security
measures are in place to guarantee the conduct of
peaceful and secure elections. ONUCI FM. radio will
also continue its efforts to sensitize the larger public
on democratic values and to advance peace education.

(Spoke in French)

The Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission
completed its three-year mandate and submitted its final
report to the President of the Republic on 16 December
2014. The report provides details on the events that
occurred during the most recent crisis; an analysis
of the root causes of conflict; recommendations in
the area of political, administrative and institutional
reforms; and proposals for ensuring reparations for
the victims and the duty to remember. The report is
currently before the President of the Republic, who
has also made $20 million available for reparations
for the victims in 2015. He has also sought the support
of partners in supporting the Government's efforts to
ensure the timely implementation of the process.

I began my statement by expressing my optimism
for Cote d'Ivoire. However, while we have cause for
satisfaction, progress still needs to be made in several
areas. We must remain vigilant and determined to
ensure that the hard-won gains that have helped to
promote stability and prosperity in the country are
irreversible.

The fight against impunity, an essential factor for
national reconciliation in Cote d'Ivoire, is proceeding
slowly. Furthermore, we must step up our efforts to
ensure that the perpetrators of human rights violations,
including sexual crimes, are prosecuted and brought to
justice, particularly when the suspects are uniformed
officials. With regard to acts of sexual violence, I am
pleased to note that a committee of national experts
on conflict-related sexual violence was established on
21 July 2014. Moreover, the Forces republicaines de
Cote d'Ivoire have undertaken an awareness-raising
campaign for its troops on this important issue. UNOCI
is providing technical support to the committee of
national experts on conflict-related sexual violence and
continues to encourage the authorities to adopt a zero-
tolerance policy on issues of sexual violence.

On 1 December 2014, some 150 people close to
former President Laurent Gbagbo detained in the
Abidjan Detention and Correction Centre for alleged
crimes during the post-electoral crisis, began a hunger
strike to denounce the conditions and duration of
their detention without any ruling on the matter.
On 25 December, I went to the prison to meet these
detainees, who agreed to suspend their hunger strike
the same day. I indicated to the national authorities
the urgent need to accelerate the legal proceedings so
as to ensure the impartial handling of the situation of
all those accused of human rights violations and abuse
committed during the post-electoral period, without
consideration of their political affiliations. That would
also contribute to advancing and strengthening national
reconciliation and political dialogue. It was to meet
these concerns, among other things, that the political
dialogue between the Government and the opposition
resumed on 29 December 2014.

Coordinated demonstrations organized by the
Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire throughout the
country illustrate, in case there was any doubt, one
of remaining challenges to achieving effective and
integrated security sector reform. A comprehensive
security sector reform process is essential to ensuring
that Cote d'Ivoire's security institutions are not only a
constructive force in guaranteeing stability and security
of the country, but also a tool to maintain democratic
gains. The security forces must meet the necessary
professional and ethical standards and norms. This is
crucial to strengthening the confidence of the civilian
population in their security institutions. UNOCI will
continue to support and encourage the Government in
completing the necessary reforms.

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process is making satisfactory progress.
However, it still needs work before we can declare
mission accomplished. In fact - as the Authority for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration has
said - after June 2015, the target date set by the Ivorian
authorities for the end of the DDR process, there will
still be a surplus ofabout 14,000 former combatants who
will have to be rehabilitated and reintegrated. UNOCI
will continue to support the Authority, in cooperation
with its international partners, in order to ensure the
speedy and effective completion of the DDR process.

Although the security situation has improved
significantly since my last briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.7197), armed robbery, banditry and other
criminal activities continue to pose security challenges
throughout the country. I am happy to note, however,
that we have seen a slight decrease in inter-community
conflicts, particularly those involving undisciplined
members of the Forces re'publicaines de Cote d'Ivoire,
former combatants and dozo. On 10 January, after more
than six months of calm in the areas bordering Liberia,
there were two attacks on security force posts in
western Cote d'Ivoire, in which two soldiers lost their
lives and 1,600 people were displaced from the area.
UNOCI's forces immediately intervened to protect
civilians and provide support to the national security
forces. The attacks demonstrate both the importance of
making progress in the political process and how vital
it is that cote d'Ivoire establish a professional security
force capable of protecting its people.

So far there have been no confirmed cases of
Ebola in Cote d'Ivoire. The epidemic in West Africa
has nonetheless affected refugee returns and prevented
Ivorian and Liberian security forces from conducting
the joint activities they used to undertake on the
borders. It has also temporarily halted inter-mission
cooperation between UNOCI and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. I would like to take this opportunity
to commend the Government and the private sector
for their efforts, which, with the support of donors
and the United Nations, have enabled them to respond
effectively to the epidemic in terms of preparedness
and prevention. However, while combating Ebola
remains a priority, it will be important to implement a
humanitarian strategy for the period 2014-2015. More
internal resources must be mobilized in order to support
residual humanitarian needs, resettle people displaced
from Mont Peko and implement a national strategy for
natural risk reduction.

As outlined in resolution 2162 (2014), the
drawdown of UNOCI's strength began on 1 December
with a reduction of 840 troops. The current strength of
6,300 troops will be reduced to 5,437 in June. After a
comprehensive restructuring and review of its concept
of operations, the military and police components of
UNOCI are now much more mobile and visible. They
are much more capable of meeting the people's needs
and ensuring the protection of civilians and the security
of United Nations personnel. At my request, the troops
now train regularly, including with live ammunition,
in order to be better prepared for every eventuality.
UNOCI's operational flexibility will further increase
with the deployment of its rapid reaction force of 650
troops, which will be operational in May.

Regarding the general outlook, as the Council
is aware, Cote d'Ivoire is entering an election year.
Creating an environment conducive to holding free,
democratic and fair elections will depend upon the
progress that has to be made in the areas of electoral
reforms, maintaining a political dialogue, DDR,
security-sector reform and justice. Cote d'Ivoire still
needs support if it is to build on the gains made so far
and complete the important process it is engaged in.
For that, the continued support of the Security Council,
Member States and international and regional partners
remains essential.

