Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the Chinese delegation for convening today's important
meeting, and Mr. Salame' for his objective briefing.

Mr. Salame knows that Russia very much
appreciates his efforts and his honest and professional
attitude to his work. We know how much he has done
to re-establish a United Nations presence in Libya. But
the reality there is such that we in the Security Council
seldom hear news that gives grounds for optimism.
Libya's profound fragmentation, the predominance
of localized interests, sometimes fuelled by external
forces, and the absolute power of the armed groups are
truly depressing. The outbreaks of violence, to which
even the capital of Tripoli is not immune, are very
worrying. The power vacuum in the country's unstable
southern regions is intensifying, and the threat of
terrorism continues and is getting worse. That is the
result of the irresponsible outside influence on Libya
that was brought to bear in 2011.

We appreciate the United Nations efforts to restore
unity in the country, draw its State institutions, including
security structures, closer together and find a way to
emerge onto a path of socioeconomic development.
We hope to see progress in the implementation of
the United Nations Action Plan, one of whose key
elements is general elections. The key to their success
must be a general understanding among Libyans of the
parameters for the elections, which require compliance
with the necessary internal Government procedures.
The existence of conditions suitable for the holding
of elections is also an essential factor. The elections
must represent a step towards unifying the country, not
fragmenting it. We hope that the national conference
that Mr. Salame has just informed us about will help to
resolve the issue.

The economic reforms proposed by the United
Nations, with the participation of specialized
international institutions, should be designed to
protect Libyans' interests and promote unification.
We are well aware that it would be extremely difficult
for the United Nations to bring Libya out of this
deep period of instability alone, and Mr. Salame' will
need international aid. It is clear that with his direct
assistance, inter-Libyan contacts are taking place
at various levels. Libya's neighbours are providing
excellent help on individual tracks, and we should
especially note the efforts being made by the Arab
Republic of Egypt. International initiatives are being
proposed. Right now we are awaiting the holding of a
conference in Palermo, at Italy's proposal, in which we
intend to take a very active part, and we welcome the
Italian Government's ideas and initiatives. We want to
emphasize that all efforts should be coordinated under
United Nations auspices, as laid down in the relevant
Security Council documents.

We take a cautious approach to restrictive measures
and evaluate them from the point of view of their
effectiveness, as well as their influence on political
efforts and the situation of the civilian population. The
calls for expanding the sanctions toolkit in the Libyan
context have become more frequent lately. We realize
the importance of combating those who undermine the
peace process, do harm to the economy's oil sector or
commit crimes against civilians or migrants. However,
in many cases the answer is to be found in the arena
of national justice and international cooperation in this
area. The threat of Security Council sanctions should
not be used as an instrument for manipulating events
inside Libya in order to settle scores with political
opponents, or the sanctions' results will be the exact
opposite of their officially stated purpose. The chief
danger is that in practice well-intended efforts could
make the task of unifying the country harder.

We urge Council members to carefully study
the proposals that our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea just made for
finding a formula for resolving the issue of migration.
We need to be combating not the migrants themselves
but those who created the migration issue and who are
now profiting off their criminal business, an area where
sanctions really will be essential.

We need a thorough investigation of the situation
concerning Libyan assets that have been frozen under
Security Council decisions. The questions that the
Libyan authorities have been asking about protecting
them are quite justified. Those funds will still be
needed when the country restores unity and begins to
recover after this massive crisis. Also, with regard to the
vital oil sector, we should emphasize that exploitation
of Libya's natural resources should contribute to the
development of the country itself and to improving its
citizens' well-being rather than serving the interests
of outside Powers. Libya's mineral wealth belongs to
Libya and its people alone.
We took part in the important visit to Tripoli of a
delegation from the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and led
by the Permanent Representative of Sweden as part
of our planned visit to Libya. We are in complete
agreement with Ambassador Skoog that there is no
substitute for field trips in the Security Council's work.
Unfortunately, for whatever reasons, we were not able
to visit the country's eastern regions and meet with the
local authorities there. We hope that the Chair of the
Committee, whose work we very much appreciate, will
rectify this as soon as possible, meet the conditions for
the mission's terms of reference, which we all approved,
and make a report on that basis to the members of the
Committee. Let us work together to help the Ambassador
of Sweden, particularly since all the members of the
Council have just spoken in favour of these efforts and
of maintaining contacts with all the Libyan parties. We

know that Mr. Salame' fully shares that approach and is
ready to provide the necessary assistance. The Security
Council does not have the right to let its work with
Libyan parties become distorted. It would be wrong
from a political point of view and could have a negative
effect on the vigorous unification efforts currently
ongoing under United Nations auspices.

For its part, Russia, basing its efforts on the
priceless historical potential of its friendship with the
Libyan people, will continue to work with all parties,
encouraging them to unite the country, overcome their
differences and move forward to a phase of sustainable
development. We will undertake those efforts both
independently and in collaboration with our friends in
the League of Arab States and the African Union, and
among our international partners.

