Mr. Romulo (Philippines): The Philippines has
joined the 14 other members of this Council to vote
unanimously in favour of resolution 1636 (2005).
History has taught us the tragic lesson that political
assassinations can lead to strife, conflict and war. We
have also learned that justice is a powerful force for
peace. We voted in favour of the resolution just
adopted for, like the rest of the world, we seek justice
for former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and the 20 other
victims. We voted in favour of the resolution for we
know that, with justice, there can be true and lasting
peace.

The Mehlis investigation points towards a
massive conspiracy. It lays a solid foundation for
further criminal investigation to identify, prosecute and
punish the perpetrators of the crime. The Mehlis
Commission must be allowed to continue with its
work. The investigation has made much headway
thanks to the cooperation of Lebanon. We commend
and thank the Government of Lebanon for the full
assistance and cooperation it has extended so far to the
Commission in the discharge of its mandate, in
accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution 1595 (2005).
But the investigation could not be completed without
Syria's cooperation.

We are deeply concerned by the Commission's
report that Syrian authorities have cooperated only in
form, not in substance. Even more worrisome, the
Commission has also reported that several Syrian
officials have tried to provide false or inaccurate
information so as to mislead the Commission.

We urge the Government of Syria to fully comply
with the provisions of this resolution and with those of
resolution 1595 (2005). We take note, however, of
Syria's recent statement regarding its current intention
to cooperate with the Commission, and we expect the
Syrian Government to fully implement the
commitments it is now making.

Questions have been raised regarding the
complicity of Syrian officials. Those are questions that
must be answered. When all the answers are in, and
when the investigation is completed, it is the
Government of Lebanon that will pursue further legal
action under its criminal justice system.

The assassination of Mr. Hariri remains
essentially a domestic concern of Lebanon's; it can be
effectively redressed only by and within Lebanon. The
international community, however, must lend all
possible material assistance, as well as political and
moral support, to the Lebanese Government and
people.

The extension of the Commission's mandate until
December 2005 sends a good and powerful message. It
is a practical step towards ensuring international
awareness and support for all efforts to see that justice
is done.
We are grateful to the sponsors of resolution 1636
(2005) - the United States, the United Kingdom and
France - for their work on the text. We are grateful,
too, for their openness in accommodating our concerns
with regard to key operative paragraphs.

Today, the Security Council not only cast a vote
for peace and justice, but also struck a blow against
those who use political assassination to sow fear and
terror. Through this resolution, the Council has
reinforced the notion that political assassination is an
act of terrorism - an act that can bring to the fore the
employment of extraordinary powers under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter.

