Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council on behalf of Mexico for the month of
April, at a time when the Council is considering the
issue of mediation in the light of the clear and
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/ 189), presented today by Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe.

The enshrining in the Charter of the United
Nations of the customary principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes gave legitimacy to mediation as
the preferred and effective means to resolve disputes
and conflicts. Since then, mediation has proved its
effectiveness and usefulness in many situations in the
quest for solutions to crises. It is becoming
increasingly important in a world torn by the
proliferation of various kinds of conflicts and by the
fragility of post-conflict situations. Here, we can only
be pleased that various forms of mediation are tending
to take on a preventive character and to cover post-
conflict situations.

In the practice of mediation, it has been amply
demonstrated that the success of any such effort
continues to depend on the commitment of the parties
to cooperate positively with the mediator's efforts. The
success of such an undertaking involves a certain
number of principles: first, the consent of the parties to
resort to the mediator's services; secondly, the
genuine - and not just apparent - political will of the
parties to commit themselves to the settlement process,
and their adoption of positions that support, rather than
obstruct, a settlement; and thirdly, the objectivity and
impartiality of the mediator in his understanding of the
dispute and his commitment to safeguarding and
consolidating the gains achieved. That requires, above
all, knowledge about the history of the situation,
awareness of its realities and an ability to maintain an
ongoing, substantive, realistic and future-oriented
dialogue with the parties to the dispute.

As mediation is simply a catalyst and a modus
operandi designed to influence the conduct of the
parties and to bring their points of view closer together,
the difficulty, as the Secretary-General indicates in his
report, lies in transforming "this adversarial process
into one of problem-solving", in nudging "reluctant
parties towards accommodation" and in "moving away
from entrenched positions to explore innovative
options" (S/2009/189, para. 25).

On their own with the mediators, the parties
cannot make progress without the support of the
Security Council, the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the encouragement of Member States. Indeed, the
role that the Council can play in the area of mediation
is essential and has a positive and immediate impact on
the conflict. Through its support for the good-offices
efforts of the Secretary-General and his envoys and
representatives, the Council promotes mediation and
provides ample opportunities for conflict settlement
through peaceful means, over and above any other
alternative.

At the same time, and by virtue of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council can use its authority
vis-a-vis the parties to a conflict in order to maximize
the gains and advantages offered by mediation and can
encourage the parties to adopt a constructive attitude to
United Nations efforts and to consider the impact on
the region's peoples and on the objective of
international peace and security.

The Secretary-General, for his part, plays a
valuable complementary role and enjoys prestige that
enables him to intervene effectively to overcome an
impasse in or re-launch the settlement of a dispute or
conflict. That role should be politically and materially
supported, including through assistance for the
Mediation Support Unit, the establishment of a
database of potential candidates for mediation,
facilitation and negotiation and, finally, the promotion
of training in the area of mediation.

Furthermore, while the observation made in the
Secretary-General's report about the role played by
States in conflict reduction and resolution applies to
Security Council member States and other influential
States, it applies equally - if not more - to the States
that are neighbours to the zone of conflict or dispute.
Indeed, the emphasis placed in the report on the
imperative need to understand conflicts in their
regional or subregional context underscores that fact,
which requires States in the region to conduct
themselves in a positive manner with regard to settling
the dispute or conflict.

However, the results of mediation, when it
succeeds, can be incomplete or can easily be reversed
32

if peacebuilding efforts do not follow - if the
international community disengages itself from the
conflict and does not help the parties to strengthen the
rule of law and democracy, to re-launch their
economies and to better manage the post-conflict
phase.

In its thinking and in its actions, Morocco has
always favoured the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflicts. It has always been committed to
fostering dialogue and bringing together points of view
in different regions of the world, in particular in the
Middle East and in Africa, including in the Mano River
region. My country's commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes strengthened its early
commitment to the United Nations in peacekeeping
operations, a commitment which continues and is
growing stronger.

Finally, Morocco is ready to associate itself with
the efforts of the United Nations and to support it in its
quest to acquire a mediation support structure that
would be efficient and effective within the framework
of strengthening United Nations-preventive diplomacy.

