Judge Byron: I would like to start by
congratulating the representative of Mexico on his
country's current presidency of the Security Council. I
wish you, Sir, a successful tour of duty.

Today, it is my honour to present to the members
of the Security Council the thirteenth completion
strategy report (S/2010/259) of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). I would like to
begin by expressing the gratitude of the entire Tribunal
to the Governments of Council members and to the
Secretariat for their continuous trust and support on all
levels over the past six months.

Since I last addressed the Council in December
2009 (see S/PV.6228) the Tribunal has rendered two
trial and two appeal judgements. The number of
remaining judgements to be delivered at the trial level
is now down to 13. We expect judgements in seven
trials with respect to 15 accused before the end of
2010. The remaining six judgements with respect to 11
accused will be delivered during the course of 2011.
10-41106
Two of the three ongoing trials and the two trials that
are yet to commence will continue into 2011.

The two single-accused cases currently in
evidence phase, the Ngirabatware and Nzabonimana
trials, are taking significantly longer than expected,
with judgements now expected for the second half of
next year. I would like to highlight two main reasons
for the delay in the completion of the evidence phase.
First, the parallel involvement of the judges in several
other trials makes scheduling particularly difficult in
case of unexpected delays. The second and important
reason is fair trial requirements - in both cases linked,
among others things, to an alibi defence that required
cooperation from a Member State.

Our planning for the rest of this year and the
beginning of 2011 concentrates, apart from the ongoing
trial work, on judgement drafting in all remaining
cases. The expected judgement delivery in several
cases before the end of 2010 will reduce the remaining
trial workload and free up time for some of our judges
to hear special depositions for the preservation of
evidence against the remaining highest-level fugitives.
We also expect several proceedings for contempt of
court; investigations are ongoing and could lead to
prosecution in up to six cases.

I am, of course, well aware of the unpredictability
of certain factors impacting the judicial calendar, but
we believe that our goal of completing the first
instance trials based on the current workload within the
next year can be achieved. For the appeals, this means
maintaining the goal of completion by the end of 2013
in relation to the ICTR cases.

Yet, as my colleague did, I need to draw once
more the attention of the Council to the difficult
staffing situation at the Tribunal and the possibility that
this challenging situation could lead to additional
delays. I have mentioned this before. The high turnover
and the difficulties in recruitment in Chambers and in
the Office of the Prosecutor, are amongst the principal
obstacles to meeting our goals for judgement delivery
in the remaining cases. I mentioned in my written
completion strategy report the departure of 154 staff
members during the past year. For Chambers alone, the
number is 24 - roughly half of our staffing level.

Let me take one of our multi-accused cases, the
so-called military trial, as an example. That trial
spanned 395 trial days. The Chamber heard 216
witnesses and admitted 965 exhibits. Familiarity with
10-41106

the evidence, which covers several thousand pages of
transcripts, is indispensable for everyone involved in
the drafting of a judgment. With these figures in mind,
Council members can imagine the impact of the
departure of members of the drafting team, including
the judgment coordinator, only a few months before the
expected judgment date.

The Tribunal works intensely on reducing internal
delays in recruitment. But even if we were to do our
utmost and have a replacement in place when the
current incumbent leaves, no one could be realistically
expected to familiarize himself or herself with the
amount of evidence involved in less than several
months. The situation in two other multi-accused cases
is comparable. Delays in the judgment delivery in
cases of this nature are therefore unavoidable.

The Council may wish to consider issuing a
statement expressing its understanding for the difficult
situation of staff retention and recruitment at the
Tribunal and to encourage further work with the
relevant United Nations bodies to address these
problems.

This week, the Tribunal submitted the revised
estimates for the rest of the 2010-2011 biennium
budget to the Controller. The delays I have just set out
will require additional resources. I urge Council
members to be aware that providing us with the
necessary resources now will help to prevent longer
delays in the Tribunal's completion of its work.

I have asked that the Secretary-General bring a
number of requests to the Council for consideration. In
line with the revised trial schedule, the terms of office
of all but two of our judges will need to be extended.
In addition, we are facing a particular situation at the
Tribunal with a very small number of permanent judges -
a number insufficient to fill the key positions, in
particular the President and Presiding Judge of a Trial
Chamber next year. We will also need a new roster of
ad litem judges to be appointed in case there are new
arrests or unexpected unavailability of the currently
serving judges if we do not want to risk additional
delays.

With regard to the terms and conditions of service
of the ad litem judges, I welcome the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 64/261, which decided
that this item will be dealt with as a priority at the
sixty-fifth session this autumn. The large majority of
judges on the benches of the two new trials will be ad
7

litem judges, and they will also take on most of the
other remaining judicial work at the trial level. I trust
that the General Assembly will recognize the
importance of equalizing the terms and conditions of
service with those of the permanent judges, not only as
a matter of equity, but also and in particular in the
interest of the completion strategy.

I turn now to my last major point - State
cooperation. I will start with the good news that one of
the recently acquitted persons was successfully
relocated in March 2010. However, despite significant
efforts by the Registrar, three others remain, as of
today, at safe houses in Arusha. For one of them, Andre'
Ntagerura, it has been almost four years since the
confirmation of his acquittal by the Appeals Chamber.
The Tribunal calls once more upon Council members'
support. Their Governments' willingness to allow these
lawfully acquitted men to settle in their territory would
be a credible symbol of their countries' commitment to
international justice and the rule of law.

State cooperation is also essential for the
everyday judicial work of the Tribunal. I would like to
underline once more the importance for Member States
to respond expeditiously to requests for information or
other assistance by a Trial Chamber, which greatly
assists in moving the proceedings forward without
additional delay and in accordance with the
requirements of fair trials.

Since I last addressed the Council in December
(see S/PV.6228), the international community has
unfortunately not made progress with regard to our
biggest remaining task - the arrest of the remaining
11 fugitives. I am convinced that we all agree that
11 fugitives are not an acceptable legacy to leave to the
residual mechanism as the Tribunal prepares to finalize
its trial activities by the end of next year.

The Tribunal depends on the cooperation of
Member States for the tracking and arrest of fugitives.
Unfortunately, I have to highlight in this context
particular difficulties with respect to cooperation with
Kenya. The Prosecutor has reported to me that Kenya
continuously fails to comply with its cooperation
obligations under article 28 of the Tribunal's Statute,
and I have brought his report to the attention of the
President of the Council for consideration and
appropriate action.

But fugitives are suspected to reside and to cross
borders in several other countries as well. Therefore,
let us once more strengthen our efforts to shut down
the remaining safe havens and arrest those indicted of
the worst imaginable crimes so that justice can finally
be done.

We have been cooperating with Rwanda
effectively over the last 16 years to ensure the smooth
functioning of our trials. In this context, I welcome the
information provided by the Rwandan authorities that
Peter Erlinder, one of the advocates before the
Tribunal, was released yesterday. The Tribunal's work
with Rwanda and the Office of Legal Affairs of the
United Nations is ongoing in this matter. Meanwhile,
the Trial Chambers will continue to guarantee fair trials
and ensure that defence counsel can represent their
clients effectively and efficiently.

Only two weeks ago, many of those working on
international justice attended the International Criminal
Court review conference in Kampala. At the
conference, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon spoke of
the "new age of accountability". The conference was
indeed impressive proof of how far we have come in
making international criminal justice part of the
international political agenda. The International
Criminal Court is the future, but today and in the
coming years it is still for us to write the last chapters
in the history of the ad hoc tribunals, the pioneer
institutions of this development. We should all do what
we can to make these last chapters a success story.

