Mr. Buyoya (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, who cannot be here
today owing to constraints beyond her control, allow
me to thank the Chadian presidency of the Security
Council for having convened this important meeting on
the crucial issue of the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on peace and security
and its evolution.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
appreciation of the African Union (AU) to Chad for its
invaluable contribution to peace efforts throughout the
continent, not least in Mali, where so many Chadian
soldiers have fallen in the line of duty. I would also
like in particular to express the AU's gratitude to
President Idriss Deby Itno for his personal commitment
and untiring efforts to rid our continent of the scourge
of conflict and violence. The initiative of convening
this debate is yet another illustration of Chad's strong
commitment to the promotion of a strategic partnership
between the AU and the United Nations.

I wish to recognize the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and commend his unflinching
commitment to peace, security and stability on the
African continent, as well as his tireless efforts in
promoting the AU-United Nations partnership in the
area of peace and security.

Today's debate comes at a time of growing
awareness of the importance of building a strong
partnership between the AU and the United Nations,
with a View to enhancing our efforts to promote peace,
security and stability in Africa. As this is the second
meeting convened by the Security Council this year on
the issue of the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the African
Union, today's meeting is also a clear indication of the
sustained attention that the Security Council continues
to devote to the promotion of peace and security on
the continent, as well as of its commitment to build an
innovative and creative partnership with the AU.

The strategic relationship between the AU and the
United Nations has been growing steadily, with the aim
of forging a more coherent and effective partnership in
the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations and article 17 of the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union. This strategic partnership has in
particular enabled our two organizations to establish
regular consultations on issues of common concern
and interest in the area of peace and security, where
cooperation is most visible.

In that regard, the holding of annual joint
consultations between the AU Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council, as
well as the coordination between the AU Commission
and the United Nations Secretariat through existing
institutional mechanisms such as the Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security and biannual desk-to-desk
meetings, are a clear illustration of the common will
to encourage greater synergy between the AU and the
United Nations.

The new joint United Nations-AU framework for
an enhanced partnership in peace and security, signed
recently between the AU Commission's Peace and
Security Department and the United Nations Office to
the AU, is a very good initiative that could be refined
and extended across the rest of the AU Commission and
the wider United Nations family.
The collaborative peacemaking efforts between
the AU and the United Nations have contributed to the
deepening of that partnership. Many examples testify
to the close complementarity that exists between the
African initiatives and those of the United Nations,
including in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region, Mali, Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic. The same applies to a number
of other cross-cutting issues, ranging from mine action
to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security-sector reform, post-conflict reconstruction
and development, and efforts in the areas of counter-
terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons.

Despite the progress achieved so far, the African
Union is convinced of the need to further deepen its
strategic relationship with the United Nations in the
area of peace and security. Such an approach is made
more compelling by the fact that, despite the significant
progress made over the past few years, Africa still has
the most conflict situations of any continent. In fact, in
addition to the conventional threats to peace, security
and stability, the continent continues to face a new set
of threats, including intra-State conflicts, violence
related to bad governance, terrorism and transnational
crime, piracy on both the east and west coasts ofAfrica,
border disputes and the effects of climate change and
environmental degradation.

In order to address those challenges, and in view
of their proximity to and familiarity with the issues,
the African Union and its regional mechanisms have
shown renewed determination to provide the necessary
leadership. The deployment of several peace support
operations in various areas of the continent clearly
illustrates the commitment of the African Union and its
regional blocs to contributing, in complementarity with
the United Nations, to collective security, as provided
for by the Charter of the United Nations.

It is in that context that the African Union has
deployed, beginning in 2002, a number of peace
support operations in response to conflict situations on
the continent, including in Burundi, Darfur, Mali, the
Central African Republic and Somalia. The stabilization
efforts carried out by those missions and the sacrifices
made by their personnel largely paved the way for, and
facilitated the task of, the United Nations missions
that eventually took over. In the case of Somalia, the
African Union Mission in Somalia continues to operate
in a complex and difficult environment with the aim
of stabilizing the country while creating appropriate
conditions for a more sustained international
commitment, possibly through a classic United Nations
peacekeeping operation.

Concurrent with the deployment of peace support
operations, the African Union is also building its long-
term capacities by operationalizing the African Standby
Force. The Force will enable appropriate responses to
be provided to some of the gaps noted in the recent
operations conducted by the African Union in relation
to planning, force generation, command and control and
mission support. On the basis of the recommendations
of the Gambari report on the evolution of the African
Standby Force and its rapid deployment capability, a
number of steps have already been taken with a view to
attaining full operational capability by the end of next
year. In the interim, the establishment of the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises will
significantly enhance both the speed of our response to
emergency situations and its robustness.

Clearly, the African Union and its regional
mechanisms have demonstrated their determination to
fully play their role and make a significant contribution
to collective security efforts on the continent. In so
doing, they have developed comprehensive architectures
covering the entire range of security challenges facing
the continent, including those related to governance
deficits.

However, the experience of recent years has
amply shown that one of the greatest obstacles facing
the African Union and its regional mechanisms is the
issue of flexible, sustainable and predictable funding
for their peace efforts. Therefore, it is crucial that an
appropriate solution be urgently found to this question,
bearing in mind that the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. Obviously, the African Union
is encouraging its member States to increase their
contributions in that regard, so that outside support,
including that of the United Nations and our partners,
is truly complementary to our own means and efforts.

If the United Nations and the African Union are to
successfully address the peace and security challenges
confronting the continent, it is also critical that they
achieve greater political coherence. Significant efforts
must be deployed to further enhance their partnership
in terms of consultations prior to decision-making,
a shared understanding of the issues at hand,
consistency and support to African-led peace efforts.
More specifically, the African Union and the United
Nations should agree on a set of principles aimed at
clarifying their relationship and anchoring it on a more
solid platform. From the African Union's perspective,
those principles should revolve around support for
African ownership and priority setting, consultative
decision-making, and a division of labour and sharing
of responsibilities based on our respective comparative
advantages.

Furthermore, practical steps should be taken in
order to enhance the effectiveness of the annual joint
consultative meetings between the Security Council and
the African Union's Peace and Security Council. The
interactions between their respective presidents must be
held on a regular basis, and joint field missions should
be undertaken. It is equally important for the Security
Council to give due consideration to our legitimate
requests and to address in a more systematic manner
the funding of peace support operations undertaken
with the consent of the United Nations. For their part,
the African Union Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat should continue to work towards greater
cooperation and coordination.

We look forward to the outcome of the review of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations to be
undertaken by the High-level Panel recently appointed
by the Secretary-General, under the very able
leadership of former President Jose' Ramos-Horta. This
review provides an opportunity to further our common
objective of building an innovative and forward-looking
partnership within the context of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Allow me to conclude by expressing our hope that
this meeting of the Security Council will mark a new
step in the enhancement of the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. The challenging
and increasingly complex situations on the ground
require concerted responses by our two organizations
and a stronger and deeper partnership, based on a
innovative reading of the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations in order to allow
the African Union and its regional mechanisms to fully
play their roles as integral components of the global
collective security system.

