Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to
Foreign Minister Okada and Ambassador Takasu of
Japan, in the presidency of the Security Council, for
convening this very timely open debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding.

Post-conflict peacebuilding plays a crucial role
for countries recovering from strife, as it aims to
preserve the results achieved after hostilities have
ended and to prevent the recurrence of conflicts. We
established the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) five
years ago so that such countries might smoothly
undergo the transition from a situation of conflict to
that of reconstruction and development. However, the
PBC has experienced a number of difficulties in
fulfilling its goals due to a lack of financial and human
resources, and also as a result of the shortcomings
inherent in having neither a comprehensive mandate
nor an integrated modus operandi. Against this
backdrop, I would like to convey some of my thoughts
on the pertinent issues concerning peacebuilding.

First of all, we need to closely examine the issue
of how to secure financial resources and effective
budget allocation. I recently had the privilege of visited
Sierra Leone as a member of the PBC to review the
peacebuilding process there. During the visit, I was
glad to see that substantive progress had been made in
a number of areas. I was also impressed with the
coordination between the country-configuration Chair,
based here in New York, and the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, fulfilling the
role of a one-stop service as the United Nations
figurehead in the field. However, I was quite surprised
to learn that there had been no contributions to the
multi-donor trust fund for Sierra Leone, other than that
made by Canada. The situation is similar in other
country configurations, where there are little or no trust
funds available, aside from the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). Budget allocations cannot be redirected to meet
changing and evolving needs.

On a related topic, the funds available to
peacebuilding are very small in comparison to the
various financial resources disbursed for peacekeeping
operations. Since the PBF is funded on a voluntary
basis, whereas the peacekeeping budget is an integral
part of the United Nations budget, the two cannot be
combined or redirected from each other. Hence, we
should bear in mind that the funds used for
peacebuilding flow directly into the host country,
thereby creating an economic benefit as well. As such,
I hope that issue can be viewed in the broader
perspective of comprehensive United Nations system
reform.

Lastly, with regard to the relationship between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, there is a misguided
and widespread conviction that the two processes
ought to be pursued in a sequential approach, in which
peacebuilding picks up where peacekeeping left off.
However, it is obvious that peacebuilding work cannot
suddenly take place in the absence of sustained
peacekeeping efforts. Instead, the two processes should
be pursued in a two-track parallel approach until
security and the rule of law are restored to an adequate
level.

For certain candidate countries that have some
interest in establishing a new configuration of the PBC,
there are concerns that the initiation of the
peacebuilding process will trigger or expedite the
withdrawal of peacekeeping operations. To alleviate
such concerns, we could look into the possibility of
providing military and police training to local forces
during the short- and mid-term stages of the
peacebuilding process, in tandem with a prolonged
phase-out of peacekeeping troops, with a view towards
easing apprehensions about the process and facilitating
a smooth transition.

On the issue of coherence and linkage in and
among individual policy areas, I should like to point
out that we need to determine and prioritize the
individual policy areas themselves before we talk about
issues regarding their coherence and linkage.

The mandate of the PBC needs to be further
elaborated upon, so that it may provide more
comprehensive and concrete guidelines. We need to
flesh out what the priority areas are for peacebuilding
in general and, if possible, what portion of the
available resources should be allocated to each of those
priority areas. One size will not fit all, so there will be
a need for custom tailoring for specific countries, but
we do need some sort of measuring stick to go by.

I would like to stress that we need improved
coordination in the work of the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office so that they can mutually reinforce one
another in an effective, dynamic and synergistic
manner. In that regard, I sincerely hope that a tangible
outcome will be attained during the PBC review
process later this year so that we can get a clearer
picture of the tasks ahead of us and proceed with a
concrete course of action.

