Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I would like
to offer my prayers and heartfelt condolences to the
families and loved ones of the victims of the recent
terrorist attacks in Kenya, New Zealand and my own
country, Somalia, which injured and took the lives
of many innocent civilians, including my brother
Saqar Ibrahim Abdalla, Deputy Minister of Labour
and Social Affairs. We mourn together and stand in
solidarity to fight the menace of faceless, borderless,
international terrorism.

I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I also thank
you for organizing this meeting with a view to adopting
resolution 2461 (2019) and renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM).

We welcome this unanimous adoption and
appreciate the support and constructive engagement of
the Council members committed to supporting Somalia
and the Government's efforts to tackle the many
complex challenges it faces. The resolution adopted
today provides essential assistance to our Government
and can facilitate the achievement of our policy of
developing Somalia in, among other areas, political
inclusiveness, governance, economic development
and security.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres our great
appreciation for his personal commitment on behalf
of Somalia and its people, as well as to assure him of
our full cooperation and support for the United Nations
system. We believe that the resolution adopted today
will ensure that the support of the United Nations, the
Security Council and, particularly UNSOM, will be
truly effective. The work of the United Nations is based
on respect and cooperation between the Organization
and the host country at various levels. We look forward
to upholding those principles.

We are confident that the Security Council,
the international community and all other partners
involved in the development of Somalia's future agree
that Somalia's problems require Somali solutions.
Therefore, increasing local ownership and utilizing our
country system are important components in building
our State capacity in order to maintain security and
achieve economic stability, as well as to ensure growth
and the delivery of public services.

Thanks to the ongoing efforts of utilizing our
country system, now the development of our State
institutions and transparency, accountability, as well as
the coordination among all stakeholders, have improved
significantly. Today our people want more than ever for
Somalia to take its rightful place in the community of
nations. With that, expect more cooperation based on
mutual respect. The Somali people demand that we
continue to assume responsibility for our own decisions
and shaping our future. We firmly believe that our
legitimacy and, ultimately, the impact of our decisions
depend upon the wishes and the interests of our people.

The meeting rose at 3.15 pm.
