The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
response to the request contained in a letter dated 17 July
1995 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitted by a letter of the same date from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council, document
S/ 1995/582.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1995/576, letter
dated 14 July 1995 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
S/l995/577, letter dated 14 July 1995 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Ukraine
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
S/l995/579, letter dated 14 July 1995 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/ 1995/581, letter dated
14 July 1995 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Group of Arab States for July 1995, the
declaration issued by the Group of Arab States at its
meeting of 14 July 1995; S/ 1995/583, letter dated 17 July
1995 from the Permanent Representative of Hungary to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the text of a statement by the Chairman-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe concerning the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina; S/ 1995/584, letter dated 17 July 1995 from
the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/ 1995/589,
letter dated 18 July 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council; S/l995/590,
letter dated 17 July 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and 8/1 995/598, letter
dated 19 July 1995 from the Charge' d'affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its previous
resolutions, is deeply concerned by the situation in
and around the safe area of Zepa. It condemns in the
strongest possible terms the offensive by the Bosnian
Serb forces against that safe area. The Security
Council is also concerned in particular at the plight
of the civilian population there.

"The Security Council attaches the utmost
importance to the safety and well-being of the
civilian population in Zepa. It demands that the
Bosnian Serb forces refrain from any further action
that threatens the safety of that population, and that
they respect fully the rights of the civilian
population and other persons protected under
international humanitarian law. The Council
reaffirms its condemnation of all violations of
international humanitarian law, and reiterates to all
concerned that those who have committed or ordered
the commission of such acts will be held
individually responsible in respect of such acts. It
reminds the military and political leaders of the

 

Bosnian Serb party that this responsibility extends to
any such acts committed by forces under their
command.

"The Security Council underlines the importance
it attaches to the fullest cooperation with UNHCR and
other international humanitarian organizations, and
demands that they be given unhindered freedom of
movement and access to that area. It further demands
that the Bosnian Serb authorities cooperate with all
efforts, including those of UNPROFOR, to ensure the
safety of the civilian population, and in particular its
most vulnerable members, including evacuation as
requested by the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in his letter of 17 July 1995
(S/ 1995/582, annex).

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
recent acts of violence and intimidation which have
occurred against the personnel of UNPROFOR. It
demands that both parties ensure the safety and
freedom of movement of UNPROFOR personnel at
all times."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l995/33.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6.20 pm.

