Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like first to express my gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
detailed report (S/2008/617). I should also like to thank
Mr. Kai Eide for the comprehensive briefing he has
just given us. I welcome the efforts being made by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General despite the difficult conditions in
which they are working.

I also wish to welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and to thank him for
his statement. In keeping with his advice, I shall be
cautious when speaking about Afghanistan.

This meeting is taking place at a time when, as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
pointed out, the situation in Afghanistan is
characterized by a serious deterioration. According to
the report of the Secretary-General, this may be the
most difficult time since the fall of the Taliban,
especially as regards the great number of civilian
victims, resulting from acts of war in the first eight
months of this year - an increase of 39 per cent over
the same period last year. That is a cause of concern to
us; but of greater concern yet is the fact that 40 per
cent, or about half, of the deaths have been due to
attacks by pro-Government and international forces.

We appreciate all the steps and arrangements
being taken by the forces to avoid civilian casualties
and damage to property. However, the figures are
nevertheless quite significant, and we believe that there
is room for improvement. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has indicated that the
international forces are trying to reduce the number of
civilian victims. We hope that those efforts will lead to
the desired results. In that regard, we also condemn the
acts of insurgent forces that result in civilian casualties.

This meeting is taking place two years after the
London Conference and four months after the Paris
Conference, where the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy was adopted. Pledges of
assistance have exceeded $21 billion. It may be worth
assessing the progress made in the implementation of
the Strategy, especially as regards the commitments
made and the performance of the Afghan Government
in the area of development. We believe that, as
Mr. Tanin has said, development is a very important
element of security and stability.

There can be do doubt that there has been much
progress in a number of areas, including in demining
and combating narcotics, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing; in
the vaccination of children; and in improving regional
relations and launching a dialogue between
Afghanistan and its neighbours. However, we must
accept that many shortcomings remain despite all the
efforts and commitments. I believe that all of that must
be properly assessed and that we must look into the
causes that have led to the current situation.
As I said the last time I addressed the Council on
this issue, I believe we all agree that the solution will
require a general rapprochement, and not just recourse

to force, if we are to restore stability. We believe that
inclusive national reconciliation among the various
sectors of the population, as called for by President
Karzai and, previously, by the Constitutional Council,
is very important to establishing stability. There must
also be parallel efforts in the area of development, so
as to ensure dignified socio-economic conditions for all
Afghan citizens, so that they do not have to turn to
illegal means of earning a living. That should also
contribute to the fight against corruption and
extremism. The Afghan Government should thus regain
the people's confidence in its ability to meet their
essential needs. We hope that the latest Government
reshuffle will promote development and concentrate on
the various priorities.

The report of the Secretary-General of last March
(S/2008/159) indicated that there had been violations
of prisoners' rights and cases of abuse and torture.
There were accusations with regard to lengthy arbitrary
detention in detention centres. The United Nations
Mission was not able to verify those accusations, and
the latest report (S/2008/617) does not indicate any
progress in that respect. The report indicates that the
situation has remained the same and that the jails and
detention centres in Afghanistan are being seriously
neglected. We reiterate the importance of respect for
human rights by all and the need for respect for
international law.

My delegation is extremely concerned about the
food crisis that the Afghan people are facing given the
surge in food prices, the drought and the global
financial crisis, which affects Afghanistan in the same
way as it does other developing countries. We join with
the Secretary-General in his call, echoed by the Afghan
Vice-President, for more than $400 million to deal with
the crisis. I am sure that members are aware of the
misery and suffering in Afghanistan and the large
number of children who live in isolated areas in
mountainous regions and valleys, carrying flour on
their backs from Pakistan to Afghanistan.

Finally, my delegation stresses the important role
of UNAMA in providing assistance. We stress the need
for an enlargement of the Mission, taking into account
the comments of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and for providing the Mission with
the resources it needs to do its work in the different
areas of the country, in line with the priorities
highlighted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, so that the Mission can accomplish
its tasks. In all of this, as the representative of Italy just
said, we must take account of Afghan ownership of the
process and its effectiveness.

