Mr. Kobler: First of all, let me congratulate
the United States on taking up the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I wish to
thank you, Madam, for giving me the opportunity to
address the Council so soon following my appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya.

There have been important developments with
respect to the Libyan political dialogue process
since my predecessor last briefed the Council on
5 November (see S/PV.7550). Since assuming my duties
approximately three weeks ago, I have endeavoured to
ensure a seamless transition from my predecessor and
continuity in the Libyan political dialogue process. I
am fortunate to have met, in such a short period, a wide
array of political leaders, civil society representatives,
tribal elders, as well as women and youth leaders. I have
also met with the respective leaderships of the House
of Representatives in Tobruk and the General National
Congress in Tripoli. I have also had the opportunity
to hold extensive consultations with countries in the
region and beyond. I travelled to Algeria, where I had
the privilege of meeting representatives of all of Libya's
neighbouring countries, as well as to Egypt, France,
Italy, Qatar, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.

I am grateful for the warm welcome I have received
from all, inside and outside Libya, and for their
invaluable insights into the complexities of the Libyan
political and security landscapes. In all those countries,
there is a growing sense of alarm at the prospect
of a spillover of the terrorist threat from Libya into
neighbouring countries. Today, along with the Libyan
dialogue participants, I met with the President of
Tunisia, who also expressed his deep concern regarding
the risk of Daesh rapidly consolidating its influence
within Libya and the danger it poses to Tunisia and the
wider region.

I have no illusion about the difficult realities that
confront us in Libya. The two institutions at the centre
of the political conflict in Libya are beginning to show
dangerous signs of internal fragmentation. The military
conflict, particularly in Benghazi, continues to exact a
heavy toll on the civilian population, adding further to
the existing humanitarian situation. Across the country,
2.4 million people - of whom 435,000 are estimated to
be internally displaced, in addition to several hundreds
of thousands of refugees and migrants - are in
desperate need of humanitarian assistance. Basic items
of daily use and necessary medications have become
scarce in many hospitals. Criminality and lawlessness
have reached endemic levels in the south. Extremists
and terrorist groups continue to expand their spheres
of influence. Decreasing oil revenues and rapidly
depleting financial resources are accelerating Libya's
economic decline. But in the face of all that, Libyans
are overwhelmingly united on one key point: Libya
cannot, and should not, wait any longer for peace to
come.

In the face of the continued inability of the House
of Representatives and the General National Congress
to move forward with the formal endorsement of the
outcomes of the Libyan political dialogue, I convened
a new round of Libyan political dialogue to discuss the
way forward. The two days of deliberations in Tunis,
which concluded earlier today, culminated in the
agreement on a number of key points.

First, a political settlement should be achieved on
the basis of the Libyan political agreement negotiated
within the framework of political dialogue facilitated
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.

Secondly, notwithstanding the legitimate concerns
of some of the parties vis-a-vis elements of the
agreement, there would be no reopening of the text.

Thirdly, there was an agreement on the need to move
forward with the immediate endorsement and signing
of a Libyan political agreement. The participants in the
political dialogue, some 40 courageous men and women
who take considerable risks to put the interest of Libya
above their personal interest, decided to publicly
announce 16 December as a target date for the signing
of an agreement.

Fourthly, there was a unanimous call on all
political and security stakeholders to create a conducive
environment to enable a future Government of national
accord to assume its responsibilities in the Libyan
capital without threat or intimidation. All underlined
the need for collective agreement on the necessary
security arrangements to facilitate that.

In that regard, I wish to take this opportunity to
call directly on the leadership of the General National
Congress to allow me and my colleagues to land our
airplanes in Tripoli and in other cities in Libya to freely
interact with whomever we deem necessary. We can
only fulfil our mandate if we have free access to all
people responsible for security, particularly in Tripoli.

Critically, the participants in the political dialogue
highlighted the urgency - the time factor. Libya is in a
race against time. Its very social fabric, national unity
and territorial integrity are directly endangered by the
forces of extremism and terrorism, the likes of Daesh,
which are actively consolidating and seeking to extend
their influence beyond areas under their immediate
control. Many dialogue participants referred to the
imminent danger of Daesh expansion.

In thinking over their options, the plight of
Libya's civilian population featured prominently in the
deliberations of Libyan political dialogue participants
today. Yesterday, the world marked the International
Human Rights Day. But for many in Libya, yesterday
marked yet another day of chaos, fear and hardship.
Libya's civilian population, including children, bears
the brunt of gross human rights violations. Many
civilians continue to be victims of arbitrary killings
and violent attacks. Much of Benghazi, the cradle of the
17 February revolution, is today a wasteland. Hundreds
of thousands of its inhabitants have had to flee their
homes. The city's infrastructure and Vital facilities lie
in ruin.

The past two days of deliberations, which in
part were attended by Tunis-based Ambassadors and
Libyan envoys from Egypt, Italy and the United States
who travelled to Tunis, revealed that Libyans expect
the Council's support and the support of the wider
international community. Such support is indispensable
to help them forge peace through unity. In that regard,
the forthcoming high-level ministerial conference, to
be hosted in Rome by Italy and the United States, will
provide an opportunity for the international community
to speak with a strong and united voice in support of
the Libyan political agreement. It is with the Rome
conference in mind that I also wish to convey, on behalf
of the Libyan dialogue participants, the following four
key points.

First, there is the hope that the Council will
unequivocally support the outcomes of the Libyan
political dialogue and the Libyan political agreement.
That would send a clear message to all those whose
narrow agendas continue to stand in the way of peace.

Secondly, every effort must be made to ensure that
technical support to the future Libyan Government of
national accord is visible, tangible and sustainable in
order to ensure that it can deliver quickly.

Thirdly, concerted efforts will need to be exerted
to address the humanitarian situation and the terrible
plight endured by the civilian population.

Fourthly, I cannot overstate the threat posed by
Daesh. Mobilizing international support to assist
Libyan authorities to take decisive measures to combat,
contain and eliminate the imminent danger is a must.

Libyans have a unique opportunity before them.
The time has come to make peace. It is unlikely that
there will be other opportunities without inflicting
further suffering and hardship on the Libyan people.
I wish to take this opportunity to assure all Libyans
that the door will always remain open for those who
wish to join the road to peace. Once the agreement is
signed, we will immediately assist in broadening the
basis of support for the new Government, which should
ultimately be based in Tripoli. Through engagement
with the militias, political parties, tribal elders and civil
society, we will advocate for acceptance of the Libyan
political agreement.

I appeal to the sense ofpatriotism and statesmanship
of Libya's leaders to give consideration to Libya's
higher national interests and the long-term welfare of
the Libyan people. Their support to the Libyan political
agreement will be the first step on Libya's road to
peace, security and prosperity.

