Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
briefing. We believe this format marks a positive step
towards greater transparency and openness in the work of
the Council, particularly when high-ranking members of
the Secretariat, as in the case of Ambassador Miyet today,
deliver reports to the Council on important issues on our
agenda.

The comprehensive report that the Secretary-General
has submitted to us, as complemented today by the

 

remarks of Under-Secretary-General Miyet, shows that the
political, security and humanitarian situation in Sierra
Leone is fragile and increasingly precarious. The example
of some statements made to the media by Mr. Sankoh as to
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and by Mr. Sam Bockarie to the effect that his troops
would not be disarming before Nigerian troops in Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) or in UNAMSIL - these are frankly
alarming and must be rejected. That is why we reiterate that
it is important to have UNAMSIL on the ground and to
have it deployed as quickly as possible; and ECOMOG's
continued presence is just as important.

We are encouraged by the comments made by Under-
Secretary-General Miyet that subsequent to the Secretary-
General's report the deployment by UNAMSIL has got
under way without difficulty. We should congratulate the
countries that have contributed military personnel for this
difficult task.

The unequivocal backing of the Security Council for
the Lome Agreement is also very important, as are all the
efforts made by President Kabbah to strengthen the
democratic institutions in Sierra Leone.

With regard to the content of the report of the
Secretary-General, in particular paragraph 34, and the
comments that Under-Secretary-General Miyet has made,
we would like to reiterate our particular concern about the
attacks against United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
In this context, we wish to reiterate the importance of the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, and we urge countries to ratify it.

In our view, everyone who is active in the territory is
responsible for the security of such personnel. At the same
time, we must seek ways of making sure that personnel of
non-governmental organizations and humanitarian agencies
receive the protection they need. With all due respect to the
relevant countries and without wishing to interfere in their
sovereign decisions, it seems to us that all Governments
receiving United Nations personnel in their territories
should become parties to the aforementioned Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

On another matter, I would like to endorse what has
just been said by the Ambassador of the Netherlands to the
effect that the amnesty envisaged in the Lome Agreement
should not be extended to cover atrocities committed
subsequent to that Agreement.

Allow me in conclusion to congratulate Ambassador
Okelo on a job very well done and to welcome the new
Special Representative, Ambassador Adeniji of Nigeria,
who so effectively discharged his duties in the Central
African Republic.

