Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, and Kuwait for convening this
important meeting.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and The Elders, Ms. Mary Robinson and Mr. Ban Ki-
Moon, whom I welcome back to the Chamber. Their
valuable and insightful briefings have always been food
for thought and given more momentum in discussing
this issue.

In the rise of conflicts in recent years, with an
unprecedented increase in fatalities and displacement
of innocents, the global citizenry is looking keenly to
the United Nations to perform its Charter responsibility
effectively. Unquestionably, conflict prevention and
mediation must take a higher precedence, as has been
noted by many in the Chamber today. The focus of the
United Nations should be clear in this regard; it must
help and assist national and regional-led efforts to
prevent and mediate conflict. Let me highlight several
pertinent points, as follows.
First, dialogue, mediation and prevention must be
high on our agenda. Indonesia strongly supports the
call of the Secretary-General for a surge in political
diplomacy in conflict prevention, which should be
translated into concrete action. Although there have
been some successes, there have been more cases of
emerging conflict, to which the Secretary-General
alluded earlier. The Security Council cannotjust ensure
that the process for peacemaking technically continues,
on the one hand, while on the other it is impeded by the
narrow national interests of some members. Preventive
action will not success without political will and, I
should like to underline, a solid moral compass. The
unity of the Council is as essential as is the need for a
sincere, well-owned and resolute effort by the parties to
conflict to resolve their disputes peacefully. The Elders
have reminded us all once again this morning of the
need for the Council to be united, and we should heed
their call.

My second point concerns the importance of
stronger partnership with regional and subregional
organizations in fostering global peace. Indonesia,
together with the rest of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) family, have worked to
implement the ASEAN Charter, with its fundamental
reliance on peaceful dispute settlement through
dialogue and consultation. We realize that prevention
and sustaining peace must happen as a joint, principled
and well-owned partnership. Regional entities, with
their unique bonds of history and knowledge, can
have unmatched insights into workable mediation
approaches and prevention. Indonesia strongly believes
that neighbours know best. The Security Council
can utilize the advantages of regional entities by
engaging with them from the earliest signs of potential
conflicts and deepening its relations with them, as it
has done with the African Union and other regional
organizations. During our presidency, we also engaged
with the European Union in addressing many issues.

Thirdly, the root causes of conflict must be
addressed meaningfully. In doing so, the Security
Council must fully uphold the principles of international
law, human rights and humanitarian law. But we also
need to be cognizant of the fact that conflict does
not happen without causes, be they issues related to
tribal ethnicity, poverty, competing resources or as
a result of pressures from climate change, such as
desertification, among others. Indonesia is encouraged
that the Security Council, along with the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, is increasingly focused on
comprehensively tackling conflict factors. We believe
that United Nations entities should further support, in
particular, those Member States lacking the capacity
to integrate preventive measures to conflicts into their
national governance and development functions. We
need to ensure the provision of development aid so that
conflicts can be avoided.

Fourthly, adequate resources are needed. Prevention
and mediation should be reinforced and underpinned
through a significant increase of and more reliable
support, among other things, through the regular
budget. In that respect, Indonesia also acknowledges the
importance of voluntary financial support, including
through the indispensable Peacebuilding Fund, for its
conflict prevention and related projects.

Fifthly, it is important to welcome new initiatives
to enhance training and capacity-building to improve
and build the capacity of negotiators and mediators,
including women as agents of peace and mediators.
Every stakeholder that can contribute to peace
should be given a role. Inclusivity is the key word. It
was in relation not only to peacekeeping but also to
peacebuilding and prevention that Ms. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, hosted a
regional meeting on women and peace and security in
April with the intention of creating a global coalition
of women for peace and tolerance that would consist of
female peacekeepers, women negotiators and mediators.
It is high time, as others have also said in this forum,
that women are more visible at the forefront in carrying
the banner of peace. It should also be incorporated into
strategies or programmes related to peace maintenance
and special political missions.

Indonesia, from its own experience, knows well that
prevention and mediation can be extremely delicate.
They have to be conducted diligently, intensively and,
in some cases, confidentially. What matters are the
positive and sustainable outcomes for peace. Indonesia
commends the Secretary-General for his personal
commitment and work on peace and mediation, as
well as his Special Envoys, peace emissaries and the
Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers for their
vital work, along with the Secretariat, in continuing to
strengthen the Mediation Support Unit.

We are also appreciative of the work of the
Secretary-General's High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation, on which Indonesia is also represented.
Indonesia, together with Finland, as members of the
Group of Friends of Mediation, were pleased to co-host
a second meeting of the High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation in Helsinki in June last year.

In conclusion, I have heard many speakers quote
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations. I looked
at the Charter as I heard the quotations. I would like
to add another Article that we tend to forget, which is
Article 24, concerning the functions and powers of the
Security Council.

"In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security".

I would like to underline, italicize, put in bold
and highlight in bright colours the words "prompt and
effective action". We tend to forget those very important
words. It is high time for us all here to be prompt and
effective. It is high time for us to be bold in preventing
conflict because conflict will not wait for us.

