Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting. I would also like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his very
thorough and substantive briefing, as well as the
Secretary-General for his report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2003/42l). The report is objective, as always, and
eloquently sets out the ongoing efforts of the
international community, through UNMIK, to
normalize life in Kosovo.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully supports the statement to be made later
by the representative of Greece on behalf of the Union.
I will therefore limit my comments to a few brief
remarks in my national capacity.

My country welcomes the fact that the transfer of
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions is taking
place in accordance with paragraph 11 of resolution
1244 (1999). We hope that the Transfer Council, which
was recently set up, will work in a cautious manner,
while ensuring that the benchmarks are swiftly
implemented and that the legitimate interests of all the
communities and citizens of Kosovo are respected.

I believe that it would be of interest to the
Council if Mr. Annabi could tell us whether UNMIK
has considered setting up - or has already set up - a
relatively structured mechanism to monitor the way in
which the Provisional Institutions are carrying out the
responsibilities that have already been transferred to
them. I believe that it would be useful for the Council
to gain an overview of the way in which the new
institutions are carrying out the duties that are
entrusted to them as the political process evolves.

We hope that the drawing up of a road map
encompassing all aspects of the process of transferring
responsibility will contribute to the establishment of
benchmarks, which are an indispensable condition for a
lasting solution with regard to the status of Kosovo. In
that regard, my delegation would like to express its
concern about the attempt by certain Kosovo Albanian
political leaders, including representatives of the
Kosovo Assembly, to circumvent the powers reserved
under the Constitutional Framework for the Secretary-
General's Special Representative. We believe that both
the Provisional Institutions and the Kosovo Albanian
political parties must work harder to develop a political
culture that can bring to an end attempts to disregard
the recommendations of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, as such behaviour has an
adverse affect on the political process in Kosovo.

That is the only way to bring about a climate in
the region that is conducive to a decision-making
process that takes into account the interests of all of the
communities of the region.

We believe that a special effort should be made to
establish an effective administration at every level in
Kosovo. Such an administration should reflect the
multi-ethnic character of the region and serve the
population in a professional manner. Bulgaria
condemns the acts of inter-ethnic violence that
unfortunately have become more frequent than in
previous months, as well as the signs of organized
crime in Kosovo. We call on local political leaders to
use their authority and their influence to contribute to
the creation of a climate of inter-ethnic and human
tolerance.

It is clear that throughout 2003 the Security
Council and UNMIK will have to pay special attention
to the return of displaced persons - a process that is
still encountering difficulties, particularly at the local
level. My country supports the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in combating
organized crime and trafficking in human beings, as
well as his efforts to re-launch the economy by
attracting investment and to resolve the daily problems
experienced by the people of Kosovo. The positive
results that have been achieved with regard to setting
up the tax administration and the customs service are
examples of movement in the right direction.

My delegation believes that transforming the
Kosovo Protection Corps into a multi-ethnic force with
very clearly defined functions - civilian protection
and civilian emergency intervention - should continue
with greater vigour. We believe that financing the
Corps out of the regional budget provides an effective
means of control.

Bulgaria believes - and here we agree with the
comments of Ambassador Pleuger of Germany - that
Kosovo has still not reached the level of political
development that would make it possible for us to
consider the question of its final status and to include
that issue on the current agenda of the international
community and the Security Council. The presence of
UNMIK and KFOR in Kosovo will continue to be a
key factor in the stability not only of Kosovo but of the
entire region, as well as a guarantee of peace and
stability. My country will continue to take part in the
operations of international structures aimed at
maintaining peace and security.

In the months to come, the international
community and all the local political leaders must
focus their attention on resolving specific problems on
which normalization of life in Kosovo depends - the
establishment of local institutions, the assumption of
greater responsibilities on the part of the local
authorities and better control of the underground
economy and organized crime.

