Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): It is
less than a month since we last had a briefing from
Mr. Aziz Pahad, South African Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs and representative of the mediator of
the African Union peace initiative in Cote d'Ivoire. My
delegation welcomes Mr. Pahad to the Security Council
once again and wishes to thank him for his second
briefing. We also welcome and endorse the statement
made by the Ambassador of Nigeria on behalf of the
Chairman of the African Union (AU), President
Obasanjo.

During his first briefing to the Council,
Mr. Pahad informed us, among other things, about the
Pretoria meeting, which took place on 3 April 2005.
The meeting produced the Pretoria Agreement, which
was signed by all the parties on 6 April. President
Mbeki has subsequently made a determination on
article 35, a ruling that the Council should support. The
Pretoria Agreement complements and has given a new
lease on life to the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra
Agreements and is paving the way forward in the peace
process. The issue of article 35 is central to the conflict
and critical to its political solution. It is our earnest
hope that all the parties will be committed to the
Pretoria Agreement and accept the ruling made by the
mediator on the issue of article 35.

Getting an agreement from the conflicting parties
is a positive development. But getting their firm
commitment to live up to what they have agreed to is
the real test and the best chance of ending the conflict
peacefully. We pay special tribute to President Mbeki
for his personal efforts, which contributed to the
success of the Pretoria Agreement. In the same vein,
we congratulate the Ivorian parties for their patriotism
and for their commitment to the peace process in their
country.

The positive developments that have taken place
in Cote d'Ivoire within the last week are encouraging.
The first is the assumption by Ambassador Shori, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, of his
functions in Abidjan. The second is the opposition's
joining the Government of National Reconciliation
after a five-month boycott. The third is the positive
outcome of the Bouake meeting between the
Government and the Force nouvelles leaders, who
agreed on a timetable for the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme. Equally significant is the withdrawal of
heavy weapons from the zone of confidence as the
initial stage of implementing the DDR programme.
These developments are a clear demonstration of the
commitment of the parties to the Pretoria Agreement
and to a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

It is our sincere hope that the DDR process will
begin in earnest on 14 May 2005, as scheduled. It is of
vital importance that the signatories to the Pretoria
Agreement commit to the timetable of the DDR
process. It is only through the successful
implementation of the DDR programme and the
restructuring of the army that the country can once
again be reunified and the holding of the October
election made possible. To give peace a chance, it is
important that all the parties make their positions
known on President Mbeki's ruling on article 35. The
Security Council should give strong support to that
ruling and underline the importance of elections within
the agreed time frame.

The biggest challenge facing the international
community in general and the Security Council in
particular is to encourage the parties to move forward
in the implementation of the Pretoria Agreement. The
leaders of all the parties to the conflict must be
encouraged to instil a sense of confidence among their
followers in order to create a conducive environment
for elections - the basis for a lasting peace in the
country. We particularly urge the media in Cote
d'Ivoire to support the recent peace accomplishments
and to sustain their current positive tone, in a spirit of
national reconciliation.

Now that the Pretoria meeting has succeeded in
putting the peace process back on track, we need to
revisit and consider favourably the Secretary-General's
earlier recommendations that the Council approve the
additional military, civilian police and civilian
resources proposed in his third report on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. The Council
should also consider favourably the additional security
requirements recommended by the Pretoria Agreement.
Adequate security between now and the scheduled
elections in October is critical, both for the DDR
process and for enhancing public security.

We also support the recommendation that the
mandate of UNOCI be extended for a period of 12
months following the current technical rollover. The
extension of UNOCI's mandate will obviously help to
guarantee a smooth implementation of the transition. It
will also be necessary for stabilizing the country in the
immediate post-election period and for laying the
foundation for post-conflict peacebuilding and the
reconstruction of Cote d'Ivoire.

