Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the
120 member States of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM).

At the outset, I would like to convey, on behalf of
the member States of the Movement, our respects to
His Excellency Lord Ahmad, Minister of State for the
Commonwealth and the United Nations of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and to
express our gratitude to his delegation for convening this
open debate on such an important matter, as well as for
the concept note (S/2018/586, annex) that was prepared
to guide our discussions today. We also wish to thank
the Secretary-General, the Archbishop of Canterbury
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their valuable briefings.

The theme of today's open debate is a fitting
occasion to pay tribute to the life and legacy of Mr. Kofi
Annan, former Secretary-General of the United Nations,
who in his lifetime was a genuine advocate of peace,
social justice, development, human rights, solidarity
and many other values so cherished by all here. Among
other things, he was an expert precisely in the area of
mediation and a leader who understood the importance
of dialogue and inclusiveness to make this a better world
for future generations. In the words of the Nobel Peace
Prize winner himself, "when one acts as a mediator, one
has to think about what the biggest need of the people
is". That is merely a small token of his commitment to
and faith in humankind.

It bears recalling that the main objective of the
Non-Aligned Movement is none other than to make
a positive contribution to the establishment of a
prosperous and peaceful world and the achievement of a
just and equitable world order. However, that goal will be
difficult to achieve as long as conflict situations persist
around the world, hence the importance of diplomacy
for peace, as opposed to the increasing and deepening
tendency of some States to resort to unilateralism,
arbitrariness and the imposition of unilateral measures.

Furthermore, and in the context of new and existing
threats and challenges, it is imperative for the Movement
to continue to promote multilateralism, in particular by
strengthening the central role of the United Nations,
including with regard to governance and by defending
the interests of developing countries and preventing
their marginalization. We are therefore committed
to the promotion, preservation and strengthening of
multilateralism and multilateral diplomacy as the most
appropriate framework for resolving, through dialogue
and cooperation, the problems affecting humankind.

Consequently, and bearing in mind that the
challenges currently facing the international
community need to be resolutely addressed by all
nations through multilateralism, we underscore the
fact that any initiative undertaken by the international
community to promote peace must be based on high
ethical values, justice and friendship, if we are to be in a
position to denounce acts of aggression and strengthen
and promote stability, tranquillity and lasting peace
throughout the world.

NAM. has historically been an advocate of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, of refraining from the
threat or use of force and of the increased use of the
provisions of Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular its Article 33. In fact,
it has even suggested, without success so far, that the
International Law Commission consider including in its
programme of work a study on the obligation of States
to resort to peaceful means of settling international
disputes. That would, in our view, make a positive
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

We also wish to take this opportunity to recall the
importance of the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, which was drawn
up at the initiative of our Movement, and which is
the first time that a normative text has developed a
detailed plan and strengthened the legal framework for
the peaceful settlement of international disputes. That
text reflects the international community's increased
confidence in the rule of law as a cornerstone not only
of the peaceful settlement of disputes, but also of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

During the eighteenth Mid-Term Ministerial
Conference of the Movement, held in April in the city
of Baku in the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Ministers
recognized the growing interest in and the provision
and use of mediation as a promising and cost-effective
tool for the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflict
prevention and resolution, without prejudice to other
means mentioned in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, including the use of arbitration and the
role and functions of the International Court of Justice.
It is also worth noting that, on the basis of an initiative
of our Movement, the next thematic discussion to take
place within the framework of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization will be
precisely on mediation.

In that context, we cannot fail to emphasize the
importance of the consent of all the parties concerned
in order to ensure the success and the legitimacy of any
mediation process if the ultimate goal is to effectively
achieve durable, inclusive and comprehensive
settlements, as noted in the concept note for this
open debate.

In conclusion, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, true to its commitment to ensuring its
position as an anti-war and peace-loving force,
reaffirms its resolve to strengthen its role in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution, confidence-building, peacebuilding and
post-conflict rehabilitation within the Non-Aligned
Movement. In particular, we would also like to identify
specific measures to accelerate the establishment
of mechanisms within the Non-Aligned Movement
to that end whose terms of reference are in line with
its founding principles and those of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, while
emphasizing that such a mechanism should be based on
the consent of the parties concerned.
