Ms. Chavez Colmenares (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My country welcomes
the convening of this briefing of the Security Council
and the concept note (S/2015/600, annex) to guide
our deliberations on the Ebola virus disease and its
current status. The pandemic has tragically affected the
friendly peoples of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
thereby impacting the entire region of West Africa and
the world over the past year and a half.

In commending the holding of this meeting of the
Council, we consider it equally important to address
this issue in the appropriate political forums, including
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, in View of its clear economic and social
dimensions.

We also thank Dr. Nabarro, Dr. Fallah, Dr. Chan,
Ambassador Antonio and Mr. Thoresson, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Sweden, for their
comprehensive statements regarding the current
situation in the fight against the Ebola virus.

The Ebola outbreak became a regional crisis in
West Africa that demanded urgent attention and whose
consequences were made evident in the collapse of
health systems, the shutdown of schools, the increased
rate of internally displaced persons and refugees,
the closure of farms and businesses, and the overall
contraction of the economies of the most affected
countries. Resolution 2177 (2014), adopted by the
Council on 18 September 2014, recognizes the threat
posed by Ebola and the need for a coherent approach
that is both coordinated and comprehensive.

We welcome the latest report published by the
World Health Organization (WHO), which highlights
a significant reduction in the incidence of the outbreak
following the declaration of Liberia as a territory
free of Ebola in May and despite the three new cases
presented earlier this week in Sierra Leone and Guinea.
We congratulate the peoples and Governments of those
countries on the results achieved after more than a year
of hard and sustained struggle.

The gravity of the health problem has demanded
a comprehensive and multidimensional approach on
the part of the international community, which has
been involved by way of international, regional and
national organizations, and the economic and social
sectors. Global mobilization has been manifest through
multiple contributions of various kinds made in
solidarity to address the devastating consequences of
the pandemic. Venezuela contributed generously to the
Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund.

In that context, we recognize the selfless efforts of
the interdisciplinary teams of men and women around
the world dedicated to fighting the Ebola virus and
the work of representatives and of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Ebola and his colleagues,
WHO, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Mano River Union, the
international medical brigades and the States Members
of the Organization. Latin America and the Caribbean
have been present from the beginning in the form of 450
Cuban doctors who contributed as fellow human beings
working in solidarity on the ground. Moreover, we
welcome the Secretary-General's initiative to convene

on 10 July the high-level international conference on
post-Ebola recovery efforts, in close cooperation with
the Governments of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

For Venezuela, the leadership of the brotherly
peoples of Africa through their Governments and
regional and subregional institutions is essential to
formulateing strategies in the new phase when the
whole region is declared definitively Ebola-free. The
economic and social recovery from the crisis must
be a priority on the international agenda, given the
contraction in the gross domestic products of the
affected countries, including more than 70 per cent
since the start of the crisis. The structural causes of the
crisis must be addressed substantively in the search for
a more just and equitable model, since the pre-eminence
of a capitalist, impoverishing and exclusionary system
is unsustainable over time and is the leading cause of
world inequities whereby the countries of the South are
precisely the main victims.

Moreover, in the context of the peacebuilding
architecture, it is fundamental to prioritize a sustainable
development approach for these African countries,
especially given the social and human repercussions of
the virus. We appreciate the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission and encourage it to continue strengthening
them in the future.

For its part, together with international efforts to
prevent the spread of the virus, on 18 October 2014 the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America
held an special summit in Havana to address the fight
against Ebola and to motivate political will towards
prevention and training of interdisciplinary teams both
to prevent health threats affecting the region and to
contribute on the ground to eradication efforts.

At this stage, where the most affected States remain
fragile in the face of chaos and the the consequences
of the crisis, the international community must not
relent in its cooperation in support of those nations. We
also need to ensure that continued efforts are made to
tackle poverty through the use of inclusive, sustainable
economic and social models and that the necessary
structural measures are taken so that the pandemic
never recurs. The devastating humanitarian crisis in
various segments of society caused by Ebola, which
particularly affected children and women, is a call on
us to engage in deeper reflection and to take action with
respect to the major challenges that remain in terms of
cooperation with the brotherly peoples of Africa in the
fields ofboth security and peacebuilding.

After years of exploitation and colonialism, the
region is now encountering major crises, which its
people have faced with exemplary dignity and courage.
Despite the immense challenges, there have been efforts
to raise awareness in the rest of the world to mobilize
concerning the human right to international solidarity
on this and other important issues.

We are therefore convinced that overcoming this
crisis requires us to reflect on how cooperation in its
many dimensions can contribute to the development of
the great human and geographical potential of Africa,
a continent with great cultural diversity and a rich
history. It is important, therefore, that we promote new
sustainable cooperation models in solidarity with the
peoples and the Governments of Africa, bearing in
mind their right to self-determination.

The post-Ebola focus is an opportunity to
implement a comprehensive socioeconomic, political,
humanitarian and cultural approach focusing on
the empowerment of the African people in their
development processes, with the ongoing full support
of the international community, in a spirit of solidarity,
so as to cooperate in the strengthening of their health
systems, in which regional bodies will also have a key
role to play.

The crisis has taught us about the need to improve
our coordination mechanisms as well as our health-care
protocols at the international level and to create early-
warning and updated technology-transfer systems in
the field of public health, on a free and accessible basis,
giving priority to prevention and education.

We must ensure that access to new initiatives to
combat Ebola such as the development of a vaccine
and all means for treating it should be available to all,
without any social or economic discrimination. All
States and institutions are called on to work towards
this goal in a decisive manner. We must also avoid and
punish any stigmatization of individuals and nations
victims of Ebola, through an ethical, responsible social
response that does not unduly dramatize the situation,
ensuring also the provision of adequate educational
programmes that ensure a scientific and humane
approach to the pandemic and to other diseases that
several affect developing countries.

Finally, Venezuela reaffirms its commitment to
the African peoples in their struggle against poverty
and social exclusion and to support their right to
development through the promotion of international
cooperation and solidarity, especially with respect to
threats such as the one that this terrible scourge has
posed to humankind.

