Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We join other
delegations in thanking Ambassador Ne'stor Osorio
for his final 90-day report to the Council. We deeply
appreciate his able stewardship of the Committee and
his valuable contribution to its work.

We have taken note of the recent report
(GOV/2012/55) of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on the implementation of the IAEA
safeguards regime in Iran pursuant to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

Ten days from now, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) will
have completed six years of existence. The Council
and the Committee have invested time and energy to
address the Iranian nuclear issue. It may be worthwhile
for the Council to reflect and review the objectives and
strategy on the subject, even as it promotes the full
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions by
all States.

In our View, the potential for confrontation over
Iran's nuclear programme has not diminished. Any
exacerbation will further destabilize the immediate
neighbourhood of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the entire region. Given the delicate and complex
environment in the region, Pakistan does not want an
escalation of tension in an already volatile region. We
therefore reaffirm the need for dialogue and diplomacy.

We believe that a peaceful resolution of the
crisis is still possible on the basis of reciprocal
confidence-building measures, as well as the necessary
steps to ensure Iran's right to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.

As party to the NPT, Iran is obligated to fulfil its
responsibilities contained in the Treaty. Similarly, Iran,
as a member ofthe IAEA, is required to fully cooperate
with the Agency within the framework of its Safeguards
Agreement.

While Iran should fulfil its legal obligations under
the NPT and the IAEA statute, its rights under those
instruments should also be respected. We urge Iran
to extend full cooperation to the IAEA to resolve all
outstanding issues.

We encourage Iran and the group made up of the
five permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany to stay the course of meaningful engagement,
build on the talks they have already held this year
and deepen the diplomatic process for a negotiated
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue.

We continue to support the view that the work
and activities of the Panel of Experts should conform
strictly to its mandate. The Panel's work must be guided
by the broader but interlinked objectives outlined
in the Council's resolutions, namely, the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime and advancing
a diplomatic solution.

We take note of the midterm report of the Panel
and welcome the ongoing discussions in the Committee
on the Panel's 2012 final report (S/2012/395, annex)
recommendations.

We look forward to further deliberations in the
weeks ahead. We reiterate our View that Security
Council sanctions should not be pursued as an end in
itself. A negotiated solution to the unresolved issues
would be facilitated if the Council, the Committee and
the Panel of Experts acted in unison and maintained a
balance between sanctions and negotiations.

Over the years, the Panel of Experts has continued
to undertake extensive outreach efforts globally, while
preparing various reports and recommendations.

There is a need to broaden the composition of the
Panel's membership, to include in particular members
from developing countries, in order to enhance
awareness about, and ensure the implementation of, the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The method method for appointing the Panel's
experts also needs revision. It must be harmonized
with the United Nations core values of transparency
and impartiality. We hope that the Council will
carefully examine those issues to develop the necessary
recommendations.
