The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to very warmly welcome
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, wish her every success
and assure her of Germany's full support to her in her
assignment. I also want to pay tribute to the dedicated
work of her predecessor, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
and her commitment and great achievements. Let me
also thank Mr. Ladsous, Mr. Lake and Mr. Tolbert for
their impressive briefings.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on during this debate on behalf of the
European Union.

We heard it from our briefers: the number of children
suffering in armed conflict is still shockingly high.

This is a reminder for us. We have to increase
our joint efforts to stop and prevent heinous crimes
committed against children. It has to be said that, since
2005, encouraging progress has been made. Twenty
action plans have been signed by parties to conflict.
Consequently, tens of thousands of child soldiers have
been released. This is a remarkable achievement of
which the United Nations and the Security Council
can be proud.
The recent convictions of Thomas Lubanga and
Charles Taylor have made clear that accountability for
the recruitment and abuse of children is advancing.
But we must not be complacent. There is still reason
for concern. The listings of new parties in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/261) are proof of
the seriousness of the problem. New parties have been
listed for the recruitment and use of children and for
the killing and maiming of children. There have also
been first listings for attacks on schools and hospitals.

What can we do better?

First, we should explore ways to improve the
existing protection framework. Child protection and
child protection training should be an integral part
of all peacekeeping and special political missions.
In that regard, we strongly commend the efforts of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
Department of Political Affairs to develop a joint
Child Protection Policy. Child protection issues
and, in particular, the release and reintegration of
children, need to be systematically included in peace
negotiations and agreements.

Secondly, we need to address the issue of
accountability. Perpetrators of crimes against children
need to be held accountable. This goes especially
for the alarming number of so-called persistent
perpetrators. The Security Council needs to look at
new ways to address the issue. The report of former
French Ambassador De la Sabliere provides a good
overview of possible options. Let me mention just two.

One option that Germany favours is that the
Security Council increase its political engagement,
for example, through sessions dedicated to the issue.
The second option we should pursue is that the
Security Council make more use of targeted measures
against individual perpetrators through sanctions
committees, starting with the expansion of existing
sanctions committee mandates. We should take those
suggestions forward in our future discussions.

Germany is gratified that the Security Council
today once again adopted a resolution (resolution 2068 (2012)) that underlines the importance of the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, that reiterates the
Council's readiness to adopt targeted and graduated
measures against persistent perpetrators, and that
authorizes annual reports of the Secretary-General.

It goes without saying that we would have
preferred a consensus decision on the resolution we
adopted today. We regret that some members chose
not to support that resolution. We had one week of
extensive discussion, and we, as penholder, made an
extra effort to accommodate all delegation's concerns.
We walked the extra mile, but we could not do one
thing - compromise on the integrity of existing and,
so far, accepted mechanisms of the United Nations.
That would have been irresponsible. I hope that the
wish to strengthen the existing United Nations system
to protect children in armed conflicts will unite us all,
although a few members might have different opinions
on the way forward.

In closing, 1 would like to reiterate Germany's hope
that the Security Council will keep up its good work
on this important issue. Our ambitions for this agenda
must remain high. We owe it to the children. We owe
it to them as the most vulnerable group of our society.
We owe it to them to spare no effort in enhancing the
protection of their rights in armed conflict.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.

