Mr. Christofides (Cyprus): I have the honour to
read out the statement of His Excellency Mr. Sotirios
Zackheos, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Cyprus to the United Nations.

My delegation has aligned itself with the
statement of the European Union. I would like,
however, to make the following brief remarks.

The Government of Cyprus has expressed on
several occasions its principled position on the
Palestinian question.

In particular, we have condemned unequivocally
the terrorist acts and suicide bombings, which have
resulted in the deaths of Israeli civilians. At the same
time, we have pointed out that the continuing
occupation, the destruction of the Palestinian
infrastructure, the prolonging of the daily suffering of
the Palestinians as a result of the closures, curfews,
unemployment and the worsening economic situation
do not create the necessary climate for reconciliation
and regional stability.

We have all along called for restraint and
moderation from both sides and implored them to look
beyond confrontation and return to the negotiating
table, as well as take steps to break the cycle of
violence. We share the international community's
belief that there can be no military solution or an
imposed settlement.

We watched, with great expectations, the
cessation of suicide killings for six weeks. We had
indeed hoped that this development, despite the
continuing Israeli actions that resulted in the loss of
lives in the West Bank and Gaza, would have led to
intensified moves towards a road map for achieving the
goal of the international community for the existence
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
within secure and recognized borders, as envisaged by
resolution 1397 (2002). We therefore express our
dismay over the recent escalation, following the suicide
bombings in Israel and the terrorist attack on a
Palestinian school in Hebron.

The Government of the Republic of Cyprus
expresses its deep concern over the disproportionate
Israeli response and the actions of the Israeli army
aimed at the headquarters of President Arafat. We call
on Israel to lift its siege without further delay.

We must be frank. We cannot understand how the
siege of the Palestinian headquarters and the personal
hardship imposed on the elected leader of the
Palestinians can lead to an increase in Israeli security
or facilitate efforts towards Palestinian reforms which
are supported by the international community. We call
on Israel to consider the long-term consequences of
such actions.

In conclusion, we reiterate the need for the
implementation of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, as well as the provisions of the Geneva
Conventions. In particular, we express our concern
over the killing of children and of unarmed
demonstrators.

