Mr. De Charette (France) (interpretation from French): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency and on your very skilled
leadership.

The tragic events that are occurring in the
Palestinian territories are the most serious we have seen
in many years. This brings us back to a time we thought
had passed. This situation is a challenge to the
international community. It poses a major risk for the
peace process. This process, which has been at a standstill
for several months now, is in danger of dying if the
international community does not react quickly and with
resolve.

In fact, these events are not surprising. France, for
its part, for some time now has been warning the Israeli
authorities about growing frustrations in the Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem. I met with Mr. Levy at
the beginning of September, and recently the President of
France met with Prime Minister Netanyahu. In both cases
we insisted on the urgency of concrete measures that
would allow for an improvement in the daily lives of the
Palestinians.

The incident that touched off the crisis might appear
to be of secondary importance. Mr. Netanyahu insisted
heavily on this point. Actually, that argument is probably
accurate. The opening of a tunnel is less serious than
many of the measures taken, which have directly affected
the lives of Palestinians: the closure of territories, the
travel ban on non-resident Palestinians to Jerusalem, the
destruction of homes, the expansion of settlements, and so
on. But this latest step, taken in a highly symbolic place,
shows, if not deliberate provocation, then at least a
serious psychological error. It is obvious that the Israeli
authorities miscalculated the emotional reaction of
Palestinian public opinion, which is very sensitive to
anything that occurs within the perimeter of the mosques.

France is deeply troubled by the surge in violence
and by the growing number of victims. Last night, I was
in contact with President Arafat, who reported 69 deaths
and more than 1,100 injured. These confrontations
resulted in casualties primarily among the civilian
population. We also, of course, deplore the injuries and
deaths among the Israeli army as well as those among the
Palestinian police, which confronted each other for the
first time.

France is concerned that an important provision of
the agreements concluded between the Palestinian

 

Authority and the Israeli Government has been deliberately
violated. The fact that the Israeli Army has entered parts of
Zone A, which is under Palestinian control, is, in fact,
contrary to the letter and spirit of the Taba Agreement.

We should shed as full a light as possible, as Mr.
Netanyahu himself has said he wishes to do, on these tragic
events - on how they unfolded, their causes and those
responsible. There can be no doubt that, primarily, they
reflect the exasperation of the Palestinian population.
According to the Israeli authorities, the current legislation
is the result of a deliberate campaign against Israel which
has the assent of President Arafat. It is difficult for us to
subscribe to that analysis, even though it may be possible
that certain dubious elements have tried to take advantage
of a difficult situation.

France hopes that everything possible will be done to
restore calm, bring the situation under control and avoid
circumstances in which the most extremist factions can
exploit the situation. In this respect, we feel that there is as
much composure and desire for calm on the side of the
Israeli authorities as on that of President Arafat. For its
part, France has endeavoured, through many contacts that
the President of the Republic and I have had with Mr.
Netanyahu and President Arafat, to help to calm a situation
which, if nothing is done soon, is in danger of moving
beyond the control of the local authorities.

France is giving and will continue to give its tireless
and determined help to the search for peace. It supports
efforts from any quarter aimed at resolving this crisis.

For several months now, some have seemed to believe
that another peace would be possible, based on other
principles, that would conform more closely to their own
interests. I say, solemnly, that only the complete
implementation of the Madrid, Oslo and Taba Agreements
is capable of restoring peace. Only the fundamental
principles established by those Agreements - that is, land
for peace and the right of the Palestinians to self-
determination - can provide an acceptable basis and
favourable prospects for negotiations.

It is either that or violence; respect for principles or
confrontation; agreements or war. France believes that the
Egyptian initiative, which led to this meeting, has come at
an opportune time and can help contribute to a return to
calm thinking. The deliberations of the Security Council
will help to restore peace once the Council confirms the
need to return to the peace process on the bases that I have
laid out.

We believe that two measures are imperative. The
Israeli authorities must return the tunnel under the Holy
City to its original state. According to certain information,
the city of Jerusalem may have decided to close the
tunnel on a provisional basis. Such a positive decision
should be confirmed and made permanent. Furthermore,
the Israeli troops that have entered zone A must withdraw
as soon as possible.

We should also clearly call upon the parties to
resume negotiations on the peace process on the basis of
established principles and implement without delay the
agreements already concluded. In this respect, the
evacuation of Hebron and the relaxation of security
measures in the territories would constitute necessary and
urgent measures.

We must not so much condemn as avoid similar
events in the future. In this respect, we approve the idea
of an immediate meeting between Mr. Netanyahu and
President Arafat in order to resume negotiations at the
highest level to allow the complete implementation of
agreements that have been signed and the achievement of
an agreement on the final status of the Palestinian
territories in order to build a just and lasting peace.

