Ms. Power (United States): I thank all the Ministers
who have travelled to New York for this important
meeting.

Shuba Jaya and her husband Paul Goes were
flying back home from the Netherlands, where they
had brought their one-year-old daughter, Kaela, to
meet Paul's parents for the first time. Nick Norris was
bringing his three grandkids, Mo, age 12, Evie, age 10,
and Otis, age 8, back to Perth from a family vacation,
so that the children's parents could have a few days of
holiday to themselves. Tambi Jiee and Ariza Gazalee
were moving back to Malaysia after more than two
years of living abroad. With them were their sons,
Muhammad Afif, age 19, Muhammad Afzal, age 17,
and Mohammed Afruz, age 13, and their daughter,
Marsha Azmeena, age 15. All of these families were on
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7. All of them are gone.

Among the 298 people on board were students and
teachers, florists and flight attendants, entrepreneurs
and restaurateurs, an aerospace engineer and a
supermarket cashier. Some 80 of the passengers were
children. Their loss is immeasurable.

The loss is felt by generations of students of
72-year-old Sister Philomene Tiernan, a member of the
Society of the Sacred Heart, a religious order devoted
primarily to advancing girls' education. Sister Phil, as
her students knew her, was returning home after visiting
the church in France where the remains of the religious
order's founder are buried. The loss is felt among people
who may never have met the victims but whose lives
were touched and at times permanently altered by their
work. I am speaking of victims like Joep Lange and his
partner, Jacqueline van Tongeren, who were among the
passengers headed to the twentieth International AIDS
Conference. J oep was a renowned researcher who helped

make antiretroviral treatments cheaper for people who
otherwise could not afford them. Jacqueline worked
for an non-governmental organization that promotes
health solutions for poor communities. I am speaking
of victims like Willem Witteveen who was not only a
deeply respected scholar of the law and political theory
but also a dedicated public servant, having served for
nearly a decade as a Dutch senator.

But the loss of the 298 individuals is of course felt
most profoundly by their families. Dora Shahila Kassim
was the lead flight attendant and a single mother. She
had worked hard to ensure that her 16-year-old daughter,
Diyana, had every opportunity. "She was not just my
mother but my father, my best friend," Diyana said. "I
do not know how I am going to live without her." Silene
and Rob Fredriksz's son, Bryce Fredriksz, age 23, was
on the flight with his girlfriend, Daisy Oehlers, age
20. The young couple lived with Bryce's parents. Since
17 July 2014, Bryce's parents have left the room just
as Bryce and Daisy left it, with the bed unmade and
clothes strewn around the floor. Silene cannot bring
herself to touch it. The space, she said, still breathes
Bryce and Daisy.

This could have happened to any of our families.
Our sons or daughters, our mothers or fathers, our
grandparents or aunts and uncles - any of the them
could have been on that flight. So could our teachers,
our colleagues, our neighbours, our best friends.
The passengers on that flight came from 18 nations,
including my own, but they could have come from
any of our countries. In that way, the families of the
298 passengers and the communities and nations they
belonged to are all of our families.

The United States believes firmly that those who
carried out this unspeakable crime cannot remain
unnamed and unpunished. When the Netherlands,
Malaysia, Australia, Belgium and Ukraine put forward
draft resolution S/2015/562, we supported their efforts.
Of course, justice by itselfwill not fill the profound void
left behind with the loss of those on Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17. But efforts to denyjustice only intensify
the pain of the victims' families who have already
endured more than any of us can fathom. That was
the effect when Russian-backed separatists prevented
investigators from gaining full and timely access
to the crash site. It was the effect of Russia's refusal
even to negotiate today's draft resolution and statute,
essentially preventing any meaningful negotiation of
those texts from taking place. It is the effect of Russia's
veto today.

By vetoing today's draft resolution, Russia has
tried to deny justice to the 298 victims on that plane
and deny their families a chance to hold accountable
those responsible. Russia has callously disregarded the
public outcry in the grieving nations and the appeals of
the families affected. It is tragic that Russia has used
the privilege entrusted to it to advance international
peace and security for the purposes of frustrating
international peace and security.

But let us be clear - today's veto cannot and will
not deny the victims and their families justice. There
cannot and will not be impunity for those who downed
a civil airliner with 298 people aboard. When justice is
denied for those 298 individuals and their families and
their communities, it is denied for all of our families,
communities and nations. While we are outraged and
gravely disappointed by the outcome of this vote,
today we say to those families that no veto will stand
in the way of this heinous crime being investigated
and prosecuted and that no veto will weaken our
unshakeable commitment to them to ensure that they
and their loved ones have the justice they deserve.

