Mr. Volmer (Estonia): We thank Belgium for organizing today's meeting and all briefers for their excellent presentations. We also express our appreciation for the role Belgium plays in strengthening the protection of children in armed conflict, including through its leadership of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The Security Council has repeatedly condemned the widespread violations and abuses committed against children in armed conflict. Over the past two decades, that has been accompanied by the Council's increasing and systematic engagement on the issue of the protection of children in armed conflict, including a clear recognition that child protection needs to be integrated into all peace processes. We are very grateful to Ms. Becker for the overview of the situation. We strongly support this objective, but we have to agree that gaps remain in its translation into action. In peace processes child protection issues continue to be addressed on an ad hoc basis, with children's rights, specific needs and concerns insufficiently addressed. We therefore thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and all other contributors for the preparation of the practical guidance to protect children in situations of armed conflict. We see the guidance as a valuable addition to the instruments at our disposal, providing a systematized compilation of practical and concrete guidelines, including examples of best practices. We welcome the fact that the guidance is firmly based on international humanitarian and human rights law. Wealso emphasize that the integration of child protection into peace processes needs to be gender-sensitive and take into account the needs of girls and boys. Given the wide array of parties involved in peace processes, we appreciate that the guidance can be adjusted and drawn upon by various actors, including the United Nations system, regional and local organizations, and civil society. It is now equally important to ensure that the guidance is widely disseminated and integrated into ongoing and future peace processes. Estonia will contribute to that effort. As noted in the guidance, we need to ensure accountability for all violations and abuses against children in armed conflict. We call on all States to exercise their criminal jurisdiction over the perpetrators of these crimes and to make further efforts to strengthen national and international accountability mechanisms. We recall that, under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the conscripting or enlisting of children into armed forces and sexual violence constitute war crimes. We affirm our continued support for the work of the Special Representative and her Office, including the close cooperation between her Office and UNICEF. We also reiterate the need for the allocation of sufficient resources for United Nations child protection activities and the importance of child protection advisers in political and peacekeeping missions. If left unaddressed, the violations and abuses committed against children in conflict have lasting negative consequences for children, their families and entire communities, leading to a continued cycle of violence and injustice. We see the guidance as one of the tools to help break this cycle.
