Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada will
support the draft resolution creating phase II of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC). This decision follows a thorough
debate involving the most senior levels of my Government.
It was a debate about the imperatives of common security,
about Canada's long-standing commitment to Africa and to
peacekeeping and about our determination to learn the
lessons of the past.

We will vote in favour of this draft resolution because
the Africans themselves want it and because it will do some
good in the context of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Our hesitation - and we did hesitate - came as
a result of our belief that it could have been done better.

Our main concern about this draft resolution,
expressed repeatedly during the negotiations leading to its
final form, is that the draft resolution does not match the
Mission's mandate with the resources needed to guarantee
its success. None of us wants to risk repeating the mistakes
made in Srebrenica, this time with an observer mission.
(spoke in English)

A proper match between mandate and resources is an
operational necessity. Canada has argued that we must learn
from our experiences and reflect these lessons in the
decisions we take today. I believe the Council did so in
Sierra Leone, where we achieved a mandate that today is
more closely matched by adequate resources. Though
imperfect, the situation in Sierra Leone has stabilized
somewhat. The killing has largely stopped.

Canada tried to apply these lessons in our efforts to
shape the resolution before us. We understand it is
important to get phase II of MONUC off the ground
quickly, and that phase II must be in place before phase III
can begin. We believe, however, that it is equally important
to get phase II right. We do not believe that the number
5,537 is magical, or that the mandate is sufficient. We
would have liked to see a more capable observation
mission. We would have also preferred to see greater
extraction capability even if it took more personnel. For
Canada's part, my Government will undertake its own
assessment of the conditions on the ground prior to
finalizing a contribution to the Mission.

There is a human security disaster unfolding in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo which requires
immediate attention. The Lusaka Agreement requires
substantive support from the United Nations. There are
few places in the world where civilians are more in need
of protection than in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In situations as grave as this, there is an
imperative to act and to do what is possible to relieve the
suffering of the beleaguered people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is never easy to balance the
requirements of immediate response with the sober
consideration of longer-term consequences. Unfortunately,
such considerations were not the only ones driving the
decision on MONUC's force level. Other factors, such as
cost aversion and outside political realities, also
influenced the Council's decision-making in this instance.

Canada will continue to do everything possible to
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping missions have a
fair chance to do their job by resisting efforts to force
configurations on them that may be politically convenient
but operationally unsound. Canada's support today is
given in the hope that this phase of MONUC will pave
the way to a third phase of substantial United Nations
peacekeeping in the service of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Canada will continue
to press for such a commitment during our time on the
Council and after we leave. Our deep commitment to
peace in Africa and to human security demands nothing
less.

