Mr. Abdounasir (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to stand before the Council to speak about
the fight against organized crime in the context of
peacekeeping missions on the occasion of the twelfth
United Nations Police Week.

First of all, I would like to emphasize that
organized crime has become an international scourge
that threatens the stability of many countries, thereby
undermining international peace and security. In most
countries affected by organized crime, weakened State
institutions responsible for enforcing the rule of law are
becoming increasingly powerless in the face of security
challenges, giving free rein to criminal networks to
engage in smuggling and all kinds of trafficking,
including drugs, the illicit trade in minerals, money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism. In order
to support countries that have fallen victim to this
phenomenon, from 2000 to 2017 the Security Council
adopted 1,100 resolutions urging Member States
and the relevant United Nations agencies to develop
and implement relevant strategies and action plans
to support fellow Member States in the fight against
organized crime.

Faced with this scourge, the international
community, through the Security Council, has
strengthened its actions in the various countries
affected, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where peacekeeping missions have been
deployed since 1999. The mandates of these missions
have included the protection of civilians, the restoration
of State authority and the fight against armed groups.

As the Council is aware, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, a vast territory of 2,345,409 square
kilometres, shares 10,292 kilometres of border with
nine other countries. The porous nature of its borders
favours the circulation of and trafficking in arms, to
the benefit of criminal groups. It is in this context that
the United Nations has, through the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO), focused its efforts
to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo to better
combat organized crime and the activities of armed
groups. The MONUSCO police component, which has
been mandated to accompany the Congolese National
Police, has developed strategies to prevent and combat
organized crime.

In terms of prevention, MONUSCO police have
developed a tripartite strategy, working alongside
Congolese National Police units by providing highly
qualified officers; strengthening operational capacities
by training specialized services; and establishing a
mechanism for monitoring procedures. In line with that
preventive approach, in 2017 and 2018 the MONUSCO
police component undertook capacity-building in
forensics and organized crime for 2,711 Congolese
National Police officers, which involved the use of
new technologies in the collection of fingerprints and
evidence for the preservation of crime scenes.

With regard to the fight against organized crime
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
support of military justice and the Department of
Police, MONUSCO has set up a criminal network task
force led by the police component and composed of
investigators and analysts who continuously assist the
local police in investigating the financing of armed
groups and the illicit trafficking of natural resources.
That ongoing support has resulted in the identification
and arrest of some perpetrators of criminal acts. In the
same vein, in 2016 the Mission, through the United
Nations Police (UNPOL), established a support unit
for structures combating organized crime composed
of specialist UNPOL experts and investigators, which
has provided technical and operational support to the
Congolese National Police in nine major organized
crime investigations.

In order to overcome instability, Governments
in most countries weakened by multifaceted crises,
including organized crime, systematically seek
to militarize their efforts, while it would be more
appropriate to strengthen the judicial system through
a criminal justice system with a more transparent and
accountable law enforcement approach. I welcome the
provision of support for State structures to combat
organized crime as one of the priority objectives in
the various mandates of the Security Council. In
addition, I would like to underline the commitment of
the MONUSCO police to continuing to work towards
the implementation of the mandate by setting up
performance indicators for units and individual officers.

