Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to address the Security Council on the issue of United
Nations sanctions - an indispensable Charter-based
instrument for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Today's discussion is set against
a backdrop of unprecedented challenges facing the
international community, including the Council. To
echo the Secretary-General's words before the General
Assembly prior to the opening of this year's general
debate, it may seem as if the world is falling apart
and turbulence is testing the multilateral system (see A/69/PV.6).

Overcoming our common peace and security
challenges requires a Council united in purpose and
action, Member States fulfilling their international
obligations, an effective United Nations system
delivering as one, and a full range of supportive
partnerships. That is certainly the requirement when
we speak about the effective implementation of United
Nations sanctions. The Security Council has a long
history of employing sanctions. The Council has
established 25 sanctions regimes in total, the first dating
back to 1966, when the Council imposed sanctions on
Southern Rhodesia, and the most recent in Yemen this
year.

United Nations sanctions have been used to support
conflict-resolution efforts, to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, and to
counter terrorism. Security Council sanctions, together
with United Nations peacekeeping and political efforts,
have made a critical difference in Afghanistan, Angola,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the former
Yugoslavia, Haiti, Liberia, Libya and Sierra Leone,
among other places. United Nations sanctions, in short,
work.

In fact, the regularity with which the Council has
turned to such instruments is testimony to their efficacy.
Today, we have 15 sanctions regimes - the highest
number in the history of the Organization. Moreover,
United Nations sanctions are also fairly economical.
The total cost of supporting the 15 sanctions regimes
is a comparatively modest sum of less than $30 million
per year.

The Council has also shown its ability to
continuously innovate and adjust its sanctions regimes.
The most significant transformation was the shift from
comprehensive to targeted sanctions. Since 1994, all
new sanctions regimes have been targeted, comprising
travel bans, asset freezes and arms embargoes; bans
on the trade in commodities, such as diamonds, coal,
wildlife products and charcoal; restrictions on items,
material, equipment, goods and technology related to
nuclear ballistic missiles and other weapons-of-mass-
destruction programmes; as well as bans on the export
ofcertain luxury goods. In 1999, the Council introduced
another important innovation, with the establishment
of its sanctions monitoring group on Angola. Today,
11 monitoring groups, teams and panels, with a total of
66 experts, work worldwide in support of the Security
Council and its Sanctions Committees.

At the direction of the Council and its sanctions
committees, expert panels regularly cooperate with
international organizations, such as INTERPOL, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Air Transport Association, on issues
related to travel bans, and with national authorities and
the private sector on asset freezes. I would like to thank
INTERPOL Secretary General Jiirgen Stock, who is
here with us today, and his predecessor, Ronald Noble,
for the excellent cooperation that we have received
from INTERPOL. We look forward to building on
that partnership so as to further enhance sanctions
implementation.
Over the past decade, the Security Council has
calibrated the designation criteria of its sanctions
regimes to clearly identify the kind of behaviour or
actions that it seeks to modify. Designation criteria have
evolved to include human rights violations, the targeting
of civilians, hate speech, sexual violence in conflict
and even wildlife poaching. In order to ensure that
sanctions designations meet human rights standards,
the Council established the Focal Point for Delisting
in the Secretariat and the Office of the Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. Both are important parts
of the Council's sanctions history. The Council has
also mandated some United Nations field missions to
monitor certain aspects of sanctions regimes, cooperate
with expert panels, and provide assistance to national
Governments.

The Council's achievements on United Nations
sanctions thus far allow us to see clearly what more
needs to be done. Work is required to raise the awareness
among all Member States that United Nations sanctions
are supportive, not punitive. They are not meant to
cripple States but to help them overcome instability,
address massive human rights violations, curb illegal
smuggling, and counter terrorism. Some Member
States already understand that and have requested the
Security Council to adopt, fine-tune or strengthen
targeted measures so as to support their fragile political
transitions and national reconciliation efforts. Many
others request the Council to strengthen targeted
measures so as to help protect them against terrorism
and other illicit activities. Those Governments offer
valuable information on listed individuals and entities,
and in a few cases, even put forward listing requests for
consideration.

More work is also needed to provide assistance
to Member States implementing United Nations
sanctions. That will clearly take effort and resources.
And some more work is needed to take more fully into
account the rights of individuals, entities and Member
States designated for targeted measures. Every day, the
Department of Political Affairs Security Council Affairs
Division provides substantive and administrative
support to the Sanctions Committees and expert panels,

and works to engage the broader United Nations system
in support of United Nations sanctions. That effort is
central to the work of my Department, and I would like
to take a few minutes to brief you on steps taken to
properly perform that important responsibility.

In the past year alone, Council members will have
noticed several changes. They include standardizing
the methods and formats of communication among
Sanctions Committees, the Secretariat and expert
panels; relaunching the Department's roster of
experts on sanctions; revamping the recruitment
process; and establishing induction programmes for
Chairs, delegates and experts. In December 2013,
The Department for Political Affairs conducted the
first inter-panel coordination workshop. The aim of
the workshop was to fulfil the call in many Council
resolutions for expert panels to work closely together
and exchange best practices. At last year's workshop,
we focused on enhancing cooperation among arms
and finance experts working on sanction regimes in
Africa. This year, we intend to focus on enhancing the
engagement between experts and the United Nations
system.

This year, the Department of Political Affairs
(DPA) also led two assessment missions on sanctions
issues, one on the partial lifting of the arms embargo on
Somalia and the other on the termination of sanctions
in Liberia. Those assessment missions strengthened
the understanding of the two Member States on what
the Council expects of them on sanctions issues and
enhanced coordination within the United Nations
system to support sanctions implementation in those
countries.

On 31 October, DPA completed the harmonization
of the format of all committee sanctions lists and
officially launched the consolidated Security Council
sanctions list. The list is being translated into all six
official United Nations languages and, along with a
redesigned subsidiary organs website, will be launched
by April 2015. All those initiatives are intended to
support the Council's efforts to effectively design,
implement and evaluate United Nations sanctions. DPA
is the committed partner in that effort, as is the United
Nations system as a whole.

This year, the United Nations system conducted
its own internal review of United Nations sanctions,
alongside the State-led high-level review of United
Nations sanctions. An internal inter-agency working
group, chaired by me, brought together 20 United
Nations departments and offices, agencies, funds
and programmes working on peace and security,
humanitarian, human rights, legal, protection and
development issues. It is clear from our internal review
process that the United Nations Secretariat needs
to develop clear and coherent system-wide policy
and guidance to support United Nations sanctions
implementation. That should be done within existing
mandates and resources and with due regard for
principles applicable to humanitarian actors.

Regular briefings, trainings and the sharing of
expertise on sanctions issues within United Nations
entities at Headquarters and in the field are also
needed. That is especially important at the outset of a
new sanctions regime, particularly when it coincides
with the establishment of a new United Nations field
mission. We also concluded that the United Nations
system possesses the technical capacity in several key
areas to assist Member States in implementing United
Nations sanctions.Those capacities, however, need to
be better coordinated in-house, better leveraged by the
sanctions committee and better utilized by the Member
States. In some cases, additional financial resources
may be required. Our internal review process also
generated several proposals for the consideration of the
Security Council.

First, the Security Council may wish to consider
increasing the use of assessment missions to take
stock of the impact and effectiveness of United
Nations sanctions. Periodic assessments should also
be undertaken to evaluate the continued relevance of
sanctions measures.

Secondly, where appropriate, the Security Council
should consider expanding the relevant designation
criteria to address specific human rights violations,
such as the use of children for extremist agendas, the
role of mid-level commanders in facilitating human
rights violations, gross violations of women's rights
committed by extremist groups, sexual violence, other
forms of gender-based crimes, targeted attacks against
women and failure to comply with the responsibility to
protect.

Thirdly, in our view all United Nations sanctions
resolutions should have a clear and standardized listing
and delisting framework. Such a framework should
include clear designation criteria and the requirement
for detailed statements of case. In addition, narrative
summaries should be publicly available, biometric
information should be sought so as to reduce false
positives, and a clear reference should be made to the
relevant delisting mechanism.

Fourthly, the Council should continue its efforts to
further strengthen due process when considering the
designation of individuals and entities.

In 2006, the Secretary-General outlined four
elements: the right to be informed, the right to be
heard, the right to be reviewed by an effective review
mechanism, and the need forperiodic reviews, especially
regarding the freezing of assets. Those elements are
consistent with the Security Council's continuing
efforts to improve the fairness and transparency of the
sanctions procedures.

Finally, given that expert panels have been in use
for a considerable amount of time, the concept and
practice of expert panels, including the Office of the
Ombudsperson, should be subject to a comprehensive
review with the aim of enhancing this important tool
of the Council. Likewise, the focal point for delisting,
established in the Security Council Affairs Division,
should also be carefully reviewed and optimized.

United Nations sanctions have proved to be an
effective complement to other Security Council
instruments and actions. We know it is not perfect,
but there is also no doubt that it works. It has to be
continuously improved, and the United Nations system
stands ready to support the Security Council in its
effort to do so.

