Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): My delegation is pleased to
see you, Sir, such a distinguished representative of your
country, presiding over this meeting. We could not have a
better start for our work this month under Gambian
leadership.

One week ago in Baghdad, the Secretary-General and
the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq signed a Memorandum
of Understanding which offered new perspectives for
ending the crisis between Iraq and the United Nations. As
the Secretary-General underlined, this is not just any type
of agreement: the Iraqi leadership is committed to this
agreement at its highest level, since it was negotiated by
Mr. Kofi Annan directly with President Saddam Hussein.

This remarkable diplomatic achievement averted war
and immediately garnered the unanimous support of the
members of the Council. The Council had encouraged the
Secretary-General to go to Baghdad and try to achieve a
diplomatic solution to the crisis in accordance with all
relevant resolutions.

It is now incumbent upon the Council to do its part,
by endorsing the agreement reached by the
Secretary-General in Baghdad. The expression of the
Council's unanimous support for the Secretary-General's
demarche is clearly reflected in the draft resolution that we
have before us, which my delegation supports. In this draft
resolution, the Council commends the initiative of the
Secretary-General and endorses the Memorandum of
Understanding.

In welcoming this outcome, my delegation naturally
expects that this Memorandum will be implemented as soon
as possible. All sites in Iraq are now accessible to United
Nations inspection. We now have a new opportunity to see
that all relevant resolutions of the Security Council are
finally fulfilled. We look forward to the rapid completion
of the necessary procedures in order to allow United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to discharge
their mandate.

The unity of the Council in adopting this draft
resolution will send a strong and unambiguous signal to
Baghdad. The implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding obviously requires Iraq's full cooperation.
We trust that Iraq will not fail to live up to its
commitments.

UNSCOM. and IAEA have a task to complete on
behalf of the Council, and we want them to be able to do
it rapidly and efficiently. The objectives of this task -
ensuring the inability of Iraq to use prohibited weapons of
mass destruction - are clearly outlined in resolution 687
(1991). We should not forget that to achieve those
objectives is to open the way to the lifting of the
sanctions, which so dramatically affect the Iraqi people.
Both these aspects are reaffirmed in the present draft
resolution. In this context, the importance of the action
taken by the Council the week before last in adopting
resolution 1153 (1998), on the reinforcement of the
humanitarian programme in Iraq, as recommended by the
Secretary-General, should not be ignored.

We hope this message of unity from the Council will
open a new era of cooperation between the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations, since we genuinely
want the Iraqi nation to regain as soon as possible its full
stature within the international community and the Iraqi
people to see an end to their suffering.

