Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Special Envoy Geir Pedersen to
the Council for his first briefing and thank him for his
report. We share many of the views that he expressed.
Needless to say, one ofthe key points he made was about
the importance of restoring lost confidence not just
inside Syria but around it, among all the stakeholders
who are engaged in Syria.

We welcome the Special Envoy's willingness to
maintain intensive contacts with the parties to the
Syrian conflict and key participants in the efforts to
resolve the situation in Syria. That is clearly the key to
success of any intermediary. We believe it is important
to maintain a normal working dialogue with Damascus,
which must be involved in all measures designed
to advance the political process and stabilize the
situation in the country. That also applies to the March
Conference in Brussels, incidentally. On 22 January
Mr. Pedersen visited Moscow, where he had extensive
talks with Russia's Foreign and Defence Ministers,
Sergey Lavrov and Sergey Shoygu. It appears from the
results of this and subsequent meetings of the Special
Envoy with Russian representatives, including Deputy
Foreign Minister Vershinin and Alexander Lavrentiev,
Russia's special envoy for Syria, that we have been
able to surmount the unpleasant and largely artificially
created incident that occurred in December with regard
to the formation of the constitutional committee.
Together with the Special Envoy and our Astana format
partners Turkey and Iran we are continuing the work of
finalizing the parameters for launching the committee,
created based on the decisions of the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress and resolution 2254 (2015). We
hope to see it launched soon.

We should not fail to note our Turkish and
Iranian partners' constructive contribution within the
framework of the Astana process, which has enabled us
to achieve qualitative change in the situation in Syria,
ensuring a genuine ceasefire in the greater part of the
country and the start of direct dialogue between the
Government and the armed opposition. We hope that
in the near future we, the Astana troika, will be able
to arrive at mutually acceptable conclusions on the
Idlib de-escalation zone and north-eastern Syria in line
with the mutual understandings reached at the trilateral
summit of the Presidents of Russia, Turkey and Iran in
Sochi on 14 February, and needless to say taking full
account of the position of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

We are willing to work, including in stages and
step by step, to implement the tasks ahead, which
include eliminating the hotbed of terrorism in Idlib
and ensuring the protection of the civilian population.
The permanently frozen situation in north-western
Syria, which is controlled by militants of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham militants, cannot continue, and those who
want to sit on their hands should understand that. We
should point out that no one wanted to take pity on the
Islamic State in Syria and the Levant by freezing the
situation in Hajin or Raqqa. Incidentally, there were a
great many civilian casualties in those places. In that
regard we can only welcome the words - basically the
admission - of the United States representative that
the fight against terrorism cannot be an excuse for
destroying the civilian population.
We would like to emphasize that, in addition
to the de-escalation and political issues, Astana
has been the platform for discussions of important
confidence-building measures between the opposing
parties such as the exchange of prisoners of war that
the Special Envoy mentioned. The exchanges took
place in November 2018 and in February of this year,
and while they may have been small in number, they
give us hope for further progress in this area. All these
measures are contributing to stabilization in Syria. An
important area of work for the international community
is restoring damaged infrastructure and doing mine
clearance. On 21 February the Government of the
Russian Federation decided to contribute to the United
Nations Mine Action Service budget in order to support
the mine clearance efforts in the Syrian Arab Republic,
and we urge our colleagues to join in these efforts. I
think I can say on behalf of the whole Astana troika that
we are open to cooperating with all interested parties
who sincerely - I emphasize "sincerely" - intend
to help to stabilize and advance a political settlement
in Syria. The quadrilateral summit in Istanbul in
October 2018 was an important contribution to the
bridge-building process.

We want to emphasize that the situation in Syria
has changed for the better, and many people have
acknowledged the changes that have happened. We
have seen positive steps on the part of States of the
region seeking to normalize relations with Damascus.
We believe that economic cooperation and participation
in the restoration of Syria's national economy will help
to accelerate that process. We hope that an openness
to achieving the full restoration of relations between
the Arab countries and Syria, and Damascus's speedy
return to the Arab family, will lend significant support
to the Syrian settlement process, in accordance with
the fundamental principles of international law and
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
In its national capacity, as a member of the Security
Council and a participant in the Astana troika, Russia
is ready to continue working with the Special Envoy to
bring peace back to Syria. Mr. Pedersen can count on
our help.
