Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, as well as
to the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their contributions to today's discussion.

In its meetings the Security Council regularly
considers issues of post-conflict peacebuilding, both
within the framework of a generalized review and in
the context of individual countries. The peacebuilding
activities of the Organization have taken on a global
scale and demand our careful attention. It is symbolic
that the initiator of today's discussion is a Council
member with first-hand experience of crisis, having
gone through a brutal armed conflict and being a
recipient of peacebuilding assistance. In our view, such
an insider perspective will help further optimize United
Nations mechanisms and increase our common
understanding of existing problems.

We believe there is a need to highlight a number
of specific principles. First, and most important, is that
the logic of any peacebuilding operation is a function
of the principle of national responsibility for defining
its priorities and the approaches to their
implementation. Only national leaders can ensure
sustainable peaceful development. Mentorship and
templates must be avoided.

Secondly, the key component in successful
post-conflict peacebuilding is the creation and
strengthening of national institutional capacities. This
should become - in facts, not just words - the
system-wide priority for the entire Organization.
Achieving lasting peace and stability is only possible
when every aspect of responsibility and ownership lies
with national players.

Thirdly, any assistance from the international
community should be provided with the consent of
national Governments and with respect for the
principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
success of peacebuilding efforts in Africa, the Balkans,
Timor-Leste, Afghanistan, the Middle East and other
regions is rooted in the ability to take into account the
interests and priorities of host States. Assistance from
the international community should not be imposed
from outside. There can be no predetermined recipes
for assistance. The specifics of every State and the
nature of every conflict must be taken into account. In
some cases, robust international patronage is essential
in order to help form Viable State institutions capable
of effectively resolving the people's most pressing
problems: establishing security and stability,
stimulating the economy and rebuilding social

1l-21268
infrastructure. Such international trusteeship does not
cancel out the principle of providing for the gradual
transfer of responsibility for a country's situation to its
national authorities and for an early definition and
formation of a clear exit strategy. Artificially
maintaining such patronage can squander its purpose
and become counterproductive. It should not become a
brake on the path to strengthening national Statehood.

The United Nations unquestionably plays a
special role in coordinating international post-conflict
and socio-economic reconstruction efforts. The
Organization possesses unique legitimacy and has
accumulated invaluable experience. Even today,
however, this role presents many complexities and
demands the coordinated efforts of the Secretariat, the
Organization's programmes and funds, Member States,
regional organizations and international financial
institutions. In this regard, we support the Secretary-
General's drive towards increasing the effectiveness of
United Nations efforts in the area of post-conflict
response, strengthening the Secretariat's organizational
toolbox and ensuring the cohesiveness of its work. In
the peacebuilding field, the United Nations and its
missions rarely operate in isolation. Other international
presences are often working alongside them, as in, for
example, Afghanistan and Iraq. Relationships in such
cases should be defined in strict compliance with
Security Council decisions.

Many of the initial tasks of peacebuilding - such
as in the area of security-sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration - now
fall to United Nations peacekeeping operations. In
accomplishing its chief task, namely, enabling the
peace process to move forward, United Nations
peacekeepers play a critically important role in
creating the conditions conducive to peacebuilding
assistance on a larger scale. Considering the growing
complexity and multifaceted nature of peacebuilding
mandates, it would be rational to entrust peacekeepers
only with the initial reconstruction tasks. It is
imperative that we exploit the potential of the
Peacebuilding Commission and of regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
donors in subsequent stages of post-conflict
peacebuilding.

We would like to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina for preparing
the draft presidential statement on the topic of today's
meeting, which we are ready to support.

11-2l268

