Mr. Badji (spoke in French): I would like, first of
all, Sir, to warmly congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month of April
2004. I am convinced that under your effective
leadership, the Council will be successful in its
deliberations. I take this opportunity to congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Jean-Marc de La
Sabliere, the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, for the exemplary way in which he
presided over the Council's work in March. I am
grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the members of
the Council for the opportunity you have given me to
address the Council, in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the lnalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, on the occasion of this crucial
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, and, in particular, on the
targeted assassination of the leader of Hamas,
Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi.

We are here before the Council once again, today,
to discuss What has become a systematic policy of
extrajudicial executions practised by the Israeli
Government. Less than a month ago, we came before
this Council to condemn the assassination of the
spiritual leader of Hamas, Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, by
the Israeli authorities. Targeted assassinations of
Palestinians, be they leaders or members of Palestinian
organizations, have been condemned on many
occasions, each time by the international community.
The Committee on the Exercise of the lnalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People has firmly condemned
all extrajudicial executions and it is with the same
energy that we condemn this most recent assassination,
of which Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi was the victim,
along with two of his bodyguards.

The Israeli Government, in complete disregard of
international opinion, is continuing its vicious policy.
As all acts of this type in the past, this assassination is
a grotesque violation of international law and
obviously does not correspond to the aspirations of the
Palestinians or of the Israelis.

Faced with the deterioration of the climate of
trust between the two parties, Israel has once again
poisoned an already volatile situation by assassinating
the leader of Hamas. Following the example of the
indignant international community, many voices have
already spoken up to forcefully condemn this
irresponsible action, which is contrary to international
law and which will further revive feelings of frustration
and anger among the Palestinians.

In a manner consistent with its guidelines, and
faced with the exacerbation of the situation, the
Committee on the Exercise of the lnalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People condemns the extrajudicial
executions and the fierce assaults on innocent
Palestinian populations. These acts not only poison the
political climate in the region, but also make the
prospect of a just and sustainable solution to the
Palestinian problem even more distant. The Committee
supports the appeal by many world leaders to the
consciences of all men and women to refuse to assist
with indifference in the destruction of the Palestinian
people. The Committee once again demands of the
Israeli Government an immediate end to the untold
daily suffering of the Palestinian people and that the
Palestinians be able to recover their land through a
lifting of the curfews and the dismantling of the wall of
separation. The Committee also demands an immediate
end to the siege imposed on the Palestinian Authority
and its Chairman, Yasser Arafat.

The Committee, lastly, appeals to the Security
Council in its wisdom, to express, as has the
international community, an unequivocal condemnation
of the assassinations that have once again plunged
Palestine and the Middle East into mourning and that it
prompt Israel to renounce its policy of denying the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. While
urging the two parties to refrain from any action that
could aggravate an already deleterious situation, the
Committee on the Exercise of the lnalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People invites the Quartet to apply all
of its influence in order to hasten the long-awaited
implementation of the road map, the only viable option
for ensuring the security of both parties and a
sustainable peace in a Middle East that is stable and
reconciled with itself.

