Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting.

Let me express our condolences to the Government
of Sweden and our Swedish colleagues. We condemn
the terrorist attack.

I would like to raise several points. First, if the
situation in Syria continues, it will result in the
collapse of the Syrian State. We have no doubt that
the winners will be the terrorists. We have seen it too
many times before. That perhaps is another indication
that the international community enjoys no united
stand on giving priority to resolving the Syrian crisis
through political dialogue and countering the scourge
of terrorism in a unified and concerted manner.
Nevertheless, there is no justification for the crime
committed on 4 April.

Secondly, a very urgent issue that requires
clarification and a wise approach involves the fact that
too many States and non-State actors are very active
in Syria. Who is unaware that Syria has been an open
field for quite some time? The point is that the situation
has worsened and nobody knows what tomorrow will
bring. We are therefore facing a much broader and more
complicated matter that is likely to get out of hand.
In our mind, the priority should be to find a way out
before we get to that slippery slope. Now is the time for
wisdom to prevail and statesmanship to take the upper
hand. One doubts that that has been the case for some
time. In that regard, the Secretary-General said today,
among other things,

"The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for international peace and security.
I call on the Council to unite and exercise that
responsibility.

"For too long, international law has been
ignored in the Syrian conflict, and it is our shared
duty to uphold international standards of humanity."
(SG/SM/18487)

Thirdly, there is a danger that the Security
Council, which is already being marginalized, could
lose whatever remaining credibility it might have.
That is why, in hind sight, the action taken by the
non-permanent members yesterday appears to be not
only very timely, but also wise. Will the proposal they
made yesterday help find a way out for what otherwise
will result in a dangerous development? We believe that
it might.

In the light of the fact that the rational for the
latest military action is based on the use of chemical
weapons - while those responsible remain to be
determined and the investigation needs to be speedily
concluded - it seems to us that the priority for now
should be the adoption by consensus of the draft
resolution proposed by the elected members, and,
furthermore, as the representative of Egypt said, for the
United States and the Russian Federation to exercise
greater responsibility and find a way out within
their means.

Finally, as we said two days ago (see S/PV.7915),
only an inclusive political process will ultimately be
able to address the Syrian crisis and prevent the situation
from spiralling out of control. There is therefore a need
for calm and restraint to de-escalate the situation. We
hope that the latest developments will not dampen the
prospect for a comprehensive political solution in Syria
through the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva.
