Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): Let me join others in
extending a warm welcome to His Excellency
President Obasanjo.

The United Nations is an indispensable actor in
Africa. Its commitment to Africa is strong and abiding.
The Security Council is deeply engaged both with
individual conflict situations and cross-cutting issues
that affect the continent.

It is encouraging that reliable partners in the
efforts to promote peace and security are emerging.
African institutions are increasingly involved in
finding African solutions to African problems.
Regional and subregional organizations are making
growing contribution to conflict management,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building. In
particular, we appreciate the role of the African Union
under the leadership of President Obasanjo. We are
grateful for his highly insightful briefing, which has
made us wiser concerning the continuing challenges
and opportunities.

Conflict has sapped Africa's potential for too
long, but the continent now seems to be turning a
corner. Progress in the peace processes in Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau is
heartening. Challenges in Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sudan must be addressed
through continued constructive engagement. Conflict
management alone, however, cannot lead to
comprehensive and durable peace. Pakistan believes
there should be four priorities: conflict prevention
pacific settlement of disputes, addressing the root
causes of conflict, and focusing on the inextricable link
between peace and development.

I would like to raise two questions, the first of
which relates to Liberia. I recall that Mr. Bryant,
Chairman of the National Transitional Government of
the Republic of Liberia, in his address to the General
Assembly on 22 September reiterated his call for the
lifting of sanctions on the timber and diamond sectors
to enable the Transitional Government to create jobs
and attend to the enormous social needs of the people.
We would appreciate if President Obasanjo could share
the views of the African Union with the Council on
that issue.

We have watched with deep anguish the events
unfolding in Darfur ever since the rebellion broke out
over 18 months ago. Pakistan has consistently
underscored the importance of immediate humanitarian
assistance, an end to all violence, a start of negotiations
between the parties and a solution within the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Sudan. We
are glad that significant improvement has taken place
in Darfur. The Government of Sudan is making its best
efforts to meet its commitments.

It is important to maintain constructive
engagement of the international community in an
objective and balanced manner. In that context, we
must ensure that our actions do not encourage the
rebels into intransigence.

We appreciate the leading role of the African
Union and the leadership and personal engagement of
President Obasanjo with the peace talks in Abuja. We
have been following closely the African Union's
decisions on Darfur, which we find balanced and
objective.

The enhanced presence of the African Union
monitoring and protection mission in Darfur was the
main recommendation of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative. Pakistan fully supports that.
We hope that the African Union and the Government of
the Sudan will soon be able to discuss and agree on the
appropriate size and mandate of that mission.

The Security Council has already expressed its
support for an enhanced African Union mission. We
would like to ask President Obasanjo how the African
Union expects that expression of the Council's support
to be transformed into concrete assistance.

