Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the President of
Portugal, His Excellency Anibal Cavaco Silva, for
convening this debate. We welcome the reports
presented by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, the Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Catherine
Bragg, and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri.

Over the last four years, in over 60 countries,
there have been armed conflicts in which the civilian
population has been most affected by the havoc and
suffering caused. Mexico expresses its concern at the
increasingly frequent and deliberate attacks on
civilians, the destruction of infrastructure and assets
that are essential for their survival, forced
displacement, and the methods and means of
indiscriminate war that are employed, particularly in
populated areas.

It is essential to guarantee respect for the
principles of distinction, proportionality, military

11-5866]
necessity and limitation. Violations do not arise only
from the conduct of hostilities, but are also closely
linked with the use of increasingly sophisticated
weapons that have indiscriminate effects. Explosives in
densely populated areas and cluster munitions are but
two examples of weaponry the use of which totally
ignores these basic principles.

The existing international instruments regarding
international humanitarian law provide a solid basis of
principals and standards that should be respected by all
parties to a conflict. The lack of application of
international humanitarian law and the restrictive and
inexact interpretation by the parties in armed conflicts
are the main generators of serious violations of this set
of standards, to the detriment of the civilian
population.

Mexico agrees with the Secretary-General that it
is appropriate to focus this debate on measures to
promote accountability in the light of violations of
international humanitarian law and of the human rights
of civilian populations. Ending impunity is essential
for a society in conflict or in a post-conflict situation
that seeks to repair the damage caused by abuses of the
past, to prevent repetition of such abuses and to create
a solid culture of respect for human rights.

States have a primary responsibility to prosecute
those responsible for the commission of violations of
international humanitarian law, including war crimes.
Therefore all States should have a national legal
framework that appropriately reflects such provisions
and facilitates their implementation. In this regard I am
pleased to report that my country is working on a draft
reform of federal criminal legislation for the
classification of international crimes. The intent is to
ensure that national legislation takes into account not
only the applicable provisions of the Rome Statute but
also the complementary substantive standards
contained in other international instruments to which
Mexico is a party.

The primary obligation of States goes hand in
hand with the responsibility of the international
community, in particular of the Security Council on
this subject.
The Security Council must promote concrete
measures to ensure accountability, such as measures to
further the rule of law and transition justice in
post-conflict situations. Likewise, it should strengthen
the mandates of the peacekeeping missions so as to
provide them with strategies for monitoring and
oversight on the ground in terms of civilian protection.

The Security Council can also establish
investigation commissions and turn to the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission. Likewise, the
Council, under the Rome Statute, can refer situations to
the International Criminal Court. That is a useful tool
in efforts to prevent future violations of international
humanitarian law.

I conclude by affirming that our obligation to
respect, and ensure respect for, international
humanitarian law means that we must use the tools that
we have at our disposal to ensure international peace,
security and justice, but also we must formulate a solid
culture of respect that eradicates impunity and repairs
the harm done to civilians affected by armed conflict.

