Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Kenya joins the consensus on
the draft resolution to establish the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone (UN OMSIL). The draft resolution
reaffirms the commitment of the United Nations and of the
international community to the long-term maintenance of
peace and security in Sierra Leone. We would also like to
commend the delegation of the United Kingdom for
coordinating negotiations on the text before us.

We also welcome the presence here today, in this
Chamber, of our brothers from the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), under whose umbrella
the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has done a
commendable job in restoring the democratically elected
Government of President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and in
trying to finally bring about real peace in Sierra Leone.

In May 1997, Kenya and other members of the
international community called on the members of the junta
to step down in order to enable Sierra Leone to resume its
rightful place among the community of nations. Even after
being deposed, these former junta members have refused to
lay down their arms and are committing unspeakable
atrocities in the north and east of the country. These
revenge killings, with no military or strategic value, have
got to stop. We demand that they lay down their arms and
let Sierra Leoneans return to their lives in peace and
harmony.

Sierra Leone would not be where it is today without
the heroic and superb efforts of ECOMOG. We are
therefore happy to note that this draft resolution recognizes,
and indeed commends, its positive role and calls on the
international community to provide more logistical and
financial assistance to assist its efforts. It is encouraging to
note that it has been receiving such help from some
members of the international community. We know that
more can be done. In a period of diminishing resources and
fatigue from helping others, this is a truly honourable cause
and worth every single penny.

Kenya welcomes the establishment of UNOMSIL as
a step in the right direction and will continue to support the
efforts of Mr. Francis Okelo, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Sierra Leone. We stand ready, as
always, to contribute military officers and civilian police
to enable the United Nations to achieve its objective of
maintaining international peace and security. We also
commend the Secretary-General for convening a high-
level conference on Sierra Leone at the end of this month,
which we believe will mobilize international support for
Sierra Leone as it searches for concrete solutions to its
problems in this peace-building process.

The military problems posed by the rebels are
compounded even further by cross-border arms flows and
support to those rebels. In this regard, the expression of
serious concern contained in the draft resolution meets
Kenya's demand that the parties concerned immediately
stop these activities, while the draft also reaffirms the
obligations of all States to comply strictly with the terms
of the arms embargo in place.

While it is inappropriate to point fingers at any
State, we must urgently appeal to all profiteers to stop
this evil trade that is increasing the senseless loss of lives
in Sierra Leone. In fact, these arms in the hands of rebels
have made the humanitarian problems in Sierra Leone
even more complex. Whereas in earlier days humanitarian
agencies would have been focused on issues such as the
supply of food and medicine, they are now engaged in
complex medical procedures, including the replacement of
limbs, as well as providing psychological assistance to
address the traumatic effects of atrocities committed
against innocent victims.

It is for these reasons that we welcome the efforts of
the Government of Sierra Leone to coordinate an effective
national response to the needs of children affected by
armed conflict. We are happy to note that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, intends to
make Sierra Leone one of the pilot projects for a more
concerted response to the needs of children in a post-
conflict setting. Against this background, we hope that we
can enhance our support of his missions, including
through the provision of adequate financial resources, to
achieve these objectives.

In conclusion, as Sierra Leone begins a new journey
in reviving its nation, as it did on 27 April 1961, when it
attained its independence, the objective of national
reconciliation must always be at the heart of all activities.
We are encouraged to note that the Government of Sierra
Leone continues to reach out in this regard, and we
encourage it to do more, because therein lies the

 

foundation of long-lasting peace and stability for that great
nation.

