Mr. Lajcak: It is a great honour for me to address
the Security Council today as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). This meeting attests to the excellent
relations that the United Nations and the OSCE have
built on both the political and operational levels. As
the world's largest security organization under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE
is committed to supporting the United Nations global
mandate at the regional level.

I have a very simple message to deliver today. I
believe that we need to continue working together,
perhaps even more than we are doing now, because the
stakes are quite high and they concern the issues that
are at the core of the Council - peace and security,
or, in the words of the mandate governing this very
Organization, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war.

As Chair of the OSCE, I will give the Council a
rundown of our priorities and activities through three
main points and will then listen carefully to any ideas
Council members may have on the way forward. First,
I want to talk about preventing and resolving conflicts
and mitigating their impact on people, because that is
our top priority.

I will start with what is happening in and around
Ukraine, which is, frankly, unacceptable. The crisis goes
against everything the OSCE and the United Nations
stand for. We must be very clear from the start - there
is no alternative to the Minsk agreements. That is why
we strongly support existing formats, in particular the
Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group.
But we cannot simply wait patiently for progress. There
are too many people suffering as we speak. I saw that
suffering at first hand when I travelled to the country in
January. It was my first trip as Chairperson-in-Office
and it is not one I will forget.

In the Luhansk region, elderly women and men on
sticks or in wheelchairs are forced every day to make the
risky journey across the only open entry-exit point - a
bridge on the line of contact in Stanytsia Luhanska that
has been severely damaged by the conflict. More than
10,000 people cross daily. They suffer and feel hopeless,
neglected and abandoned because the commitments are
not upheld, the trust keeps eroding and space for real
dialogue is disappearing.

We have been brainstorming since my trip on
concrete proposals that could bring about tangible
improvements for people on the ground. Some of the
measures we have identified include humanitarian
demining and repairing the Stanytsia Luhanska
bridge. Those measures, and more, have come about
through the close engagement with the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, the Project Coordinator in
Ukraine, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the European External Action Service and the United
Nations Development Programme. I had a chance to
discuss them separately last month with Ministers
Klimkin and Lavrov. I did not hear "no" a single time.
I therefore hope we can work to bring those proposed
steps forward in the coming months.

I also want to use the opportunity today to express
my sincere gratitude to the brave men and women of
the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. They are
the eyes and ears of the international community on the
ground. They are operating with great risk and deserve
our support.

I know that some people have been talking about a
United Nations mission in Ukraine. I want to point out
that that is not a new discussion. There is nothing I can
add to it today except to reaffirm that we stand ready to
engage on any concrete proposals or decisions coming
from this body.

While the crisis in and around Ukraine occupies
much of our attention, there are still other dark
spots of conflict in the OSCE area. The organization
works towards conflict resolution and mediation in
Transnistria, Georgia and Nagorno Karabakh. I am
glad we can turn the spotlight of the Council on those
contexts today as well.

Let me start with the Transnistrian settlement
process, where we have seen some real momentum.
That momentum needs to keep building. During my
trip to the Republic of Moldova in January I stressed
the need for progress on the package of eight measures
to continue. Next steps could focus on public transport
and telecommunications. With political will and real
dialogue, tangible results for the benefit of the people
on both banks of the Dniester can be achieved. We
are also prepared to host a 5+2 meeting in Bratislava,
depending upon further developments following the
recent parliamentary elections. The OSCE International
Observation Mission has issued a statement of
preliminary findings about the conduct of the elections.
I fully support it and want to underline more broadly
the crucial role of OSCE election observation, which
consolidates democracy in the OSCE region. That is
why OSCE participating States must do everything
possible to allow those missions to work unimpeded.

Let me now turn to Georgia, where our
chairmanship fully backs existing formats and remains
committed to the Geneva international discussions
and the incident prevention and response mechanisms.
I visited the administrative boundary line with South
Ossetia, where I saw for myself the urgent need to
reopen the crossing points that had been closed for a
few weeks. Their closure creates daily obstacles for the
local population, such as limited access to health care.
In that connection as well, we aim to focus on projects
that could bring about small but concrete results and an
improvement of the situation for people on the ground.

There have been some steps forward in Nagorno
Karabakh, but we need to see more positive
developments. I returned from Azerbaijan two days
ago, where I welcomed the intensification of talks and
a reduction in ceasefire violations. I will also travel
to Armenia next week. Further trips to the Western
Balkans and Central Asia are planned. On those and all
of my other trips we are following the same strategy,
that is, to open up new space for dialogue and practically
address the challenges we face right on the spot.

There is a lot of debate about what to call those
conflicts. No matter what terms we use - frozen,
protracted, dark spots - we cannot escape an
undeniable fact, namely, that they have gone on for
far too long. Until they are resolved, there is always
a risk of escalation. Until they are resolved, people
will continue to suffer. And, until they are resolved,
they need our attention and our cooperation. United
Nations-OSCE engagement must be part of that.
There is already constructive dialogue between my
special representatives and United Nations envoys and
representatives. There are some very positive, concrete
projects being implemented on the ground. I think there
is still room for more, and that is what I am here to
explore today. Therefore, for my second point, I want to
talk about what lies ahead.

The United Nations was born from the ashes of
the Second World War. Later on the OSCE grew out
of Cold War divisions. They both channelled power
through systems of agreed rules, principles and
norms, which gave everyone a stake in the running of
international affairs. They both envisaged new forms
of cooperation between decision-makers, so that life
could be better for people on the ground. They both
aimed to create dialogue in places where there had
been none. Now our two organizations face a similar
challenge. We are learning how to deal with issues the
founders could scarcely have imagined, from climate
change to cyberterrorism and violent extremism That is
why we have chosen the theme "A Safer Future" as our
second priority. The security landscape is changing.
Unpredictability is increasing. Our institutions need to
adapt to suit a young century. Again, it is something we
can, and must, work on together.
The United Nations took steps to tailor its agenda
in 2016, when the Security Council adopted the
sustaining peace resolution to try to better address the
cycle of peace (resolution 2282 (2016)) - not waiting
until conflict has hit to react but, instead, removing
the conditions in which it can flourish. That means
pooling our capacities in the areas of sustainable
development, institution-building, the rule of law
and good governance. That is fully aligned with the
comprehensive approach of the OSCE to security. As we
all work to make sustaining peace a reality, the OSCE's
conflict cycle toolbox and related work can offer some
lessons from the ground. Let me mention just a few
examples, starting with the counter-terrorism portfolio.

Terrorism and violent extremism are not exactly
new phenomena, but they pose bigger threats than
the founders of our organizations could ever have
anticipated. I was extremely glad to hear that a
memorandum of understanding had been signed
between the OSCE and the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism. Prevention mechanisms are
key. The more we work together, the more people we
can reach.

Another opportunity for enhanced cooperation lies
within the women and peace and security agenda. Both
the United Nations and the OSCE are doing valuable
work on the ground. We are both supporting women
peacebuilders. We are both advocating for inclusive
peace processes. We are both mainstreaming gender
throughout our field missions. And we are both working
to turn the tide on conflict-related sexual violence. The
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) is approaching. As it does, I urge us to look
at more ways by which we can reinforce and support
each other's activities.

The same goes for youth and peace and security. The
narrative has been completely imbalanced for too long.
Young people were seen as risks, rather than assets, in
the context of peace and security. We are changing that.
I see many opportunities for cooperation as resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) are implemented. But ifwe
are to make any visible progress in any of those areas,
we must band together. I suppose members know where
I am going with this.

I want to conclude my briefing today by outlining
our third priority, one that is particularly close to my
heart: effective multilateralism. It appears the world
has started to forget the very urgent role played by
multilateralism - this fundamental problem-solving
and war-preventing tool in international relations. Some
in the Chamber are from countries that are thousands
of miles outside the OSCE area, but we are not as far
apart as it may seem. In fact, many of the challenges
those here face are also being seen within the 57
participating States of the OSCE. For the spectrum
of challenges is global: climate change and its effects
on the most vulnerable societies; poverty and hunger,
which can fuel migration; and growing inequalities and
how they fan the flames of conflict and radicalization.
Those challenges are completely resistant to any
unilateral solutions.

Working together and using multilateral platforms
is not a luxury we can afford to opt out of; it is our only
choice. We have nothing to lose, and everything to gain,
in working together. Our people have everything to
gain. Fortunately, when it comes to the United Nations
and the OSCE, we are mindful of that. There is strong
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
entities in Vienna, with crucial projects taking place on
the ground. Our field missions, including the Special
Monitoring Mission, have benefited from United
Nations expertise and support, and we have more
memoranda of understanding and letters of agreement
than ever before.

The OSCE has a lot to earn from closer United
Nations engagement. This includes operational
readiness, capacities and capabilities at various stages
of the conflict cycle, as well as training and expertise
across a wide range of themes and issues. But the
OSCE has a lot to give too - from tailored regional
knowledge and niche expertise to lessons learned
from the ground. Moreover, in this climate of eroding
global arms control, the OSCE can be a platform for
confidence-building and increased transparency.

I think we could and should see even more
engagement in the coming months and years, because
there is absolutely no alternative when it comes to the
legitimacy the United Nations brings and the reach it
allows. And when it comes to the OSCE'S 57 members,
there is absolutely no alternative to local know-how and
field presence. When mobilized effectively and pulled
together, the results can be historic.

I came here to New York to talk to the Council's
about the priorities of Slovakia's OSCE chairmanship
and to focus on opportunities for stronger United
Nations-OSCE cooperation in bringing these priorities
to life. I thank Council members for the attention they
have given me today, but before I finish I want to make
one more thing clear. This briefing alone will not change
anything. It will not change anything in our work and
it will not change anything in the lives of people. That
is why it is so crucial that our words today be followed
up by action.

We are willing to do our part. I have already reached
out to the Secretary-General and other high-level United
Nations officials to invite them to participate in various
OSCE events this year. My team has also ramped up
coordination with the United Nations Liaison Office in
Vienna, and there is ongoing discussion about options
for deeper cooperation on the ground. The more we
work together, the closer we will get to our shared
goals. I am confident that today's briefing is another
step along the way.

