Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. I have no doubt that
under your eminent leadership, the Security Council will
discharge its responsibilities in a most successful manner.

My delegation welcomes wholeheartedly the success
of the Dayton conference, which will pave the way for
the widespread conflict in the Balkans, unleashed nearly
four years ago, to come to an end. With the landmark
agreement reached yesterday, my delegation believes that
a definitive step has been taken - away from the
bloodshed and suffering that have plagued this region and
towards the beginning of a foundation for peace.

It is due to the exceptional diplomatic initiative and
steadfast resolve of the United States and the other
members of the Contact Group, as well as the forward-
looking attitude of the three parties concerned, that this
feat which, in the darkest hours seemed like a pure
impossibility, has been achieved. The Republic of Korea
joins the international community in expressing its solemn
appreciation to these parties for their efforts in reaching
the comprehensive settlement.

 

My delegation also takes this occasion to pay a tribute
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and its
peace-keepers, both military and civilian, whose
immeasurable contributions to the peace efforts in the
former Yugoslavia have helped fulfil the goal of restoring
peace and security.

My delegation is fully aware that the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, initialled yesterday in Dayton, Ohio, is the
first, important phase on the long road to peace in the
former Yugoslavia. We hope that the spirit of compromise,
reconciliation and tolerance which first brought about the
Agreement will continue to flourish so that it may be
faithfully implemented after being formalized in Paris next
month.

In this regard, my delegation sincerely hopes that the
Agreement will open up a new era for consolidating the
prospect of peace and stability in the Balkans through the
full cooperation of the parties concerned. Moreover, my
delegation believes that the prompt action of the Security
Council to suspend the economic sanctions imposed on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and to lift the arms
embargo on the former Yugoslavia is indeed timely and
appropriate. The role of the Security Council in the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement is indeed
paramount in the consolidation of peace in that region.

Despite the geographical remoteness of the former
Yugoslavia, the Republic of Korea firmly believes that it is
an area with far-reaching implications for the peace and
stability of the world. The international community bears
the moral obligation to extend its fully-fledged support to
help bring the conflict to an end by turning peace on paper
into a genuine peace in deed.

Furthermore, the four-year conflict has taken a severe
toll on human lives. With a quarter of a million lives lost
and many more people uprooted from their homelands, the
community of nations must cooperate to provide urgently
needed humanitarian assistance and prevent further
violations of human rights. The multitude of people who
have been forced to leave their homes should be allowed to
return to their place of origin in safety.

My delegation believes that one important aspect of
the Agreement is that of the provisions which ensure that
war criminals will not be allowed to hold any elected
offices. This should serve as a stern lesson to would-be
perpetrators of crimes against humanity and peace. It is
incumbent upon the international community to guarantee
that crimes, such as "ethnic cleansing", do not go
unpunished.

My delegation also believes that for all its
weaknesses and shortcomings, the Agreement is the
product of real compromise and mutual concession by all
the parties concerned and, therefore, it is crucial that the
international community should encourage the parties to
the conflict to implement the agreement in a most faithful
manner.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reassure
the Council that the Republic of Korea, a nation which
itself suffered a devastating war a half-century ago, will
do its share in contributing to the implementation of the
Dayton Agreement as a responsible member of the
international community.

