Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
Security Council and the United Nations remain
steadfast in their commitment to support the people of
South Sudan in their quest for stability, peace and good
governance. Unfortunately, we have a long way to go
and much work remains to be done. As such, we must
work together to send the right signals to South Sudan's
leaders. The Secretary-General perhaps put it best last
week when he told the leaders bluntly,

"Put peace above politics. Pursue compromise.
Overcome obstacles. Establish the transitional
Government of national unity, and do not delay it."

The Council has repeatedly shown its willingness
to use targeted sanctions to marginalize spoilers, target
those who commit violations and abuses and impose
accountability for atrocities. The Council should
consider carefully new proposals to use sanctions to
better stabilize the situation, limit the unrestricted flow
ofarms and incentivize the parties towards compromise.

Rather than rush that deliberative process, the
United States supports the decision of the Security
Council today to renew the current sanctions measures
until 15 April, and the mandate of the Panel of Experts
for just a few more weeks - until 15 May. That period
will allow the Council to fully discuss proposals that
have been put forward by delegations around this table
and allow us time to measure the progress made by
the parties on implementing the peace agreement and
forming the transitional Government of national unity.
We fully agree that this is a delicate moment in the peace
process, but it is also a critical moment: humanitarian
needs are greater than ever, human rights violations
persist and the people of South Sudan continue to suffer.

Parties to the conflict need to show progress on the
peace agreement signed last year, an agreement which
is severely lagging when it comes to implementation,
as we heard Ambassador Festus Mogae, Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC),
testify to last month. We urge South Sudanese parties to
take the key steps necessary for the full implementation
of the peace agreement.

In line with the timeline set out by the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, over the next
several weeks we expect to see full cooperation by
both sides on the implementation of the Juba security
arrangements as decided by the JMEC Chair and
agreed to by the parties on 24 February, with the return
of designated Sudan People's Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition security to Juba. That should lead
to the return of Rick Machar to Juba and the immediate
formation of the transitional Government of national
unity. It is also important that the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan suspend the implementation
of the decree creating 28 states, as called for by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in its
communique of 30-31 January 2016.

We encourage South Sudan's leaders to show their
commitment to peace and to a prosperous future for the
people of South Sudan through those concrete actions
over the next weeks. We will use that time to support
the parties in their efforts to carry out those tasks, to
measure their progress and to respond appropriately.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
