I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the eleventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the continued efforts of the United Nations and Member States to counter the threat. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his overview of the report and to commend both the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, for their invaluable contributions to the report. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is one of the greatest challenges faced by the United Nations in its 75-year history. The resulting period of global uncertainty has exposed existing economic fault lines and social instabilities, and its impact has also been felt across the global security apparatus. As we have heard, the rapidly evolving and deeply uncertain nature of the pandemic makes it difficult to assess its overall impact on ISIL's activities. The dire situation faced by thousands of ISIL-associated women and children in the detention camps of north-eastern Syria remains a major challenge for the international community. The COVID-19 pandemic risks exacerbating an already untenable humanitarian, human rights and security situation. Indefinite detention is legally unjustifiable and has significant security and moral implications. The detained children remain the most vulnerable group. Every additional day that they spend in the camps will increase the risk that they will suffer irreparable psychosocial damage. Last month, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) published an analytical brief on the prosecution of ISIL-associated women, highlighting the gender-specific challenges encountered by States in the investigation and prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration (PRR) of women returnees. Women remain the group with the lowest rate of return from the conflict zone. We cannot allow these women to become the forgotten demographic. There is an urgent need to institutionalize comprehensive, tailored and gender- sensitive prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies and to provide States with the required technical assistance. There have been signs of progress. Some States have repatriated their citizens despite the additional challenges posed by COVID-19. Some States are also making progress in prosecuting ISIL returnees for terrorism-related offences, sometimes cumulatively with war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. This may help provide justice to the victims of ISIL. States should continue to improve the collection and sharing of admissible, terrorism-related information and evidence by the military, in compliance with international human rights law and international humanitarian law. CTED is working in partnership with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNOCT, under the Global PRR Initiative, to explore approaches to rehabilitation and reintegration in various settings. Pandemic-related restrictions, including social isolation measures, curtailed religious and cultural activities and lack of employment opportunities, may exacerbate existing grievances, particularly in societies facing endemic conflicts. With people spending more time online, ISIL and its affiliates are taking the opportunity to accelerate the spread of their toxic propaganda via digital platforms, including gaming platforms. Member States must ensure that policies adopted to curtail the spread of terrorist narratives and misinformation are human rights- compliant and gender-sensitive. A whole-of-society approach, based on consultations with relevant stakeholders, including civil society organizations, academia, think tanks, religious actors and community leaders, is more crucial than ever. Within the framework of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, CTED continues to engage with States, including in partnership with the Government of Iraq, on their development of comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorism strategies that engage a wide range of stakeholders. States should introduce innovative and practical counter-terrorism measures, strengthen existing partnerships and ensure that victims' rights are respected. I welcome the adoption, in March, of the Interfaith Despite its significant loss of territory, ISIL continues to pose a threat, not only in the Middle East but also in the newer battlegrounds of South and South- East Asia, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel. We are closely following the current political crisis in Mali and hoping for the restoration of the rule of law in order for the country to continue its fight against the rise of the terrorist threat. Our response to this enduring transnational challenge must be a multilateral one, rooted in enhanced information-sharing and international cooperation. CTED has innovated its working methods in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and maintained business continuity, despite the challenging circumstances. Acting on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we have enhanced our desk- based stocktaking of Member States' activities and assisted the Committee in adopting an updated country visit framework, as well as the annual list of briefings and meetings for the Committee and the wider membership. Under the United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, CTED and its partners have conducted virtual deep-dive missions for Botswana and Cote d'Ivoire and developed Advance Passenger Information and Passenger Name Records implementation road maps for both States. CTED also led a virtual deep- dive mission for Botswana with its partners on enhancing the capacity to counter terrorism using National-Level Interagency Coordination Mechanism Fusion Cells. CTED and UNOCT have held joint consultations with Member States and experts on the use of biometric technologies for pandemic-related measures, aimed at ensuring their compliance with international human rights law. We have deepened our engagement with our partners on the ground, particularly the United Nations resident coordinators and country teams in assessed Member States. This has helped us integrate local, national and regional developments into our analysis of key trends and our facilitation of technical assistance, which will in turn translate into more effective and impactful counter-terrorism and counter-violent extremism outcomes. We continue to share our insights through our regular stream of publications, including our recent analysis of the potential short- and long-term impacts of COVID-19 on terrorism and counter-terrorism. In June, pursuant to resolution 2462 (2019), CTED and the Monitoring Team produced a joint report on counter-financing of terrorism (S/2020/493, annex), based on responses from 112 Member States. The report was followed by a closed briefing of the Council. In July, we conducted a virtual global consultation with over 15 civil society organizations on counter-financing of terrorism and its implications for human rights, in accordance with resolution 2462 (2019). CTED is committed to continuing dialogue with civil society on issues relating to counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism within a human rights-compliant and gender-sensitive framework. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will undoubtedly make our already complex task even more difficult. But the pandemic has also given us an opportunity to question the status quo. We should continue to use this opportunity to review and strengthen our counter-terrorism and counter-violent extremism approaches. We must collectively uphold our shared principles of a rule of law-based international order and develop human rights-compliant and gender-sensitive policies, practices and whole-of-society approaches. Our determination to ensure justice, equality and human dignity must continue to be the cornerstone of our multilateral counter-terrorism efforts.
