Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: I visited Liberia three weeks
ago, and I am thankful to Angola for the invitation to
speak to the Council on the subject today, soon after
my visit.

I found that the country has a strong, vibrant
democracy and the healthy engagement of different
stakeholders. The women continue to be resilient in the
face of persisting challenges. We have to applaud the
strength of the Liberian democracy since the end of the
conflict. It is, however, vital now that we continue to
invest in the Liberian people's broader resilience and

recovery. The dividends of peace need to flow greater
and deeper for women and girls.

Liberian women have earned global fame for
helping to bring an end to the civil war, convincing
the rebels to lay down arms, consolidating peace and
ensuring that the country does not relapse into conflict
since the civil war ended 13 years ago. Liberian women
today are also known for the extraordinary role they
played in halting, reversing and eliminating the Ebola
epidemic. I bring the inspiring example of Liberian
women when I speak to women from Syria, Colombia,
South Sudan, the Central African Republic or the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in my travels to
conflict-affected countries. Truly, Liberian women are
a source of inspiration.

However, Liberian women have yet to benefit fully
from the dividends of peace. The absence of war does
not mean the presence of complete peace. We have to
ask ourselves: What does peace mean to women when
they continue to experience high daily levels of sexual
and gender-based violence, with very limited access
to justice? Only 8 per cent of girls have completed
secondary education or higher, and there are reports
of alarming rates of sexual abuse and exploitation in
schools by teachers and administrators, with total
impunity. Whenever I speak with teenagers, they ask me
for more female teachers; this call has also been echoed
to me by the President. Harmful traditional practices,
from child marriage to female genital mutilation and
the abduction of girls into the Sande and Poro secret
tribal societies, are devastating both to women's lives
and the country's recovery. Thankfully, the bill on
domestic violence currently before Parliament includes
the banning of both female genital mutilation and the
end of child marriage. We are anxious that the bill
be passed.

The country that elected Africa's first woman
President is ranked 149th in female representation
in Parliament, and there are even lower rates of
women's leadership in local districts, towns, clans and
chiefdoms. Again, we appreciate the fact that there is
an effort - which needs the Council's support - to
secure a quota ahead of the coming local Government
elections so as to increase women's representation
and participation. Sexual and gender-based violence
continues to be one of the most reported crimes,
particularly against minors, yet the overwhelming
majority of perpetrators escape justice, despite the
hard work of some Government officials and civil
society organizations.

The drawdown of our troops must be accompanied
by significant investment in and support for a
criminal justice system that works and serves the
people. In addition, as many of us know, women were
disproportionately affected by the Ebola epidemic.
They were at the greatest risk of infection because of
their roles as caregivers and nurses. Women are proud
of their role and share a strong desire to strengthen their
health system. In a country where women are a majority
of cross-border traders and approximately 85 per cent
of daily market traders, many women were suddenly
impoverished by border closures, travel restrictions and
market shutdowns. These women have called upon us
to help them rebuild their trade, which does not require
a lot. As the Government Minister of Gender, Children
and Social Protections noted, these women were heroes
before the Ebola crisis hit. They are now back to zero.

Gains against maternal and infant mortality were
quickly reversed by the disruption of basic services. My
mission to Liberia was also to look into our support
to the effort to provide water, sanitation and hygiene
services as an initiative that we are undertaking
together with Oxfam International and the Government.
The Governments of both Liberia and Sierra Leone are
our partners.

The Council is mainly deliberating today on the
continuation of the Mission drawdown plans and the
future of the United Nations presence in Liberia. There
cannot be a vacuum when the Mission leaves. We have
to show Liberians that the end of the peacekeeping
Mission does not mean that the international community
will turn its back on them. There is no better way of
showing that than by resolving to invest in those who
need us most, who have been most affected by the
war and the epidemic and who are also important to a
secure post-conflict Liberia. Insecurity and impunity
impact girls and women hardest. It is important that we
understand and act on that so that no one is left behind.

What I am asking of the international community is
to increase its deployment of support to reconstruction,
peacebuilding initiatives and the rule of law in order to
bring women and girls the justice and peace dividend
they have earned. During my visit we launched
a five-year joint programme aimed at preventing
sexual and gender-based violence that encompasses
every important Government actor and a major
number of United Nations entities in a great example
of coordinated and extensive consultation with the
community. The plan, which I have to say is one of the
best I have ever seen anywhere, needs our support to
succeed, especially in its law-enforcement aspect.
The Government of Liberia, with support from
UN-Women and the United Nations country team,
has been at the forefront of implementing the
Secretary-General's seven-point plan on gender-
responsive peacekeeping. Future investments in
Liberia's reconstruction must continue to adhere to the
commitment to allocating a minimum of 15 per cent of
all peacebuilding funds to gender equality. Similarly,
we have to ensure that women are included, engaged
and participate in the benefits of all the investments
in water, sanitation and hygiene infrastructure that are
planned as part of the recovery from Ebola. We stand
ready to support the training that will equip them to
be competent partners in ensuring that those services
are provided. We should learn from the good practices
in the fight against Ebola that were led by women
or targeted them so that we can apply them to other
epidemics that particularly affect women and girls,
such as the Zika virus.

We have supported efforts and provided economic
grants for hard-hit cross-border traders, supported
orphaned children and stigmatized survivors and
ensured that women's needs were reflected in the
United Nations humanitarian response. The country's
network of women's peace huts, the local peacebuilding
mechanism that has been copied in several countries in
the region, must continue to receive our support for the
needs it still has and in order to ensure that it becomes
fully embedded in the local governance system.
The country needs thousands of female teachers and
midwives for an ambitious economic empowerment
programme in support of rural women and to help them
relaunch trading activity. Liberia's women need strong
justice organizations and security actors to ensure
respect for the country's laws.

Even as the Mission continues its drawdown, I must

ask it to consider its contribution to gender equality as
a key element of its legacy. I am happy to report that
the Liberia country team and the Mission have been
planning for an orderly handover of gender-related
functions and have consulted and fully integrated
their efforts with the UN-Women team and other
stakeholders in the country. The Mission has been
playing an important role in advancing women's
participation in peacebuilding and peace consolidation,
while supporting various Government institutions in
implementing their commitments to gender equality,
advocating for important legal reforms and even
building the capacity of women's organizations through
quick-impact projects.
UN-Women and the rest of the United Nations family
are preparing for the challenging task of inheriting
those functions and continuing to move forward. We
need the support of the Mission, the Security Council
and the international community at large in the
crucial next few months, especially in four specific
areas. First, as has been mentioned, is the enactment
of pending bills on domestic violence, land rights,
reproductive health and governance decentralization,
which are important to women and gender equality. The
second is women's involvement in the decentralization
of health, education and agricultural and water and
sanitation services. The third is a robust, dependable
criminal justice system that can, and must, protect its
communities and women. The last is the importance
of taking ambitious steps to improve the decreasing
representation of women in politics at the national and
local levels, including through enforceable quotas and
temporary special measures.

That is a short and modest list for a country whose
women fought very hard to defeat the rebels and Ebola.
We must make sure that gender inequality is also
defeated and that their political voices are heard. In
very large measure, the future of Liberia depends upon
its women and their resilience. That is something that
the international community cannot turn away from and
must, in fact, take up as strongly as it can, or we will
leave with our mission having been fully accomplished.

