Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Allow me to express my
delegation's deep satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over the Council today. We deeply appreciate the
initiative taken by your country, Argentina, in convening
this very timely and important debate on the protection of
United Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel in conflict zones.

We also wish to express our appreciation to the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette, and to
the Executive Director of the World Food Programme
(WFP), Ms. Catherine Bertini, for their sobering
statements, in which they detailed the nature of the
attacks on United Nations, associated and humanitarian
personnel and made recommendations for action that the
Council should take.

Jamaica is deeply concerned by the continued
attacks against United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel, and we condemn in the strongest possible
terms all acts of violence directed against them. We
believe that the international community must move with
the greatest urgency to curb these unacceptable acts and
that it should spare no effort in adopting the most
comprehensive approaches to resolving these gross
Violations of international law, recognizing - as
Ms. Bertini pointed out - that attacks against United
Nations and associated personnel are aimed at the United
Nations itself. The extremely urgent nature of this
situation requires us to urge full compliance with
international law and to take appropriate steps to address
the gaps in the legal coverage of humanitarian personnel
that continue to exist despite the current legal regimes.

T oday's debate gives us a unique opportunity to
review the role to be played by the Security Council in
supporting the work of humanitarian organizations and
improving the environment for humanitarian assistance. In
this regard, we must ensure that the mandates of the
United Nations field operations include appropriate
measures for the safety and protection of United Nations
and associated personnel and other personnel.

The presence of military and peacekeeping
personnel in a multifunctional operation may be one of
the most effective ways of guaranteeing the minimum
security necessary to conduct humanitarian operations.
United Nations peacekeeping forces mandated to support
humanitarian assistance missions have generally helped
establish a more secure environment. We therefore
believe that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations could assist in determining the most
appropriate cases in which this approach may be applied.

Coordination and cooperation among the military,
civilian, political and humanitarian components of a
multifunctional operation are essential to the success of
United Nations missions. As was emphasized earlier, we
must restore respect for the neutral and impartial work
they undertake. We also believe that proper training and

 

sensitization of personnel to the relevant domestic laws,
conditions and customs that they will encounter should
become an integral part of their process of preparation.
An effective and comprehensive security plan for the
humanitarian components of peacekeeping operations is
essential for their success and for securing the safety of the
personnel involved. The provision of adequate financial
resources for the proper security training of United Nations
personnel must therefore be treated as a matter of priority.
In this regard, we acknowledge the importance of the Trust
Fund for Security of United Nations personnel, and we
recall the appeal made by the Deputy Secretary-General for
more contributions to the Fund. We are also pleased to
have learned from the Deputy Secretary-General that a full-
time Security Coordinator will be appointed.

My delegation has taken special note of the entry
into force of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel, and we recognize its
importance in expanding the level of legal coverage for
humanitarian workers. However, there still remain
substantial weaknesses in legal coverage. The international
community must therefore urgently devise appropriate legal
instruments to address the concerns of those humanitarian
organizations not associated with the United Nations. The
United Nations must also address the need for legal
coverage and protection of locally recruited United Nations
staff, who often are the major targets of attack.

We would also suggest that a compilation of
examples of best practices and lessons learned with regard
to the safety and security of humanitarian personnel in the
field should be conducted with the utmost urgency in order
to provide useful guidance to new and ongoing
humanitarian missions. We believe that the
recommendations concerning the protection of humanitarian
workers contained in the Secretary-General's report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict are important in
addressing the problem, and we hope that the working
group established to consider these recommendations will
soon complete its mandate.

In an effort to strengthen the security of United
Nations and associated personnel, we further believe that
the inclusion of certain aspects of the 1994 Convention into
status-of-forces agreements could be useful in enhancing
the security environments in which these persons operate.
We also believe that there is a need for greater cooperation
between the humanitarian community, peacekeeping
operations and Member States - particularly troop
contributors - in exchanging information on risk
assessment and on conditions in the field. The Secretariat
should coordinate such exchanges on security issues. In
this connection, we note the recommendations made by
the Deputy Secretary-General and look forward to the
report of the Secretary-General to be submitted later this
year.
The protection of humanitarian workers cannot be
fully achieved without effective deterrence of those who
continue to violate the rights of individuals who enjoy
protection under international law. As previous speakers
have pointed out, the international community should not
tolerate impunity. States must bring to justice those who
have committed serious violations of international
humanitarian law. We must put the full weight of the
Council behind efforts to strengthen international legal
enforcement mechanisms. We must continue to support
the international criminal tribunals and to emphasize the
responsibility of States and non-State actors alike for
guaranteeing the safety of humanitarian personnel and for
ensuring the unimpeded access of such personnel to
civilians in situations of conflict.

The Security Council must also play an important
role in ensuring the protection of civilians and
humanitarian workers. We believe that any long-term
protection requires an enhancement of the Council's role
in addressing the root causes of conflict in a
comprehensive manner. The lack of political will is one
of the greatest crises facing the international community
in resolving conflicts and the Council must therefore
redouble its efforts to address the political aspects
involved in the many situations which are giving rise to
the current humanitarian crises.

In conclusion, I wish to join previous speakers in
paying tribute to those staff of the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations who have chosen to serve
the international community in conflict situations, and to
salute those who have sacrificed their lives in the cause
of peace. The Council must act now. Their lives must not
have been lost in vain.

