Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are confident that your knowledge and
experience will serve you in conducting the work of the
Council in the manner to which we all aspire. I would
also like to express our gratitude to our brother, the
Permanent Representative of sisterly Tunisia, who
conducted the work of the Council last month with
wisdom and competence.

An examination of history will reveal many
documents and testimonies accurately documenting all
the massacres perpetrated by Israel against innocent
Palestinian civilians - in Deir Yassin, Ayn Kibya,
Gaza, Al-Husan, Qualquilya, Kafr Kassim, Khan
Yunis, Rafa, Al-Quds, Ramallah and other cities and
villages of Palestine. Israeli terrorism has even pursued
Palestinians to Sabra and Shatila. The Mossad and its
agents have pursued Palestinian personalities outside
Palestine and have killed a large number of them. By
admission of Israeli officials themselves, it is now
known how those agents worked, and continue to work,
to assassinate Palestinians using numerous terrorist
methods, including bombing with helicopters and
planes.

By deploying occupation forces around densely
populated areas and Palestinian cities and villages, the
Israeli authorities recently divided the West Bank into
43 sections and the Gaza Strip into four sections. This
has led to greater isolation for those cities and villages,
thereby limiting the movement of their citizens and
deepening the suffocating economic blockade. This is
an approach aimed at destroying the Palestinian entity
from within, destroying the Palestinian economy and
infrastructure and sabotaging national interests. This
approach is also aimed at eradicating Palestinian
society, which lives under blockade in geographical
cantons in which Palestinians are separated from each
other, from their brethren in the Arab world and from
the outside world. Those inhumane and unjustified
methods presage a dangerous deterioration in the
security situation, add to the current tensions and
demonstrate the true intentions of the new Israeli
Government.

Israel describes the intifada as violence. It turns a
blind eye to the fact that it is resistance to occupation,
which is a legitimate right and, indeed, a national duty
that has been exercised by all peoples to rid themselves
of occupation and injustice. Current developments in
occupied Palestine are not violence carried out by those
who oppose peace, as Israel claims. No. They
constitute a popular uprising that rejects surrender, the
usurpation of the rights of Palestinians, the
confiscation of Palestinian territory and the
confinement of Palestinians to isolated areas where
Israeli extremism is dominant and where they cannot
even secure the basic necessities of life.

The Palestinian uprising is an expression and a
reflection of the impatience of the Palestinians vis-a-
vis the barrenness of the peace negotiations. The
Palestinians have been offered so far the peace of time
bombs, by which the Israeli side has insisted on
imposing its conditions and adopting the approach of
the victor towards the vanquished. Israel has discussed
simple and commonsensical issues without talking
about the basic issues - issues of destiny - to gain
time and to impose new realities on the ground.

Whatever agreement is reached, Israel tries to
empty it of its content. Israel prevaricates when it
comes to making agreements and delays when it is
asked to implement. The uprising has made the claims
of Israel perfectly clear regarding its desire for peace.
It has become obvious to the international community
that Israel does not desire a peace based on justice and
that it has no intention of recognizing the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, foremost among which
are the rights of return and self-determination and the
right to establish an independent State, with Arab
Jerusalem as its capital. Israel has showed no sincere
and serious desire to establish a climate of confidence
regionally and to coexist with its neighbours in security
and peace.

The Commission on Human Rights sent a fact-
finding mission led by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Mrs. Mary Robinson, in spite of all
Israeli's attempts to mislead the Commission and its
attempts to obstruct her movements by firing on her car
to remind her of the fate of Count Bernadotte, who was
assassinated by Zionist terrorist gangs. The
Commission confirmed the suffering of the Palestinian
people, their pain, their wounds and their continued
tragedy.

The Palestinians have lost their territory; their
houses have been demolished and they have
experienced much suffering. Death has become a daily
event for them. The father dies, and the son goes out
the next morning carrying the picture of his martyred
father. Then the son dies, and all of the fathers and
mothers receive the hordes of people who come to pay
their condolences.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia feels that Israel is
the only party responsible for all these acts of
aggression committed against the Palestinians.
Therefore, we denounce and deplore all Israeli
measures which run counter to all humane principles
and all norms of the revealed religions and
international law. We call upon the international
community to prevail upon Israel to stop its continued
aggression against Palestine and the Arabs.

The international community entrusted the
Security Council with the task of maintaining
international peace and security. The developments in
occupied Palestine right now mean that the Security
Council must assume its responsibility. It must adopt
the necessary measures to protect the Palestinian
people - to protect innocent children from the bullets
of the occupiers, to protect the young people whose
dreams die before they are even born and to protect
mothers with tears in their eyes while they hold their
dead sons and pray to God to rid them of the injustice
of the occupiers.

The Council must adopt measures to protect the
fathers and the elderly who have lost their sons and
their grandsons to the occupation. It must do this to
affirm the international responsibility of the United
Nations vis-a-vis the question of Palestine, until it has
been resolved in all its aspects. It must do this in
implementation of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, which applies to all territories
occupied by Israel. It must do this in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1322 (2000) and with the
General Assembly resolution adopted during its
emergency special session.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports the
Palestinian request that the Security Council assume its
responsibility and implement its commitments to send
an international observer force to the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, to protect
those who are still alive among the Palestinian civilian
population. These are innocent people who only aim to
recover their rights and to live like everybody else -
like all nations, in peace, security and freedom.

Peace cannot be made through the hubris of the
generals and their use of tanks and planes. It can be
achieved only by accepting the terms of rights and by
forcing the aggressor to stop its aggression and to end
its occupation. Stability in the area is linked to the
achievement of a comprehensive and just peace. The
peace negotiations were based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. Just as peace cannot be
dealt with piecemeal, the land cannot be partitioned
either. In order for a just and comprehensive peace to
be established, all Arab territories occupied since 1967
must be returned so that stability, security,
understanding, coexistence and cooperation can be
achieved.

