Mr. Vilovic': Allow me to thank the Rwandan
presidency for taking the initiative in organizing
this briefing on post-conflict peacebuilding and to
express my appreciation for the opportunity to deliver
these remarks in my capacity as Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

The annual briefings to the Security Council
represent valuable opportunities to apprise the
Council of the Commission's work, perspectives and
priority areas. My predecessor's presentation of the
Commission's report on its sixth session has shed light
on where the Commission stands today with its country-
specific engagement, institutional consolidation
and policy-development efforts. Stemming from
our founding resolutions, the main purpose of the
Commission is to provide advice to the Council, and
I believe that today's briefing offers an opportunity to
reflect on the envisaged scope of, and prospects for, the
Commission's advisory role to the Security Council.

The Commission approaches its advisory function
to the Security Council from the conviction that it can
play a useful role in helping the Council manage an
increasing workload. By focusing on and sustaining
broader international attention to situations which may
not be on the Council's immediate radar, the PBC is
supporting the Council in ensuring that the energy and
resources invested in addressing and stabilizing conflict
situations are preserved and protected for the long term.
At the same time, we are convinced that this is a shared
responsibility requiring improved two-way interaction
between the Council and the PBC as well as much better
clarity as concerns roles and responsibilities in relation
to the other operational actors involved.

Members of the Council will recall last year's
debate and interactive dialogue under the Colombian
presidency, which highlighted a number of issues
related to the Commission's advisory function to the
Security Council. Those issues were captured in a
summary that was shared with the Council and is
contained in document S/2012/791. Today, I wish to
build on elements of that summary.

First, three of the missions in countries on the PBC
agenda are in the process of drawdown and transition.
We believe that the Commission can and should play
a role in support of the Council's consideration of

drawdown and transition strategies in those countries.
Drawing on the synergies with the Peacebuilding Fund,
the PBC's advice in such situations could focus on
assessing progress in national peacebuilding efforts
and challenges facing those efforts; the level of support
from and commitment on the part of the international
community beyond the United Nations system; and
the specific capacities required for the United Nations
presence to continue to support long-term peacebuilding
efforts. Therefore, the Council could usefully benefit
from interaction with the PBC during the consideration
of the outcome of technical assessment missions and the
drafting of the Council's resolutions on managing the
transition processes. In that regard, it would be helpful
if the Council were more explicit about the tasks that
the PBC should undertake in support of United Nations
leadership and actors in the field. The Working Group
on Lessons Learned has worked closely with members
of the Integration Steering Group and has developed
pertinent findings on the possible role of the PBC in
those transition contexts.

Secondly, where the PBC continues to be engaged
following the transition and exit of a United Nations
mission in a country on the PBC agenda, the Council
could also benefit from periodic updates on progress
with regard to peacebuilding and risk factors. That would
ensure that the Council remains abreast of country-
specific peacebuilding-related developments that might
require attention. The continuing collaboration between
the PBC, the Peacebuilding Support Office and all lead
United Nations departments and relevant entities in
that regard is crucial.

Thirdly, in situations where the peacebuilding
process in countries on the PBC agenda faces serious
challenges, the Security Council could draw on the
PBC's perspectives as it considers options for its
response and formulates its strategy. The situations in
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic serve
as reminders that peacebuilding is a process fraught
with many risks and that there is a need for a coordinated
response and strategy, which need to be adapted to
evolving national and regional developments. Where it
is engaged, the PBC can be viewed by the Council as
a useful instrument of the international community's
strategy to address and reverse similar situations. At the
same time, the Commission recognizes that a crucial
element of its advisory role to the Council is to ensure,
while working closely with the senior United Nations
leadership in the field, that a timely and appropriate
analysis of risk factors and drivers of conflict is
brought to the attention of the Council placed for its
consideration and action.

The areas and situations presented here are
inherently dynamic. There is, therefore, also a need
for dynamic information-sharing with the Council on
country- specific developments, opportunities and risks.
The Chairs of the PBC country-specific configurations
continue to value the opportunity to formally brief the
Council on the situations in the countries concerned.
We believe that more regular and substantive exchanges
could possibly be of most value to the Security Council
ahead of the Council's field visits to countries on the
PBC agenda, upon the return from a PBC field visit
to those countries, in the process of the imminent
drawdown and exit of United Nations missions, and
in situations presenting an obvious challenge to the
peacebuilding process. We also invite the penholders of
Security Council resolutions to seek the advice of the
respective Chairs ofthe country- specific configurations
when drafting resolutions concerning countries under
consideration by the PBC.

In addition and most recently in its resolution
2086 (2013), the Council emphasized the need to
harness the Commission's role in advancing and
supporting an integrated and coherent approach to
multidimensional peacekeeping mandates in countries
on its agenda. There is clearly a need to take forward
that recommendation and have additional clarity on the
scope of the Commission's advisory role in anticipation
of relevant future referrals from the Council. We look
forward to discussing those and other suggestions in
the context of the planned informal interactive dialogue
with the Security Council to be held tomorrow.

Let me conclude by reaffirming that the PBC
is committed to enhancing its impact in the field by
empowering national actors to own and lead the
peacebuilding process and by ensuring that the United
Nations and other key actors are positioned to help
them achieve that goal. We are cognizant of the fact
that the PBC needs to continue to sharpen its tools
and learn from the lessons of its engagement. We are
also convinced that, as a parent organ providing nearly
25 per cent of the Commission's membership and
having referred five out of six of the countries on the
PBC agenda, the Council needs to contribute to those
efforts. We must, therefore, work together to develop a
practical and meaningful partnership.
