Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to begin,
Mr. President, by extending my sincere felicitations on
the successful Turkish presidency of the Security
Council and on your able guidance of the Council's
work during this month. I will also compliment the
Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is here, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura, because I think this time there is a
lot of change in the Secretary-General's work. He is
emphasizing a change for the better. There seems to be
progress. I think that for the first time there is
something to be fairly positive about. On the basis of
thr quarterly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/463), I would like to congratulate all of them
for the achievements and the movement forward in
Afghanistan.

Over the years, the Secretary-General's reports
have become a credible pronouncement on progress
and setbacks in Afghanistan. I am happy to note that in
the latest report, progress outweighs setbacks. That
trend must be sustained.

The report of the Secretary General under
consideration today has rightly mentioned the Kabul
Conference as the major political development of the
last three months. The Conference was a landmark
event. Its outcome, the Kabul process, has generated
the optimism of a destination in sight.

The Kabul process clearly spells out the
respective roles of the Afghan Government and the
international community in terms of j oint commitments
and detailed benchmarks. As the Afghan Government
assumes greater responsibilities in areas of security,
governance and economic and social development, it
will need the continuous support of the international
community, and this must be forthcoming. It is our
sincere hope that parties on both side of this equation
will fulfil their mandated tasks. We agree with the
Secretary-General that for the Kabul process to
succeed, our efforts must be focused on priority areas
with appropriate sequencing and coordination.

The Secretary-General has also cautioned that
optimism and progress achieved in Afghanistan
continue "to be overshadowed by the deterioration in
the security situation". He has rightly observed that in
the context of security, the Government's efforts to
implement peace and reintegration programmes are
particularly important.
In a society suffering from four decades of war,
the vexing question of security cannot be addressed by
another war. Military action alone is not and will not
be a solution to Afghanistan's problems.

We share the view expressed by the Secretary-
General that a viable reconciliation process is vital for
durable and long-term peace in Afghanistan. Pakistan
supports an Afghan-led and inclusive reconciliation
process to bring the opposition groups into the political
mainstream. We therefore welcome the establishment
of the High Peace Council in Afghanistan. It is our
hope that the Security Council will continue to be a
willing partner of the Afghan Government in the
reconciliation process.

Pakistan has always emphasized the importance
of regional unity in dealing with challenges of security
and development in Afghanistan. The immediate
neighbours of Afghanistan have a special role to play
in its stability. Pakistan is engaged with other countries
in a number of important regional initiatives on
Afghanistan. Those initiatives aim at a greater regional
connectivity with a view to promoting economic and
commercial cooperation and rooting out the menaces of
narcotics, terrorism and extremism.

Pakistan is deeply committed to strengthening its
ties with Afghanistan in all areas. Our bilateral
relations are marked by close cooperation in all fields.
There is continuous dialogue and regular exchange of
visits at the highest levels. President Hamid Karzai
paid an important visit to Pakistan this month. The
joint statement issued on the occasion of his visit
charts the future trajectory of our bilateral relations.

Earlier, our two countries had successfully
concluded the Transit Trade Agreement, upgrading a
similar agreement signed in 1962. We have pledged to
continue with development projects in Afghanistan,
despite our known constraints as a result of the
unprecedented floods in Pakistan. We are also engaged
in security and intelligence cooperation with
Afghanistan, including through the Tripartite
Commission, which also includes the United States and
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).

Pakistan has commended the Afghan nation and
Government and the Independent Election Commission
on the successful holding of Wolesi Jirga elections on
18 September. These elections demonstrated the
commitment to strengthening democratic traditions and
institutions in Afghanistan, despite numerous
challenges. And for those who know the region well, I
am sure Staffan would confirm how difficult it is to
bring democracy there.

We call for early and voluntary returns of the
nearly 3 million Afghan refugees who still live in
Pakistan. We note progress in this area, with the
voluntary return of 91,583 refugees from Pakistan in
past three months, as noted in the report. This is a
gratifying step forward. We would stress the need to
strengthen reintegration programmes for refugees
within Afghanistan's development strategy.

Here I should like to say that there are corridors
that for centuries have led from Afghanistan eastwards
into the heart of India. I think the largest Afghan-led
kingdom was in Madyar Pradesh; it went by the name
of Bhopal. Interestingly, while in North Waziristan, we
are combating terrorism - and the Orakzai tribe
specifically - this largest kingdom in India, Bhopal,
was an Orakzai kingdom. This shows that it is not
sanctuaries that people need to worry about; it is
centuries of travel into these areas, which remain
where they are. People will come and go. Drawing
lines, as we have done - whether it be the Durand or
the Maginot in France, which certainly did not stop
Hitler - does not stop anyone. People carry around
centuries of history and will continue travelling on the
routes that they know and accept.

The United Nations, through its Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the able
leadership of Staffan de Mistura, is playing a
commendable role in the country. And the progress we
see today is, I think, something that we can credit to
him and the great work he has done in the short period
that he has been there. Pakistan greatly values
UNAMA's activities in the areas of governance
assistance, aid delivery, judicial reforms, coordination
among donors, humanitarian assistance, the eradication
of poppy cultivation, counter-narcotics, and landmine
removal. I take this opportunity to reiterate our
readiness to provide all possible assistance to Special
Representative de Mistura and his team.
As the international community completes the
first decade of engagement with Afghanistan after the
Bonn process, it must remain steadfast in its
commitments and introspective in its conduct. Next
month, the Security Council will consider the mandate
of ISAF. Meanwhile, the Afghan Government will also
be following up on the Kabul Conference and the
reconciliation process. These are important landmarks
in our journey to rebuild Afghanistan. Let the history
of Afghanistan be our guiding star on this challenging
journey.

I conclude with one aspect of that history. The
Durand Line was created under the Government of the
Amir Abdur Rahman. While today the area is
considered a sanctuary, at the time his people asked,
"Why have you given away half our country"? He
answered, "I put the people I did not want on the other
side of that line".

