The President: I thank Mr. Borello for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.

Indonesia welcomes this opportunity to preside over
today's open debate marking the twentieth anniversary
of the Security Council's adoption of the first-ever
resolution on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict - resolution 1265 (1999) - and coinciding
with seventieth anniversary of the Fourth Geneva
Convention - part of the backbone of international
humanitarian law.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been an integral part of Indonesia's constitutional
mandate and foreign policy, and sets the tone for the
theme of our Security Council presidency, namely,
"Investing in peace". Over the years, we have been
unwavering in advocating the protection of human
rights and humanitarian access for civilians in conflict
and post-conflict situations. I have made this position
crystal clear in addressing, inter alia, the recent
situations in Palestine, Syria, and Yemen. In situations
of conflict, the safety and security of civilians, the
safety and security of people, must always come first.
In other words, the protection of civilians must continue
to underpin our work at the Security Council.

Yet the path leading towards that noble objective
continues to be plagued with challenges. As the
Secretary-General has reported, the state of civilian
protection today remains similar to that of 20 years ago.
That is truly a source of concern. Under the mandate
of the Charter of the United Nations, all 15 countries
represented around this table bear the collective
responsibility to end and reverse that travesty.

The adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) was a truly
momentous achievement. It affirms the Council's
commitment to humankind in line with the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention. Over the years, the world has
come to a better understanding on the multidimensional
nature of this agenda, from addressing physical threats
to ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
and from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. In order to strengthen the implementation of the
protection of civilians agenda, there are some pertinent
points worth considering.

First, the national capacities of the concerned
must be strengthened. The task of protecting civilians
lies primarily in the hands of the State concerned,
particularly with regard to upholding the rule of
law and establishing good governance. However,
as States in conflict often have limited capacity to
do so, international partnerships become crucial to
address the root causes of the conflicts and enable
them to emerge from conflict into a better, more
secure future. Moreover, community engagement and
empowerment also play an important role in developing
national capacities.

In that regard, civilian protection programmes
should be tailor-made to the needs of affected
communities. Local leaders and community members,
especially women, must become part of the design and
implementation of such programmes. Recognizing
that women and children face the highest risks in
situations of conflict, the participation of women in
such programmes will help increase their effectiveness.
For its part, Indonesia has been proactive in efforts to
empower Palestinian communities to allow them to
gain better access to basic needs. Just three years ago,
we built a hospital in Gaza that has provided much-
needed health-care and eased the suffering of civilians
living under the occupation.

Secondly, ensuring effective implementation
and compliance is key. We already have in place
the normative frameworks guiding the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, namely, the Fourth
Geneva Convention and a number of United Nations
resolutions. The challenge now is how to effectively
implement them. That ultimately requires respect for
international humanitarian and human rights laws
by State and non-State actors alike. To that end, we
believe that engagement with all parties to a conflict
is crucial to encourage them to implement the existing
legal frameworks.

Thirdly, we must pursue innovative and practical
ways to protect civilians on the ground. As the front
line, United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
actors remain our primary agents. As such, the skill
sets and capacities of peacekeepers and humanitarian
actors must continuously be updated and strengthened
so that they can be better equipped in tackling new and
emerging challenges on the ground.

Based on the experience of Indonesia's peacekeepers,
mastery of soft-skills, or people-to-people skills,
has been demonstrated to positively contribute to
building the trust of local communities. Furthermore,
intelligence-gathering skills are necessary to ensuring
the success of early-warning systems to detect and
prevent potential humanitarian crises.

The twentieth anniversary of the first Security
Council resolution on the protection of civilians
should serve as a reminder not only of our political
commitments, but also our duty to implement those
commitments to ensure the primacy of human safety and
security. After all, the United Nations was established
upon the mandate "we the peoples of the United
Nations". We cannot afford to let our people down.

I now resume my functions as President of the
security Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

