Mr. Vieira (Brazil): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and thank you for convening this
important debate.

We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/24l), which covers the initial six months of the
operations of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).

We note with satisfaction that the transition from
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and MINUJUSTH was carried out
without negatively impacting the security situation,
which attests to the orderly and gradual withdrawal of
the military component of the former Mission and to
the carefully executed transfer of responsibility to the
Haitian National Police, supported by the remaining
formed police units. It also attests to the success of
MINUSTAH, which, for 13 years, helped Haitians
to ensure a stable and secure environment, rebuild
the country after natural disasters and prepare for
the future.

MINUSTAH demonstrated the potential of
innovative approaches that could serve as a model for
future peacekeeping operations elsewhere in the world.
We note in particular the coordination between civilian
and military personnel on the ground, community
outreach strategies as confidence-building measures
and the important role of women in all areas of the
stabilization process. During these 13 years, Brazil had
the honour to lead MINUSTAH and to contribute more
than 30,000 troops to the Mission.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General's report,
the decline in homicide rates over the past few years
has been maintained, with a decrease in the number
of such crimes in the last quarter, as compared to the
same period last year. However, it should be noted
that, compared to the previous quarter, the number of
homicides has increased, which serves as a reminder
that the security situation is still precarious. In that
regard, we recall the contributions for the stabilization
of Haiti made by the implementation of quick-impact
projects and community violence-reduction projects.
We believe that such initiatives, which were successfully
put in practice by MINUSTAH, should continue during
MINUJUSTH's mandate.

We take note of the two-year exit strategy proposed
by the Secretary-General for the transition to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti,
as well as its 11 benchmarks, and we welcome the fact
that the benchmarks were adopted in close consultation
with the Government of Haiti. We believe that such
consultation should continue during the implementation
and review of the exit strategy. In that regard, we
encourage both MINUJUSTH and the Government of
Haiti to use the window of opportunity provided by
the remaining duration of the Mission's mandate to put
in practice ambitious reforms in the field of the rule
of law. That would allow the country to consolidate
stability gains achieved over the past 14 years and lay
the groundwork for sustainable and inclusive long-term
socioeconomic development.

In conclusion, we would like to encourage the
extension of the MINUJUSTH mandate for another
year and the maintenance of its budgetary and police
components. We would prefer, however, that the
references to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations in the mandate be circumscribed to operational
activities of the police component of the Mission.
While recalling the need to plan carefully the practical
steps for the implementation of the exit strategy, we
believe that the Council should continuously assess the
situation on the ground and revise its plans, if need be.

Brazil is firmly committed to its long-term
engagement and solidarity with Haiti. Our peacekeepers
have left, but our engagement remains steady, as
evidenced by the growing portfolio of bilateral technical
cooperation projects.

