Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would first like to join
others in thanking the briefers for their updates. As
this is the first time that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ndiaye has briefed the Council, I
want to welcome him and offer him the full support
of my delegation. I will focus my comments on three
pertinent points.

First, the international community should increase
its support for the Central African Republic. We join the
Secretary-General in welcoming the important progress
that has been made in the initial four months since the
February signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We
note from the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/498)
the progress made by the Government in a number of
areas, ranging from facilitating the conditions for the
sustainable return of internally displaced persons to the
launching ofpopular consultations on the truth, justice,
reparations and reconciliation commission. We also
note President Touadera's leadership in his commitment
to dialogue and willingness to seek compromise in
the pursuit of peace. It should serve as a source of
encouragement for the international community, as
it testifies to the fact that its partnership and support
has borne fruit. We can use that momentum to further
support the Central African Republic.
Despite a number of encouraging developments
and progress following the peace agreement, we remain
deeply concerned about various violations of the
agreement by some armed groups. We strongly believe
that they must be seriously addressed in order not to
jeopardize the implementation of the peace agreement,
which is still in its infancy.

Secondly, the Council should support the work of
regional and subregional organizations in the region.
In that regard, we recognize the important efforts of
the African Union and the Economic Community
of Central African States and other regional and
subregional organizations such as the European Union.
We also welcome the efforts of the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security and the United
Nations, through the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, in garnering international support for
the peace agreement. The fact is that partnership is key.
We encourage regional organizations and the United
Nations, as well as other stakeholders, to continue their
collaboration, and call for the international community
to provide its support. We also recognize the role of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in
providing a bird's-eye View of the region and liaising
with neighbouring Governments. To that end, we
welcome Special Representative Fall's report to the
Council earlier this month (S/2019/430) on the overview
of the situation in the region.

Thirdly, after hearing the updates from the briefers,
we believe it is clear that the role of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) is more
important than ever. The Mission's work is crucial to
security-sector reform in the country, and its work
on justice and the rule of law provide the necessary
technical support for investigations by local authorities.
Those are two important tools in enabling the
Government to protect its people. In order to enhance
MINUSCA's effectiveness, peacekeepers should also
be able to win the hearts and minds of the locals and
protect civilians. To that end, we once again emphasize
the importance of training and capacity-building for
peacekeepers, including enabling them to use the tools
of mediation, negotiation and community engagement.

For its part, Indonesia currently contributes
214 military personnel to MINUSCA, including an
engineering company that we have deployed since 2013.
We are also increasing our contribution by providing
140 police officers in a formed police unit. We
should preserve the momentum sparked by the peace
agreement, support its implementation and continue to
monitor its progress. Let this peace agreement be the
last and ultimate agreement that will serve as a bridge
to peace.

