Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
realize that it is late on a Friday evening and I will
therefore address only five points in my country's
statement on the report of the Secretary-General.

First, I entirely agree that the process of
restructuring the armed forces and the collection of the
small arms that are circulating in the country must
become a special priority in the efforts of the
international community in the immediate term. We
cannot expect the Central African Republic to achieve
political, economic or social recovery without being
able to eliminate its security problems. We therefore
ask donor Governments and institutions to respond to
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, to
contribute generously in financing the programmes
prepared by the Government for this purpose and to
provide the requisite military and technical expertise to
guarantee their successful implementation. In this
context, I cannot but express the hope that the response
of the international community to these requirements
will be more forthcoming than that received by the
Government when it presented its programmes in this
field to the special meeting held in New York in May
2000.

Secondly, the international community must also
focus its attention on addressing the humanitarian crisis
facing the Central African Republic, as evidenced by
the displacement of large numbers of civilians inside
the country and across its borders and by the even
larger numbers of refugees who flocked to its territory
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Congo
Brazzaville, Chad, Sudan and Rwanda. Some may say
that the presence of such a large number of refugees
from all these countries only demonstrates that the
Central African Republic is still an oasis of stability in
a region plagued by armed conflicts and ethnic strife.
Donor Governments and institutions, however, must
accept that the Government of President Patasse has
neither the necessary capacity nor the adequate
resources to provide for the needs of these refugees and
that the entire international community has a special
responsibility towards them.

Thirdly, the Government of the Central African
Republic had previously prepared a number of
emergency plans to overcome the humanitarian,
economic and social repercussions of the coup attempt.
It has also taken a number of encouraging steps to
resume its dialogue with the trade unions and drafted a
series of important laws to attract foreign investments.
While all these measures are, from our point of View,
extremely positive, given the difficult circumstances
the country is going through and the prevalence of
extreme poverty among its population, we
unfortunately find that the international community is
still hesitant in mobilizing the financial resources and
other forms of assistance that the country requires to
address the enormous challenges, which are only
increasing day by day. While we welcome the
recommendations put forward by the Secretary-General
to send economic and financial experts to the
institutions of the Government and to develop the
country's agricultural sector, as well as other important
proposals, we must also reiterate that the Central
African Republic will never be able to emerge from the
vicious cycle in which it finds itself in the absence of
sufficient external financial inflows, the
implementation of large-scale development
programmes on its territory and the alleviation of the
enormous debt burden that paralyses its ability to meet
the daily requirements of its people, including the
payment of salaries and arrears to state employees, as
the international community has continuously called
for.

Fourthly, Egypt welcomes the expanded role
proposed by the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic, especially in promoting the process
of national reconciliation between the Central African
parties, supporting the efforts of the Government to
restructure the armed forces, training the security
forces and promoting respect for human rights. We also
especially look forward to strengthening the role that
the Office can play in the field of early warning in a
manner that will alert the United Nations and allow it
to address developments that may threaten to return the
country to the brink of disaster, as we witnessed last
May. We hope, of course, that the Office will be
provided with financial and human resources
commensurate with the additional tasks and burdens
that it will be assigned so that it may implement its
mandate in the best possible manner.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General has highlighted in
his report the direct interlinked relationship between
the course of events in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other neighbouring States, on the one hand,
and the degree of stability that the Central African
Republic may enjoy, on the other. We thus hope that
the Security Council will take this important factor into
account in the context of its efforts to restore peace in
the Congo and to implement the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. We specifically hope that there will be an
effective presence of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo -
once it is expanded and its third phase launched - in
the Congolese territories adjacent to the Central
African Republic. We also hope that the process of
disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating armed
groups will encompass all of those elements that are
located in Equateur Province, so that the threat posed
by these elements to the Central African Republic can
be removed once and for all.

Finally, Egypt was at the forefront of those
countries that provided troops and equipment to the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINURCA); it was also among the first
countries that was keen to continue its support -
within its capabilities - to the Central African
Republic in the post-conflict peace-building phase after
MINURCA was completed. We thus hope that the
international community will take this opportunity to
reflect on what the situation in the country could have
been just last May and on what we can now begin,
through implementing and building upon the Secretary-
General's recommendations, to assist the Central
African Republic in reaching the path that it deserves
towards lasting peace and stability.

