Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania fully associates
itself with the statement to be made shortly by
Ambassador Van den Berg of the Netherlands on behalf
of the European Union. I shall therefore confine myself
to brief remarks of a complementary nature.

I wish at the outset to thank the United Kingdom
for carrying forward this extremely important and
timely initiative. Our commendation goes also to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for making the rule of
law a priority topic for the proceedings of the fifty-
ninth session of the General Assembly, as well as for
his comprehensive and inspiring report, which offers a
good platform for further discussions within and
outside the Council.

Romania has an especially immediate
understanding of the importance of justice and the rule
of law in building a democratic society, as it is a
country that dealt quite successfully - judging by the
annual report delivered this very day by the European
Commission - with the challenge of an accelerated -
political and economic transition. In all modesty, we
stand ready to share with those interested the recipe,
with all its strong points and its shortcomings and
lessons learned. One important ingredient in that
respect is how to handle the constantly evolving
requirements of making the law actually rule the land.

Romania strongly supports the central role played
by the United Nations, both as a promoter of the
universal principles of justice and the rule of law and
as an active participant in their concrete
implementation. Embedding justice and rule of law
components in the terms of reference for United
Nations missions and assisting war-torn societies to put
in place adequate reforms in that regard should become
a permanent priority of the work of the United Nations.

Nevertheless, real progress in achieving effective,
genuine justice and the rule of law depends largely
upon local actors. Multilateral and bilateral assistance
should be considered only as supporting elements in
ensuring that justice and the rule of law are effectively
widespread throughout the region or country
concerned, thereby fostering solid prerequisites for
sustainable local ownership. The fundamentals of
justice and the rule of law have to be lived and
practised locally.

Achieving national reconciliation has often
proved to be one of the biggest challenges in efforts to
ensure lasting peace in conflict-shattered societies. It
therefore makes sense in such cases to capitalize on the
virtues of the general concept of transitional justice,
with due account being taken of cultural specifics and
the traditions of the countries and societies concerned.

Atrocities and injustices brought about by civil
wars and State repression can easily fuel new cycles of
violence. Impunity may undermine trust in legal
systems, thereby encouraging further crimes. While
welcoming the important role played by ad hoc
international criminal tribunals in helping countries
and peoples to come to terms with past abuses, we
believe that in many cases similar results could be
achieved at lower costs if judicial mechanisms were
established at the national level and strengthened with
international support. As rightly pointed out in the
report of the Secretary-General, easier interaction with
local populations, closer proximity to evidence and
witnesses and greater accessibility to, and for, victims,
are indisputable advantages in that regard.
Of course, where States are unable or unwilling
to prosecute and bring to justice those responsible for
the most serious crimes, the complementary
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
an institution that reflects universal aspirations to the
rule of law and global justice, should be resorted to. I
wish to take this opportunity to reiterate Romania's
firm commitment to the goals and principles of the
Rome Statute of the ICC, as well as to express our
strong belief that the Court will live up to expectations
and provide an effective means of bolstering the rule of
law and dealing a decisive blow to the culture of
impunity.

A wider range of non-judicial mechanisms such
as truth commissions must of course supplement
criminal justice and reparation programmes for
victims. The latter aspect should be afforded greater
consideration, as reparations programmes can
contribute substantially to the promotion of national
reconciliation. Quite often, the prejudice resulting from
conflicts is not only confined to the level of those
directly affected, but has more profound implications
at the levels of community and society. We are indeed
dealing with serious collective trauma when, for
instance, conflicts inflict damage to, or destroy,
cultural or religious patrimony, tearing apart the values
that make up and hold together a given community. In
such cases individual compensation should be
accompanied by broader restoration and reconstruction
and programmes.

There is one additional concern that I would like
to bring to the fore of this discussion at the United
Nations regarding the importance of justice and the
rule of law, in the hope that it will be possible to
integrate it into the further pursuit of the theme
proposed by the United Kingdom. We must not lose
sight of a phenomenon that may sometimes be more
worrisome than even the challenges of building or
rebuilding a viable administration of justice in post-
conflict situations. That phenomenon is the
proliferation of areas in our world where there is a
complete absence of law.

We have improved our capacity as an
international community to address and manage even
the most intricate and complicated conflict and post-
conflict situations. But we do so in most cases when
we have before us a conventional set of interlocutors to
deal with. However, we do not seem to know what to
do with regard to self-styled republics and territories
where there is no recognized authority to be held
accountable by world opinion. There are numerous
such black holes today, and they exist, unfortuantely, in
most areas of our planet. The reluctance, uneasiness or
inability of the international community to tackle such
problems casts a shadow over the valuable work done
to avert more conflicts and tensions than ever before.
Eventually, that makes our work incomplete and is a
glaring example of unfinished business.

In closing, I would like to express Romania's full
support for the conclusions and recommendations set
out in the report of the Secretary-General, as well as
our full readiness to contribute to their implementation.
We would also like to commend you, Mr. President, for
the draft presidential statement on this subject. We look
forward to building upon it further during the Council's
future deliberations.

