Sheikh Al-Thani (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank President Obama for convening this important
meeting, whose significance, I hope, will strengthen
our collective effort in combating the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, and in fact all manifestations
of international terrorism, the reason for our meeting
today.

The international community agrees with the
diagnosis of terrorism. It is an imminent threat and
we must therefore make combating it a priority. The
peoples of our region have unfortunately paid a heavy
price because of this phenomenon. Innocent citizens and
civil institutions have been targeted and terror reigns for
political reasons. As I said this morning in the General
Assembly (see A/69/PV.6), there is no civilization in
the modern era that has not had to confront terrorism,
whether right-wing, left-wing or religious. It would be
a fatal mistake to tie this type of political violence to a
single culture, religion or nationality, whatever it might
be. It also goes without saying that the transnational
nature of terrorism and its use of modern technologies
and communications are contributing to the spread of
this scourge. That makes it essentially impossible to
respond without international solidarity. In Qatar we
consider ourselves an integral part of an international
alliance against terrorism. We will tackle it nationally
and globally by joining with international efforts.

We have no choice but to respond at a security
level, and even with an emergency military response,
given the imminent threat posed by the terrorist groups
that recruit and transport combatants across borders.
The current state of alert, however, should not make
us forget the origins and motives of this phenomenon.
Terrorism should in fact be a rare, exceptional
occurrence; it is possible for terrorist groups to control
entire populations and areas of certain countries only
when the State is absent, creating a political vacuum,
or when the State has become an instrument of murder
and repression that leaves no room for dialogue,
political efforts, gradual reforms or civil change. There
are regimes of terror that are killing their own people,
and if our efforts to eradicate terrorism are to bear
fruit, we will have to restore such States, which should
be unifying frameworks that do not deal in repression
and can help us to fight terrorism. We cannot wait for
more people to be killed. We cannot defeat terrorism
unless the societies that have been affected by it react
to the bloody repression such as what we are witnessing
in Syria and Iraq, particularly when it targets people
because their religion is different.

In that regard, we would make the following points.
Past experience has shown that military action alone
cannot solve such problems. We must work within a
framework of political solutions that can open the door
to a better future. Violence breeds violence, and we
must therefore take a political path. Secondly, if the
political dimensions of a solution are to gain public
support, it must be credible and avoid double standards.
When civilians are targeted, the response must be the
same, regardless of who is perpetrating that violence.
We cannot stand by while thousands are killed. There
is always some explanation orjustification for this, but
I fear that such explanations give the impression of a
double standard. Thirdly, fighting terrorism does not
give anyone carte blanche to take measures that are
outside the rule of law. Civilians must not be victimized
yet again.

In conclusion, we affirm our support for all efforts
based on an international consensus designed to put
an end to this scourge, whatever its motivations or the
excuses made for it.

