At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Germany for holding this important meeting to discuss issues related to the Middle East. I also wish to commend your delegation, Mr. President, on its skilful steering of the work of the Security Council during the month of July. I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his valuable briefing. Bahrain reaffirms its long-standing position on the Palestinian question and its support for all efforts aimed at reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting solution that will enable the Palestinian people to exercise its legitimate rights like any other people and to establish an independent State of Palestine within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the principle of a two-State solution and on the basis of the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant internationally recognized resolutions. I would like to make it clear that Israeli plans to annex Palestinian territory in the West Bank and impose Israeli sovereignty over it and over the illegal settlements established on the territory of the State of Palestine occupied since 1967, in particular the annexation of the Palestinian valley and Area C in the West Bank, pose a serious threat to international peace and security. Such a flagrant violation of international resolutions undermines the prospects of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. As the Palestinian question is one of the oldest issues on the agenda of the Security Council, today the international community must build on decades of United Nations efforts to find a peaceful, comprehensive, just and lasting solution. Bahrain supports the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire to reinforce diplomatic action in conflict zones in order to facilitate the delivery of medical and humanitarian assistance to the places that are most vulnerable to the coronavirus disease pandemic. The fight against the pandemic has become a shared battle. Implementing the ceasefire has proven considerably difficult, amid conflicts that have been escalating for years and a prevailing climate of mistrust between the parties. Nevertheless, there remains an urgent need to reinforce diplomatic attempts to address these challenges and find ways to promote measures to consolidate international peace and security. Bahrain welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), concerning Iran (S/2020/531). In the report, it was stated that that country was directly responsible for the terrorist attacks carried out last year against two Aramco facilities in Abqaiq governorate and Khurays in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and for launching cruise missiles and drones at Abha International Airport. Bahrain also strongly condemns the Iranian-backed Houthi militias for recently preparing two remotely operated booby-trapped vessels to carry out attacks and terrorist operations in the Bab Al-Mandab Strait and the southern Red Sea. Those actions show that the Houthis clearly persist in threatening the safety of maritime traffic and are seriously undermining the security and stability of the region. Given the serious threat posed by Iranian large-scale arms transfers in the region, it has become necessary for the Security Council to extend the arms embargo on Iran. The embargo is an important tool to counter the proliferation of weapons by Iran, promote regional stability and hold Iran responsible for its actions. In conclusion, the common threat faced by the world today makes it all the more pressing to consolidate peace and stability and confront threats thereto. We must therefore prevail in putting an end to practices that exacerbate the suffering of civilians around the world in order to achieve international peace and security and guarantee a more prosperous future for all the world's peoples.
