Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation for the confidence vested in
Egypt by the members of the Council in asking us to
take part in the preparations for this important mission.

As members are aware, the Council decided to
take the opportunity of its stopover in Addis Ababa
on 23 January to hold an informal dialogue with the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU).
The purpose of the dialogue was for the two Councils
to exchange views on a number of issues of common
interest, namely, the situations in Burundi and in
Somalia. Although our time in Addis Ababa was brief,
we were able to engage in a substantive and useful
dialogue with our African partners. In that regard,
I would like to thank the Secretariat, as well as the
United Nations Office to the African Union, for their
valuable support in the preparations for that stopover.
I also wish to thank the AU Commission, the Office of
the Permanent Observer for the African Union to the
United Nations in New York for their contributions and
the Ethiopian Government for its hospitality.

The activities of Council members commenced
in Addis Ababa with a briefing from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union and Head of the United Nations Office to the
African Union, Mr. Haile Menkerios. During that
meeting, Council members shared the key messages
they delivered during their visit to Burundi, as well as
their views on the meetings they held with the various
interlocutors. Special Representative Menkerios
expressed his views on the situation and provided
valuable insights into the AU position, the dynamics
within the Peace and Security Council and the broader
regional context.

The meeting with the Special Representative also
provided an opportunity for the Security Council to
reflect on the situation in Somalia, particularly the
political process and the upcoming elections, the security
challenges facing the country and the continuing
terrorist threat posed by Al-Shabaab. The discussion
also addressed issues pertaining to the cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations in support of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The informal dialogue between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council was
lively and interactive, with most members of the two
Councils constructively engaged. The participation
by the Head of the United Nations Office and the AU
Commissioner for Peace and Security also provided
important insights.

In that connection, before I move on to the
highlights of the discussions, I would like to extend my
thanks to Uruguay for co-presiding over the dialogue,
and to France and the United Kingdom for initiating the
discussions on the situations in Burundi and Somalia,
respectively. I also want to point out that the holding
of that informal dialogue was an important step. All
participants welcomed its significance in strengthening
cooperation on issues of mutual interest.

With regard to Burundi, many participants stressed
the urgency of addressing the situation and pre-empting
any possibilities of further deterioration, and called for
concerted efforts from all regional and international

partners to that end. Members of both Councils
also agreed on the priority that must be given to the
restoration of security and the initiation of a genuine
and inclusive national dialogue, which could lead to a
consensual political solution to the current situation. In
that connection, members of both Councils expressed
support for the regional mediation efforts led by Uganda
on behalf of the East African Community. At the same
time, Council members expressed concern at the slow
progress of the mediation. They were interested in
hearing the views of the Peace and Security Council on
the nature of the United Nations engagement in support
of the regional mediation efforts, through the role of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary General and the United
Nations support team deployed to Burundi.

Discussions also focused on the need for supporting
the restoration of security and the provision of adequate
protection for civilians in Burundi. The envisaged
deployment of 100 AU human rights and military
observers was of great interest. The deployment of
those observers would provide better monitoring of the
situation and represent a constructive point of entry in
engaging the Government of Burundi.

In addition, several members of the Peace and
Security Council called for the adoption of a Chapter
VII draft resolution by the Security Council authorizing
the deployment of an African prevention and protection
mission in Burundi. In contrast, several members
expressed strong views that the deployment of such
a mission without the consent of the Government of
Burundi would be counterproductive and ineffective.
Council members walked out of the informal dialogue
with a sense of confidence that the Peace and Security
Council was determined to make every effort to address
the situation in Burundi. The upcoming AU Summit
in Addis Ababa on 29 January will represent a crucial
venue for generating a regional political strategy that
the Security Council would be able to support.

On Somalia, the two Councils heard presentations
by the representatives of the United Kingdom and
Ethiopia. Through those presentations, the two
Councils noted that 2016 promises to be a defining year
for the country, and that a need exists for continued
engagement with stakeholders in Somalia with the
aim of organizing transparent and credible elections.
The two presentations welcomed the progress under
way in the implementation of Somalia's Vision 2016
and reached the same conclusion, namely, that the
Somali stakeholders should be encouraged to reach an
agreement on an election model for elections to be held
this year and without further delay.

The two speakers raised concerns about the
continued threat posed by the Al-Shabaab terrorist
group to peace and security in the region. They also
commended the role of AMISOM, while expressing
hope that the newly established United Nations Support
Office in Somalia would facilitate continued and
more effective United Nations support to AMISOM.
In addition, the representative of Ethiopia voiced the
AU's concern about the financial challenges facing
the Mission. He stated that AMISOM. was operating
in the most difficult and dangerous of environments,
implementing a Security Council mandate, the organ
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

