I thank the President for organizing today's important debate on contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity, under the agenda item "Peacebuilding and sustaining peace", in these unprecedented and challenging times for us all. I also wish to thank Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations; Mr. Ibrahim Mayaki, Chief Executive Officer of New Partnership for Africa's Development; Sir Hilary Beckles, Vice-Chancellor of the University of the West Indies; and Mr. Munir Akram, President of the Economic and Social Council, for their insightful briefings. The world is changing rapidly and fundamentally, while contemporary conflicts have become more complex and protracted. Around 2 billion people, circa one third of the world's population, currently live in countries affected by conflicts. These conflicts are often linked to global challenges and are no longer defined by national borders. We are witnessing the direct and secondary consequences of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic as it interacts with pre-existing humanitarian crises, adding another layer of complexity to already fragile situations. The most vulnerable populations, who experience lack of access to basic services and health care, are disproportionately affected by weak governance and fragile health systems, which also has an impact on their livelihoods and social protection. The pandemic has put the gains of countries in transition and post-conflict countries in the areas of sustaining peace and development at the risk of being reversed. The identification and understanding of conflict are crucial in determining the potential areas for intervention and for the formulation of measures and policies for conflict prevention, management and resolution. The international community should work together in support of peace processes to prevent conflicts and resolve crises with a view to building and sustaining peace. I would like to reaffirm Slovakia's support for the Secretary-General's reforms aimed at making United Nations peace operations a more effective tool in promoting peace and security and in bolstering political processes in host countries. We highly commend the Secretary-General's leadership in this domain, including the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which has garnered a strong sense of ownership among the Member States. Slovakia fully supports the 2020 review of United Nations peacebuilding architecture, which offers a timely opportunity for adapting to the immediate challenges to sustaining peace that the various threats pose. It underscored the need for stronger partnership with international and national health and financial institutions and reaffirmed the advisory, convening and bridging roles of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), in support of a coordinated and coherent international response to the crisis. Inthe 2020-2021 PBC term, Slovakia is serving as amember of the Commission, which plays an important role in advising the Security Council. Priorities for our membership canbe summarized into three Ps and three Cs: "participation, partnerships and people" and "coherence, coordination and complementarity". Slovakia is ready to promote partnerships and synergies with other transition processes. We need to achieve an enhanced interlinkage of peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions for the more effective use of instruments promoting peace, security and stability, including integrated planning and implementation and assessment to ensure consistency and coherence. The COVID-19 pandemic, in combination with pre-existing drivers, reinforces the need for effective, agile and responsive United Nations peace operations. While acknowledging the importance of ensuring that the needs of all segments of society are taken into account, national ownership and leadership should continue to be at the heart of all efforts. The international community needs to focus on partnering with national and regional actors to reinforce national capacities and institutions. Partnerships with civil society, including women- and youth-led organizations, could help to adequately measure impact on the ground. Slovakia strongly supports the equal and full participation of women in all efforts to create and maintain international peace and security and calls for the complete implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions that address this issue. Slovakia is convinced that multilateral cooperation is key for an effective response to drivers of contemporary conflicts. The United Nations peacebuilding architecture has come to play a crucial role in enhancing the integrated cross-pillar approach and in bringing together political, security and developmental partners. Reviews of existing mandates must consider the adopting exit strategies that help to lay the foundations of the long-term and sustainable peace. Member States increasingly view security sector reform (SSR), as embodied in resolution 2151 (2014), as an important priority for peacekeeping, including for timely conclusions of peacekeeping missions. For years, Slovakia has identified SSR to be one of the key elements of effective conflict prevention and successful post-conflict rebuilding and stabilization. The direct experience of many United Nations peace missions and operations clearly shows that nationally-led and inclusive SSR is key to developing security sector institutions that are non-discriminatory, representative of the population and capable of effectively responding to specific security needs. The United Nations peacebuilding architecture needs to adapt to the new type of challenges that the world is facing, such as climate change and environmental degradation. Particular attention needs to be placed on how the COVID-19 pandemic is creating new problems and amplifying such existing ones as socioeconomic divides, gender inequalities and increased insecurity for women and girls and other vulnerable groups. Slovakia strongly supports the Secretary-General's call for cessation of all hostilities and for the implementation of a global ceasefire, as well as his call for an urgent and coordinated response to the COVID-19 pandemic through three lines of action: tackling the health emergency, focusing on the social impact of the crisis, including the economic response, and working to build back better.
