Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation has carefully studied the fifteenth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). This
document, for which we would like to thank our Secretary-
General, prompts us to make the following comments.

The Security Council will recall that Liberia went
through a very difficult time in 1995, which led us to
consider the complete withdrawal of the United Nations
from that country. The efforts made by the countries in the
region, particularly by the Head of State of Ghana, Mr.
Rawlings, and by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nyakyi, made it possible to
persuade the factions to sign a new peace Agreement in
Abuja on 19 August 1995. That Agreement, which brought
into force a cease-fire and effectively established the
Council of State, included a tight timetable to bring the
Liberians to the polling booths a year after it was signed.

From the outset, it was apparent that this timetable
would be very difficult to keep to; that was the view of the
Secretary-General himself. The French delegation clearly
hopes that the peace process will be concluded as quickly
as possible. Nevertheless, we are not very surprised at the
recent delays. The disarmament and demobilization process
is at the very heart of all peace agreements. The distrust
between the factions after five years of civil war explains
why, as was equally true in Namibia, Mozambique and El
Salvador, difficulties are encountered in carrying out these
particular tasks. We note, however, that some progress has
been achieved. Assembly sites are being identified, and the
United Nations and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
are assured, for the time being, of the full cooperation of
the Council of State, which I repeat, was established only
a few months ago.

Technical delays in the implementation of the peace
process are therefore understandable. On the other hand, the
entrenched reluctance of certain factions to respect the
agreements which they have entered into is unpardonable.
We have noted, as have other delegations, that the wing of
the United Liberation Movement of Liberia for
Democracy led by Mr. Johnson has been responsible for
many armed attacks against troops of the African force.
We particularly deplore the serious incident on 28
December 1995 in Tubmanburg, which cost the lives of
at least 16 men of the ECOMOG force, to whose memory
we pay tribute. The French delegation would like to
recall, in this connection, that the involvement of the
United Nations in Liberia, where approximately 11 peace
agreements have already been signed, is conditional upon
the good will of the factions to put an end to the war and
to restore democracy in that country. We cannot accept
extortion by warlords who fear that the return of peace
may deprive them of the booty which they appropriated,
to the detriment of the civilian population. We find it
equally inadmissible that obstacles are still being placed
in the way of humanitarian convoys which were freely
criss-crossing the country to bring assistance to
populations cut off from the outside world for more than
three years.

The French delegation is prepared to support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on extending
UNOMIL's mandate for an additional period of four
months. Nevertheless, we do not intend to leave the
factions free for 120 days to apply or not to apply the
Agreements signed at Abuja. We therefore hope that the
draft resolution soon to be adopted by the Security
Council on UNOMIL will contain language allowing the
Council to re-examine the situation in Liberia within 60
days, particularly with respect to the implementation by
the factions of commitments undertaken in the fields of
disarmament and demobilization. Thus the Council will be
enabled to review its analysis of the situation if the events
make this necessary.

In conclusion, the French Government would like to
reiterate that France will continue to provide assistance to
Liberia so that that country may rapidly return to the road
to progress and democracy. The French Secretary of State
with responsibility for humanitarian affairs visited Liberia
last month to evaluate the assistance which we could
provide to assist the peace process. The French delegation
announced during the Conference on Assistance to Liberia
that France would soon make a considerable effort. The
French Government has decided to provide approximately
F15 million in assistance to Liberia; F6 million will be
devoted to humanitarian operations and F4 million will be
used to promote the reintegration of populations in the
Maryland region. France will also provide aid of F1.5
million to Guinea, which has a battalion within
ECOMOG. A payment of F3.5 million to the Special

 

Trust Fund of the United Nations for the maintenance of
peace in Liberia will be made shortly.

France hopes that the Liberians, who have committed
themselves to restoring peace to their country, will continue
to do everything they can to encourage the international
community to continue to help them. Aid can never be
provided indefinitely. It is therefore also necessary that
Liberians of good will seize the opportunity offered to them
to close what is, unfortunately, one of the most dismal
pages of their national history.

