Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): First, I
wish to thank you, Sir, on behalf of my delegation for
organizing this public meeting on Afghanistan. I would
also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
for their important briefings.

The holding of the present meeting, essentially
devoted to the problem of combating poppy cultivation,
is ample evidence of the Council's determination to
make a greater contribution to the re-establishment of
security, which is necessary for peace and stability in
Afghanistan. While, at the political level, notable
progress has been made in the framework of the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement, insecurity
remains the main obstacle to the creation of a State of
rule of law. It must be recognized that Afghanistan now
finds itself at a crossroads. The constitutional process
initiated a few months ago is supposed to lead to
transparent and credible elections and to the
establishment of a multi-ethnic and broadly
representative Government. It should also lead to the
establishment of viable institutions charged with
ensuring the primacy of law, respect for fundamental
freedoms and the promotion of gender equality.

My delegation notes that illicit drugs are one of
the major sources of financing for criminal activities
and international terrorism. It has also been established
that drug abuse, the result of a deeper malaise, has
become a genuine social problem.

In Afghanistan, illicit poppy cultivation and the
production and trafficking of drugs are, more than ever,
a major concern. To deal with this issue, the Afghan
Transitional Administration, led by President Hamid
Karzai, has set the objective, among others, of
eradicating poppy cultivation. In that context, the
Government has taken the appropriate regulatory
measures to give that effort the necessary efficacy.

We believe that this is a long-term fight requiring
binding provisions, public awareness and information
campaigns and alternative options. In other words, the
Afghan authorities must rigorously implement the
measures taken and must educate the population about
the dangers of opium. The international community
must assist the carrying-out of quick-impact
development projects, particularly those for finding
alternative crops able to generate substantial revenues
for farmers.

My delegation remains convinced that the
simultaneous implementation of the provisions made
will contribute decisively to the eradication of this
scourge, whose negative impact on the security of
Afghanistan is clear.

In order for security - that key sector - to
become a tangible reality in the country, it is up to all
of us, in cooperation with the Afghan authorities, to
strengthen the foundations of the political process
resulting from the Bonn Agreement by providing
greater support for the reforms undertaken.

In fact, the Bonn Agreement has entered the
crucial phase of consolidating the peace process and
the recovery of the country, which greatly needs the
political support and financial assistance of the
international community, combined with greater efforts
from Afghans themselves.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the celebration
on 26 June of the International Day against Drug
Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, under the slogan "Let's
talk about drugs". We hope that this day of public
awareness will provide an opportunity for the peoples
of the world to become more aware of the need to get
rid of this international scourge.

