Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is continuing its discussion of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict with a View to
creating a more effective and more inclusive vision to
be implemented by the international community in an
atmosphere of assiduous collective action and
commitment and in a manner corresponding to the
findings and recommendations of the High-level
Meeting to be held by the General Assembly in
September. That Meeting will seek to enhance all
United Nations activities in an integrated manner with
a view to achieving a real improvement and reform of
the Organization.

We must therefore work collectively on two
parallel fronts. First, we must make every effort to
resolve armed conflicts and to prevent their recurrence
in an integrated framework that includes elements of
preventive diplomacy, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, peacebuilding and integration efforts, and the
redeployment of resources to achieve stability and
development.

Secondly, we must protect civilians from any
harm that may befall them during or as a direct result
of armed conflict. Proceeding from our firm belief in
the strong link between this topic and international
humanitarian and human rights law, this year for the
first time Egypt sponsored a draft resolution, entitled
"Protection of human rights of civilians in armed
conflicts", at the sixty-first session of the Commission
on Human Rights, with the aim of depoliticizing
international humanitarian law and focusing on the
promotion of international mechanisms for the
protection of civilians' rights in armed conflict,
including the protection of peoples chafing under the
yoke of foreign occupation, in a framework that
guarantees the equal and scrupulous implementation by
States of their obligations under the Geneva
Conventions and international humanitarian law. It is
encouraging that the resolution commanded
unprecedented support, as reflected in the positive
votes of most States members of the Commission and
its sponsorship by approximately 100 States. Egypt has
also supported the Security Council's efforts in that
respect in recent years. It has also stressed the need to
harmonize the provisions of international humanitarian
law and the principles of the United Nations Charter.

We are disturbed, however, by the increase in
hotbeds of tension throughout the world. Rights
violations and crimes against civilians have all been on
the rise recently, leading to a growing number of
casualties and displaced persons, as well as to ongoing
acts of destruction and sabotage and the plundering of
natural wealth and cultural heritage, in contravention
of all legal and moral norms. We must therefore stress
the fact that the protection of civilians in armed
conflict should be based on the decisive commitment
of all parties and States to the provisions of
international humanitarian law, especially the Fourth
Geneva Convention. It should be also be based on the
observance of religious, cultural, ethnic and
demographic specificities and on the necessary
protection of civilians under brutal occupation. It
should take place in an atmosphere of full respect for
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
non-interference in internal affairs.

Despite such important developments as the
expanded scope of United Nations peacekeeping
operations to cover the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and securing the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to most of those in need, we must
acknowledge that the training and deployment of the
personnel of those operations remain inconsistent with
the many complex security and economic measures
that vary with each situation. United Nations
interventions therefore sometimes come too late to
meet the needs of civilians in certain areas in terms of
security and emergency humanitarian assistance. Hence
it is necessary to reconsider the manner in which the
United Nations, especially the Security Council,
addresses the question of the protection of civilians,
keeping it separate from political, economic and
security interests and bilateral relations.

There is no doubt that protecting civilians in
armed conflict requires that regional organizations play
an important role at all stages of the process -
especially on our continent, Africa, where the African
Union has set an example to be followed that can be
benefited from at the international level. The need to
protect civilians in armed conflict does not cease with
the end of military operations. Rather, an inclusive
concept of such protection involves post-conflict
peacebuilding, including the development, social and
humanitarian dimensions, and aspects relating to
rehabilitation and reconstruction.

The destruction of socio-economic infrastructures
caused by armed conflict puts the lives of civilians in
grave danger. Peace, in its political, economic and
security aspects, remains fragile if it is not backed by
comprehensive and focused development plans and
programmes. Security, development and human rights
all should be safeguarded at all stages of the process in
order to bring about security and stability for civilians
in conflict areas.

