Mr. Skoog (Sweden): First of all, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Ambassador
Cardi and Ambassador Vale de Almeida for their
engagement and briefings this afternoon.

We see the agreement on the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) as a milestone that represents
an important example of dispute resolution conflict
prevention. Its continued implementation benefits
international peace and security and stability in
the region.

There are encouraging developments and there
are issues of concern. We should be open about both.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l7/515), which shows that the implementation
of the JCPOA continues to be broadly in line with
expectations. That the procurement channel is working
according to plan is encouraging, as is Iran's general
compliance with its nuclear-related obligations - as
evidenced by reports of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. It is important that the Islamic Republic of Iran
continue to provisionally apply the additional protocol
to its Safeguards Agreement. In addition, we look
forward to Iran's early ratification of the additional
protocol. In spite of the general positive picture, I would
like to mention three areas that remain of concern.

First of all, we have previously expressed our
concern over ballistic missile test, which are inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015).

Secondly, the seizure of arms, apparently
originating in Iran, in contravention of the measures
in resolution 2231 (2015), is deeply disturbing. Unless
exempted, any transfer of arms to and from Iran
requires the authorization of the Council. We will
carefully future reports from the Secretary-General
relating to confiscated material as more information
becomes available.

Finally, like others, we reiterate our concern over
the continued contraventions of the travel ban. It is
important that Member States provide to the Secretary-
General all the information necessary to carry out the
reporting requirements set out in the resolution. We
call on the Government of Iran to formally respond
to allegations as identified in the Secretary-General's
report. The July 2016 agreement of the JCPOA
underscored the power of dialogue to make progress in
non-proliferation. However, reaping the full benefits of
the agreement will require the long-term commitment
of all sides. We echo the call of the Secretary-General
for all States to act in accordance with and in support
of the agreement and to avoid provocative rhetoric
or action. Mutual trust is essential for this historic
agreement to succeed.

