Mr. Danforth (United States of America): I will
now speak in my national capacity. The United States
remains strongly committed to supporting the United
Nations International Criminal Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and welcomes the
reports provided by both Tribunals. We must all work
together to ensure success of the Security Council-
endorsed completion strategies of both Tribunals to
successfully complete trials by 2008 and appeals by
2010.

Serbia and Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia must fill their legal obligations to
cooperate fully with the ICTY by apprehending all
fugitive indictees within their territories and
transferring them to The Hague. In this regard, we note
that the Republika Srpska has failed to render a single
fugitive indictee to the Tribunal, and the cooperation of
Serbia and Montenegro has deteriorated to a standstill
in the past twelve months.

The United States and others have made clear that
upholding international obligations to the ICTY is a
prerequisite for further integration into the European-
Atlantic community. Serbia and Montenegro's lack of
cooperation with the ICTY also undermines the
confidence of the international community that it is
willing and able to prosecute war crimes fairly and
effectively. Until Serbia meets its cooperation
obligations, we do not see domestic trials of ICTY
indictees in Serbia as a realistic option. We call on all
authorities in Serbia, especially the Prime Minister as
head of the Government, to act immediately to
apprehend and render to The Hague all fugitives hiding
in the country. We continue to support efforts to help
create the capacity for credible domestic trials of low-
and mid-level war crime cases throughout the region.
We note the significant work being done in Sarajevo in
this regard and urge other States to contribute to this
court, either through direct financial assistance or in-
kind contributions.

With regard to the ICTR, first we note and
commend the increased pace of trials under the
leadership of its President. We urge all States,
especially the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Republic of the Congo and Kenya, to fulfil their
international obligations to apprehend and transfer to
the Tribunal all persons indicted for war crimes by the
ICTR found within their countries. These fugitive
indictees continue to incite conflict in the Great Lake
region and must be actively pursued and apprehended,
as called for repeatedly by the Security Council.

The United States has completed the transfer of
all of its 2004 assessed contributions for the ICTY and
ICTR to the United Nations and is committed to
significant financial and diplomatic support to both
Tribunals.

Before resuming my function as President, I
would like to direct two questions to the President and
Prosecutor of the Rwanda Tribunal. I would appreciate
the President's assessment of Rwanda's capacity to try
lower-ranking defendants. I would also appreciate the
Prosecutor's assessment of Rwanda's cooperation with
his Office, particularly with regard to investigations of
alleged offences by the Rwandan People's Army.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I would like to proceed as follows. I propose that
we take a lO-minute break now, and when we resume
the panel will be given an opportunity to respond,
beginning with Judge Meron. We will then hear from
the representatives of the four countries that have
requested to participate.

The meeting was suspended at ] pm. and resumed
at 1.10pm.

