Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, let me
express our sincere thanks to China for organizing
today's debate on such a timely and important topic,
which is very relevant for building a safe, just and
prosperous future for all. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the briefers for setting the stage
for today's important debate.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

On 11 November, we will commemorate the end
of First World War. The horrors of that war and of the
Second World War still reverberate today. The lessons
we have drawn from them have become part of our
shared history and are at the basis of our common
endeavour to prevent global conflict at all costs.

I will focus my intervention on three issues:
multilateralism, United Nations reform and the
importance of upholding international principles and
rules.

Multilateralism is the only credible answer to
the challenges we face today, such as climate change,
migration, transnational crime and terrorism. We cannot
address those challenges unilaterally or bilaterally; we
need to tackle them together by using the international
organizations and forums we created for that purpose
and by finding common ground. However, we are
witnessing a trend, including in the Security Council,
where the multilateral approach is being challenged
and undermined. It is a worrisome trend. When the
multilateral system becomes paralysed, especially in
the context of international peace and security, it is
innocent people who suffer.

Too often, the Security Council fails to act.
Examples of such failure can be found in Syria, Yemen
and Myanmar. In the absence of action, ordinary
citizens become Victims, and impunity reigns.

The situation in Syria has been a stark reminder of a
crisis of respect for the hard-won gains in international
law - from the Geneva Conventions to the Charter
of the United Nations and to the Chemical Weapons
Convention. All of those norms have been trampled
upon in Syria. In such a case, the primary responsibility
rests with the Security Council. In the event of mass
atrocities, a Council paralysed by the use of the veto
will lead to its being circumvented, thereby weakening
its position and undermining the multilateral order. It
is for that reason that we support the French-Mexican
initiative. It is our obligation as States Members of the
United Nations to make sure the multilateral system
works, which brings me to my second point: United
Nations reform.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General to reform the
United Nations in order to make the Organization fit
to meet the challenges of today's rapidly changing
world throughout the three pillars of the United
Nations - peace and security, development and human
rights. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is an important guide in that regard.

The overall aim is to strengthen the role of the
United Nations where possible and to continuously
renew our commitment to the United Nations Charter,
in particular in the Security Council. In order to deal
effectively with peace and security challenges, all
members should shoulder their responsibilities. We are
convinced that the world stands to gain from a Security
Council that is more agile and effective in its operations
and whose composition is a better reflection of today's
world.

On peacekeeping reform, we strongly support the
Secretary-General's initiatives to make the United
Nations delivery on the ground more effective and
efficient, such as through the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, with its emphasis on performance.
Constructive multilateralism can also entail supporting
new initiatives and forms of cooperation, for example, by
working more closely with such regional organizations
as the European Union and the African Union. Building
on their resources, expertise and legitimacy, the United
Nations can strengthen its role in dealing with crises
throughout the conflict cycle, from prevention before
conflict to sustaining peace after conflict.

I come now to my third point, namely, upholding
international principles and rules. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands has always championed, and will
continue to champion, the rules-based international
order and multilateral cooperation, especially on
security matters and other issues of shared concern.
Upholding the rule of law, ensuring accountability,
promoting and protecting international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, including the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights that binds us
all, are vital to the legitimacy of the United Nations
and multilateralism. There can be no lasting peace
without justice. Multilateral cooperation on peace and
security requires cooperation across the board in the
whole United Nations, including on human rights and
the Human Rights Council, on fighting poverty and
climate change and on international law and courts.

I would like to end by referring to a line from the
statement made by my Prime Minister, Mr. Mark Rutte,
at the general debate of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly: we should believe in the power of
principle, not the principle of power (see A/73/PV.9).

