Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome France's initiative in convening
today's meeting. We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for the assessments he provided. Mr. Guterres
also shared critical information with us. We have paid
particular attention to the statements made by the
Ministers representing Syria's neighbouring countries.

The trends in the developing humanitarian situation
in Syria cannot but arouse deep concern. There is
an increase in the number of civilian victims and an
increase in refugees, who now number more than
200,000. The number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) has surpassed 1 million, while 2.5 million
Syrians require assistance. The situation is even more
dramatic given that there are more than 1.5 million
refugees from other countries in Syria. The majority of
the Syrian population has experienced the consequences
of the chaos.

Both belligerent parties bear responsibility for the
plight of common citizens. We call upon the Syrian
leadership and leaders of the opposition, including the
armed opposition, to prevent a further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation.

We note the efforts of the Government of Syria
aimed at providing assistance to those suffering.
It is important that a plan has been agreed upon
for a humanitarian response. In accordance
with it, international humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations working with local
authorities and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent are
carrying out humanitarian activities in Syria. The bulk
of humanitarian assistance today is going to the refugee
camps in Syria's neighbouring countries, and they truly
need that assistance. However, the population living
within Syrian territory clearly lacks access to the
humanitarian assistance that is being provided through
various channels. There is an urgent need to earmark
additional resources to assist all affected Syrians,
including IDPs.

Russia is actively providing Syria with
humanitarian assistance, both bilaterally and through
international organizations. We have provided targeted
donor contributions in the millions of dollars to the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the World
Food Programme and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), and direct humanitarian
assistance has also been delivered.

We welcome the activities of the international
entities, above all OCHA, in providing international
humanitarian assistance to suffering Syrians.
Humanitarian organizations and agencies must have
access to the sites in neighbouring countries where
there are Syrian refugees, in order to properly assess
the situation and provide appropriate assistance. We
underscore the importance of implementing the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
regional plan to assist refugees.

The humanitarian situation in Syria has been
negatively impacted by unilateral economic sanctions
and restrictions imposed by individual countries and
regional associations. We fundamentally oppose such
practices. The sanctions imposed in circumvention of
the Security Council have nothing in common with
genuine efforts to assist in settling the Syrian crisis.
They simply complicate the life of common citizens
and deny them the opportunity to meet their basic needs
and fully enjoy basic human rights. That is not only our
conclusion, but also the conclusion of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. We call upon the nations that have imposed
sanctions against Syria to immediately lift them.

We cannot accept the efforts of individual States
to use pseudo-humanitarian arguments to justify their
financial, material, technical or logistical support to
illegal armed groups. When implementing humanitarian
activities, it is critical to continue to fully comply with
the principles of neutrality and impartiality. Allow me
to put this directly: not all of the ideas voiced here are
in keeping with those criteria. In general, humanitarian
assistance must be carried out strictly within the
framework of international law.

It is quite clear that the primary cause ofthe plight of
the Syrian people is the ongoing hostilities. Therefore,
the core challenge, at this point in time, is the ceasefire.
All belligerents must halt their activities and cease all
armed confrontation and move their conflict into the
political realm. Any other approach will lead only to
a worsening of the crisis, including the humanitarian
cr1s1s.

Today, not only has there been no decline in the
level of violence in Syria but it has continued to worsen.
We regret that, owing to the positions of a number of
Security Council members, we were unable to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, which played a certain
deterrent role in the crisis.

The Office ofthe Joint Special Envoy in Damascus,
which is being established, must quickly begin its
active work on the ground, which we hope will help
the Syrians to end the vicious cycle of violence. One of
the near-term practical jobs of the Office, as we see it,
is to assist in carrying out a careful, impartial inquiry
into all of the circumstances related to the latest tragic
events and acts of violence against civilians.

The international community cannot remain aloof
to the attempts of extremist elements and terrorists to
further destabilize the situation in Syria, in particular
the repressive acts against ethnic and religious
minorities.

We anticipate that today's meeting will facilitate
a strengthening of the common denominator in our
positions, in the interest of coordinated leverage on
the conflicting parties so as to encourage them to
immediately end the bloodshed and make it possible
to address the pressing humanitarian problems of
the Syrian people, particularly since we already have
a consensus basis in that context in the form of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, Mr. Annan's
plan and the final communique of the Action Group for
Syria.

That is the basis for Russia's decision to continue
its persistent efforts in dealing with the Syrian
Government and with the opposition groups. We call
upon other responsible members of the international
community to do the same.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Brahimi
as Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States on Syria and will provide him
with assistance towards a political settlement in Syria
along with our firm, principled support.

