Mr. Dausfl Cespedes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to say that my delegation is glad to
see you, Sir, presiding over the meetings of the
Security Council for the month of October. We also
congratulate Ambassador Ouane of Mali on the skill he
displayed in conducting the Council's work in
September.

Once again humankind is witnessing how the
forces opposed to a peaceful, just and lasting solution
in the Middle East try to replace peace and negotiation
with violence and aggression.

Once again the world has been astounded to see
how the actions of the Israeli forces have taken
precious lives among the Palestinian civilian
population. We watch with great frustration the cruel
repression unleashed with the consent of the
Government of Israel and the indiscriminate use of
heavy weaponry and helicopter gunships against the
defenceless civilian population and Palestinian
facilities. We convey our heartfelt condolences to the
families of the deceased.

This brutal provocation takes place at a time
when negotiations between the Israeli Government and
the Palestinian National Authority seemed to be
resuming in pursuit of the longed for and necessary
peace, and when through a number of peace initiatives
the utmost was being done to get the negotiating
process back on track.

Cuba vigorously condemns the provocations and
barbaric acts committed against the Palestinian people.
We demand an immediate end to the repression and
acts of force, since their continuation would lead only
to an extremely dangerous escalation of violence in the
already very sensitive situation prevailing in Palestine,
with unforeseeable regional and global repercussions.

The Security Council, through 25 different
resolutions adopted over all these years, has confirmed
its recognition of the applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention to the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem. The Israeli actions have once
again breached those resolutions and many others
adopted by the General Assembly and the Council
itself. International law, the United Nations Charter and
international humanitarian law have been repeatedly
trampled upon.

The international community would have
expected more determined and effective action by the
Security Council. When the long list of speakers is
finished, this meeting will leave many of those present
feeling unsatisfied.

Once again events have clearly proved that the
Security Council fails to fulfil its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security whenever
there is interference from the hegemonic and domestic
policy interests of one permanent member that
arbitrarily and irresponsibly uses its powers and
prerogatives.

Cuba reaffirms its full and unswerving solidarity
with the Palestinian people in its just struggle to
establish an independent and sovereign State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, and to have all Arab occupied
territories returned. We call upon the international
community to strongly condemn the crimes and the
delaying tactics used by Israel during all these years in
order to impose its arrogant annexationist policy, which
violates the most elementary norms of coexistence and
international law.

My delegation welcomes with interest and hope
the meetings in Paris and Cairo, but reiterates that a
just and lasting solution will not be found for the
Middle East conflict unless it is based on strict
compliance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and particularly Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

If today we are unable to take effective actions
that could reopen the path to peace and impede the
return of provocation and violence of those sectors in
Israel that are opposed to a peaceful solution to the
conflict, we will only be paving the way for a new
crisis.

The people of Palestine need, today more than
ever, the support of the international community, and
Cuba will not fail them.

