Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my country, Peru, which has also suffered
from terrorism, we would like to express our solidarity
with and support for the countries that have been
victims of terrorist attacks.

(spoke in English)

I now have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala,
the United States, Uruguay and my country, Peru.

I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
for having convened this debate to discuss the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2017/223) and its observations and recommendations
following the strategic assessment mission to determine
the future presence and role of the United Nations
in Haiti.

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and wishes to thank her for

her comprehensive briefing and for the role that she has
been playing to support the political process in Haiti
and the professionalization of the police and in the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment.

The Group of Friends acknowledges the important
role that MINUSTAH has played in ensuring stability
and security in Haiti, expresses its deep appreciation
and gratitude to the personnel of MINUSTAH and to
all Member States which have contributed to it and pays
tribute to those who have been injured or killed in the
line of duty.

The strengthening of the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive
to democratic stability, and improving socioeconomic
conditions are the key elements needed to achieve
greater security, stability and prosperity in Haiti. In
that regard, the Group of Friends recognizes the major
milestone towards stabilization that was achieved with
the peaceful completion of the electoral process and
the return to constitutional order on 7 February 2017.
It commends the Haitian authorities, in particular
the Haitian Provisional Electoral Council and the
Haitian National Police (HNP), for their efforts
towards ensuring that the elections were conducted in
a credible and inclusive manner and held in a largely
peaceful environment.

The Group of Friends also congratulates the new
President of the Republic of Haiti, Mr. Jovenel Moise,
and welcomes the new Government led by Prime
Minister Jack Guy Lafontant, and sends its wishes for
success in this new stage.

The Group of Friends emphasizes the importance
of national ownership, inclusivity and the role that civil
society can play to advance national peacebuilding
processes, and reiterates the vitality of the commitment
by the Government of Haiti to strengthen the rule
of law and make further progress in the justice and
security sectors.

The Group of Friends welcomes the ongoing
strengthening, professionalization and reform of the
HNP, while noting the need for continued international
support for the Haitian police, and affirms the
importance of the HNP's strategic plan for the period
2017-2021, developed on the basis of a joint HNP-
United Nations capacity and needs assessment.

The Group of Friends stresses that no genuine
stability, sustaining peace or sustainable development
can take place in Haiti without strengthening
democratic institutions and democratic processes. In
that context, the Group emphasizes the importance of
promoting the rule of law through the strengthening
of Haitian institutions, and further reaffirms the
responsibility of MINUSTAH for supporting the
Haitian State by promoting improved governance
structures, transparency, the independence of the
judiciary, and the promotion and protection of human
rights, in accordance with its mandate.

In that regard, the Group of Friends encourages
the Government of Haiti to make progress in the field
of justice and human rights. The Group of Friends
recognizes that strengthening national human rights
institutions and respect for human rights, including the
rights of women and children, respect for due process
and combating criminality, sexual and gender-based
violence, putting an end to impunity and prolonged
pretrial detention, and ensuring accountability are
essential to ensuring the rule of law and security in
Haiti, including access to justice. The Group of Friends
reaffirms its solidarity with, and commitment to, the
people and the Government of Haiti in their pursuit
of stability, reconstruction, recovery, socioeconomic
development and democratic consolidation.

The Group of Friends welcomes General Assembly
resolution 71/161, entitled "The new United Nations
approach to cholera in Haiti," which intends to renew
the Organization's efforts aimed at eliminating the
transmission of cholera and at addressing the suffering
of its victims. The Group of Friends notes that the
implementation of that new approach will fall under
the responsibility of the United Nations country team
under the coordination of a deputy representative of
the Secretary-General, a humanitarian coordinator
or a resident coordinator. The Group of Friends notes
that, while important progress has been made, Haiti
continues to face significant humanitarian challenges,
especially in the aftermath of Hurricane Matthew.

Furthermore, the Group of Friends affirms that
progress in the reconstruction of Haiti and in its
socioeconomic development - including through
effective, coordinated, appropriate international
development assistance, given the increased Haitian
institutionalcapacitytobenefitfromsuchassistance-is
crucial to achieving sustaining peace and stability. The
Group of Friends reiterates the need for security to be
accompanied by sustainable development in its social,
economic and environmental dimensions, efforts in
which the Government of Haiti plays a leading role,
with the assistance of the United Nations country team.

The Group of Friends welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General of 16 March 2017 (S/2017/223),
which includes observations and recommendations
by the strategic assessment mission, as requested by
the Security Council in resolution 2313 (2016). It also
welcomes the Secretary-General's recommendation that
a new United Nations mission be established in Haiti
following the termination ofMINUSTAH by 15 October,
in order to continue to assist the Government of Haiti
in consolidating gains by reinforcing Government
institutions and strengthening the national capacity for
the rule of law, police development and human rights.

The Group of Friends recognizes the important
contribution of MINUSTAH to the stabilization in Haiti
and that the moment has come to start a responsible
transition to a new phase of United Nations activities
in the country, focused on strengthening the rule oflaw
institutions in Haiti, prioritizing support and capacity-
building for the HNP, and engaging in human rights
monitoring and reporting, as set out in paragraph 62 of
the Secretary-General's report.
The Group of Friends looks forward to a gradual
and responsible transition moving forward in the new
peacekeeping mission.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
