Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
France has followed with interest the latest developments
in the situation in Liberia. It is pleased at the conclusion
of the Accra Agreement, which at long last provides a
glimmer of hope for peace for Liberia. France pays
tribute to the Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for his efforts to
reconcile the factions. It hopes that the commitments
undertaken by all the Liberian parties will this time be
respected. It deeply regrets that the Accra talks on the
setting up of the Council of State have failed, and it calls
upon the parties to set up without delay this organ that is
so essential for the transition.

My delegation voted in favour of this resolution,
which extends the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) for three months,
to enable the parties to provide concrete proof of their

 

good will and spirit of responsibility. It is once again being
made clear that the international community and the United
Nations cannot take the place of the Liberians; they alone
are responsible for their country's fate. The French
Government urges the Liberian factions to respect the
cease-fire concluded on 28 December last and calls for
strict implementation of the arms embargo. My Government
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation for the
holding of a summit of the Heads of State of the region to
harmonize their policies towards Liberia and promote the
implementation of the Accra Agreement. The continuation
of the conflict in Liberia is truly a threat to the stability of
the region.

The humanitarian situation, which, as the Secretary-
General stresses, has left the population in extreme distress,
is of deep concern to my country. France is providing
humanitarian assistance, particularly within the framework
of the European Union. The United Nations and the
non-governmental organizations are doing all they can to
come to the aid of the Civilian population. It is absolutely
shocking that material and other supplies intended to assist
people are plundered and that the life and freedom of
movement of the personnel of these organizations are
threatened. My delegation therefore calls upon the parties
to respect their commitments and to ensure that the military
commanders in the field allow assistance to reach its
destination.

At the end of the three-month period, which will serve
as a test of the good will of the Liberian factions, my
country will be ready to consider possible recommendations
by the Secretary-General for augmenting UNOMIL's
resources and functions.

