Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Security Council mission for the report on their
recent visit to Timor-Leste (S/2007/711). New Zealand
welcomes the mission's visit as an important
opportunity for the Council to see first-hand the
situation in Timor-Leste, a few months after the
formation of the new Government and two months
before a decision is required on the future mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT).

New Zealand acknowledges that there have
indeed been encouraging signs of progress in Timor-
Leste this past year. Presidential and parliamentary
elections have been held successfully, and the new
Government has some important accomplishments to
mark its first 100 days in office, such as the adoption
of a new Government programme and the approval of
an interim budget.

We recognize the complexity of the challenges
that the new Government of Timor-Leste is facing, and
we would like to reiterate our continuing support for its
efforts towards solving these. We would like to take
this opportunity to commend the opposition's active
participation in parliament as an essential factor in the
functioning of a democratic system.

New Zealand is pleased to see that the security
situation is gradually improving. However, as noted in
the mission's report, the root causes of last year's crisis
have not been fully addressed. Underlying political
tensions continue to challenge Timor-Leste's young
and fragile institutions, and a security downturn could
easily see Timor's progress set back. Many problems
remain, not least the large number of people who still
live in internally displaced persons camps throughout
Dili.

New Zealand believes that ongoing involvement
by the international community will be needed in order
to support the new Government in working towards
resolving the many issues it faces. We support a strong,
long-term United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. In
this sense, the Security Council visit was very
important and timely, and we hope it will serve to
reaffirm the international community's commitment to
supporting Timor-Leste.

The review of UNMIT's mandate in February
next year will be very important. Close attention will
need to be paid to the skill-sets and focus of the police
element within that mission. While New Zealand
believes that United Nations Police (UNPOL) numbers
should be maintained at the current level, attention
should be paid to UNPOL's make-up to ensure that it
has the required capability to fulfil its two primary
roles: first, to provide security, and, secondly, to
support the durable reform and rebuilding of the
National Police Force of Timor-Leste through capacity-
building and training in core police competencies. Both
of those targets are equally important to future stability
in Timor-Leste.

New Zealand welcomes the call by the head of
the Security Council mission, Ambassador Dumisani
Kumalo, for the role of UNPOL to be reviewed to
ensure maximum results. New Zealand would prefer
such a review to be done prior to discussions on
UNMIT's mandate in February, as it would be helpful
in assessing the progress UNPOL has made thus far,
and in ensuring that it has the direction, skills-sets and
focus that it needs to carry out its roles in the year
ahead.

New Zealand continues to see the need for
UNMIT to support the Government of Timor-Leste in
reforming and strengthening the justice and security
sectors. Security sector reform is an integral part of
strengthening Timor-Leste's State and Government
institutions, and it is essential to ensuring that Timor-
Leste's security needs can be met in the future.

The report of the Security Council mission
highlighted many of the issues that still need to be
addressed, such as improving cooperation between
security institutions, strengthening the legal
framework, increasing operational capabilities and
enhancing civilian oversight. We urge the Timorese
Government and UNMIT to work together on
comprehensively reviewing and reforming all aspects
of the Timorese security sector, encompassing the
Defence Force, the Ministry of Defence, the Police
Force and the Ministry of the Interior.

New Zealand remains committed to working with
the international community in assisting Timor-Leste in
the long term. We continue to contribute defence and
police personnel to the International Stabilisation Force
(ISF) and to UNPOL, and we commend the positive
cooperation between the two. New Zealand appreciates
the importance of maintaining stability in Timor-Leste
in order to allow reconciliation and State-building to
take place, and we expect the ISF to remain in Timor-
Leste for the time being.

In conclusion, New Zealand would like to thank
the Security Council and UNMIT for their ongoing
efforts in Timor-Leste. The Security Council's interest
is a welcome demonstration that the international
community remains committed to supporting and
assisting Timor-Leste.

