Mr. Yankey (Ghana): We very much appreciate
the briefing we have just received from Under-
Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari on the situation in
the Middle East. We share the common concern
expressed about the escalating violence and the high
number of civilian casualties, especially on the
Palestinian side. But we are no less saddened by the
assassination of the Lebanese Minister.
In the absence of an active peace process to
address the grievances and interests of all the parties
involved in the Middle East conflict, we are likely to
witness more ugly incidents - such as the brutal
assassination of the Lebanese minister and, before that,
the tragic incidents in Beit Hanoun and those that took
place during the war in Lebanon - as well as the
intolerable deprivation and poor humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories. We agree with
the Under-Secretary-General that the status quo is
futile and unacceptable. We therefore welcome the
proposed initiative by France, Italy and Spain which
we have just heard. We hope it will yield some positive
results.

We have also heard the repeated denunciation of
both the incessant indiscriminate firing of numerous
Qassam rockets into Israel by Palestinian militants and
the devastating consequences of Israeli reprisals. It is
necessary to emphasize that those actions stem from
decades of power struggle involving the right to self-
determination and independence of both the peoples of
Israel and Palestine. Ghana is disappointed that the
various peace initiatives have brought the parties no
closer to a settlement. Although the Israelis have
realized their own State, they must confront various
security threats. For the Palestinians, the dream of an
independent State remains a distant one that, in fact,
risks being compromised permanently, given the
evolving situation on the ground. Ghana believes that
the way to lasting peace is a just and negotiated
settlement that gives the two parties meaningful space
to realize their national aspirations.

We also recognize that Lebanon, Syria, Iran and
Iraq are essential factors in the equation for peace in
the Middle East. But a genuine commitment to peace
requires sustained dialogue among all the parties,
based on respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all the States in the region.

Today, it is not only the integrity of the Security
Council that has been called into question for failing to
implement its own resolutions. We also expect the
Quartet to deliver on its promise to implement the road
map for peace in the Middle East. That is the only way
to assure the Palestinians that the international
community is committed to helping them realize their
aspirations for national independence. At the same
time, the security of Israel must be recognized as a
constant in the equation for peace, and the necessary
guarantees given so that the Israelis no longer feel

singled out for condemnation by the international
community whenever they take steps to defend their
national security.

