Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: As in the past, I am
grateful for this opportunity to give the Council clarity
on the activities undertaken by my Office and on the
activities planned.

This is an historic opportunity. As I brief the
Security Council today in the Council Chamber, the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court is in session in New York,
and Security Council members are in Africa. They have
just met with the Government of the Sudan in
Khartoum.
This is an historic opportunity. Ten years ago,
countries from all over the world adopted the Rome
Statute creating the International Criminal Court (ICC).
They sent a new and powerful message: there can be
no impunity for perpetrators of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.

But three years ago, the Security Council referred
the Darfur situation to the Court and thus sent an even
more concrete message: there can be no impunity for
perpetrators of massive atrocities in Darfur.

Today we have an historic opportunity to confirm
those messages, to move from principles to action.

Massive crimes are still being committed in
Darfur. Girls are still being raped. Children die as their
schools are bombed. The entire Darfur region is a
crime scene. Over the last five years, despite promises
and denials, millions of civilians have been targeted by
officials who vowed to protect them. Impunity reigns.

Today we have an historic opportunity to
confront those massive crimes.

My Office received a mandate from the Council.
This mandate is justice. I will fulfil my mandate. I have
collected compelling evidence. The evidence will
identify those most responsible for crimes against
civilians in Darfur, in particular the Fur, Masalit and
Zaghawa communities. I inform the Council that I will
present a second case to the Judges of the International
Criminal Court in July.

My Office has a duty not to intervene when
national authorities are conducting national
proceedings. That is the principle of complementarity.
The Sudan claimed that it would investigate and
prosecute perpetrators of crimes in Darfur. Various
courts and investigative mechanisms were created.
However, the Office has found no trace of Sudanese
proceedings in relation to crimes in Darfur during the
last three years. The Government itself has clarified
that there were none.

In April 2007, the Judges of the International
Criminal Court issued arrest warrants against Ahmad
Harun, former Minister of State for the Interior, and Ali
Kushayb, a militia/Janjaweed leader, for crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

It was an opportunity for the Sudan to break the
criminal system unveiled by the Court, to surrender the
08-36743
indictees, to start proceedings against lesser
perpetrators. This opportunity was lost.

The Sudan, a State Member of the United
Nations, has the legal obligation and the ability to
arrest and surrender Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb. I
report today that the Government of the Sudan is not
cooperating with the Court. There has been no
improvement since December.

The Government of the Sudan is not complying
with resolution 1593 (2005). The Government of the
Sudan does not recognize the jurisdiction of the Court,
a jurisdiction that the Security Council granted. As of
today, and even to Council members in Khartoum,
Sudanese officials insist that "the ICC has no
jurisdiction over Darfur".

Impunity is not an abstract concept. Ahmad
Harun is attacking the victims in the camps today. As
Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs, he is
hindering humanitarian aid. As a member of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) oversight committee, he is affecting
the deployment and safety of peacekeepers. As a
member of the National Congress Party-Sudan
People's Liberation Movement Committee, he was sent
to Abyei to manage the conflict. Abyei was burned
down, and 50,000 citizens were displaced.

The Sudanese Government accepted UNAMID
peacekeepers and aid workers in Darfur. The same
Government is promoting Ahmad Harun. The Sudanese
Government tolerates the firefighters and promotes the
arsonists at the same time. The international
community cannot ignore the arsonists; if they remain,
there will never be enough firefighters.

The Security Council has the power to ensure the
cooperation of the Sudan. The issue of arrests has to be
central in any conversation with the Sudan. It is the
first step. The Council must make publicly clear that
the two fugitive indictees and those who protect them
will not benefit from any lenience or any support from
the international community.

In December, I informed the Council that my
Office was opening two new investigations. In our
second investigation, we collected evidence showing a
pattern of attacks by Sudanese officials against
civilians, in particular against those 2.5 million people
forcibly displaced into camps. In our third
08-36743
investigation, we focused on the Haskanita attack,
attributed to rebels. Let me give you further details.

In Darfur, the evidence shows an organized
campaign by Sudanese officials to attack civilians,
with the objective of physically and mentally
destroying entire communities. Over a period of five
years, they have been relentlessly attacked throughout
Darfur: attacked in their villages, attacked in the
camps, their land usurped. The first phase of attacks in
2003 to 2004 affected 4 million people. Since 2005,
villages are still being attacked.

What is the difference between those two phases?
A simple one: there are fewer villages left to burn and
loot, fewer civilians to terrorize and kill. But the tactics
remain the same: the Sudanese army, in coordination
with the air force and militia Janjaweed, attacks
civilians. In 2008 alone, it has displaced more than
100,000 civilians from the villages ofAbu Suruj, Sirba,
Seleia, Aro Sharow, Kandare, Kurlongo and Sheged
Karo. Schools, markets and water installations have
been hit. Homes have been burned. Such attacks are
sufficient to demonstrate to the 2.5 million people
displaced their total vulnerability. Such attacks are
calculated to drive entire groups to inhospitable areas,
where they die immediately, or into camps, where they
die slowly.

In the camps, crimes and insecurity are
organized. Far from being disarmed, the militia
Janjaweed are integrated into the Sudanese security
apparatus and stationed in the vicinity of camps. Rapes
of women are systematic. The health consequences and
the perceived shame of rape are, in effect, destroying
physically and biologically the communities.
Destitution is organized. Surveys - when Sudanese
officials agree to their release - indicate that
malnutrition rates exceed emergency thresholds,
especially for children under five. Community leaders
and teachers are the first to be targeted during attacks.
This is a policy to ensure that all links binding
communities together are torn.

Usurpation of land is systematic. Sudanese
officials are not facilitating the return of displaced
people. Sudanese officials are facilitating the
settlement of groups affiliated with militia Janjaweed
on Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa land. The census is
crystallizing the situation, potentially creating a new
demography. Displaced persons are concerned that new
occupants could gain rights to the land, and are
3
resisting the census. In Kalma, Karandj and Abozr
camps, violence has been used to force the population
to accept the census. Combined with the impunity of
perpetrators and the official denial of the crimes, the
resulting mental harm to victims is devastating. The
groups disintegrate.

Sudanese officials are protecting the criminals
and not the victims. Denial of crimes, cover-ups and
attempts to shift responsibility have been another
characteristic of the criminal plan in Darfur. We have
seen it before. The Nazi regime invoked its national
sovereignty to attack its own population, and then
crossed borders to attack people in other countries. In
my own country, Argentina, the military dictatorship
had a well-documented strategy to disguise the
criminal system of disappearances. They denied the
crimes, they minimized their crimes, they denied the
involvement of members of the Government in the
crimes, and finally they proposed to forget the crimes
and focus on political solutions. Remember also
Karadzic's Directive 7, instructing his army to create a
situation of total insecurity with no hope of survival for
the people of Srebrenica, while making sure to avoid
international outcry. The main instruction was to
discreetly reduce support to the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR).

There is no end to the imagination employed in
such cover-ups. In my written report I have provided
statements of Sudanese officials to the effect that the
situation in Darfur is stable, that the provision of aid
and the deployment of peacekeepers is proceeding
smoothly, that only 10,000 people have died since the
beginning of the conflict, that all attacks find their
origin in rebel acts or even mistakes by UNAMID and
that political negotiations will solve all problems. The
evidence shows a different picture.

The evidence shows that the commission of such
crimes on such a scale, over a period of five years and
throughout Darfur, has required the sustained
mobilization of the entire Sudanese State apparatus: the
coordination of the military, security and intelligence
services, the integration of the Janjaweed militia, the
participation of all ministries, the contribution of the
diplomatic and public information bureaucracies and
the control of the judiciary.

Let me now address our third investigation: into
the crimes committed against peacekeepers and aid
workers, those who came to help Darfuris. The list of
attacks is long. On 29 May in Al Fashir, the memorial
for the 61 African Union (AU) peacekeepers who lost
their lives in Darfur was unveiled. My Office is
determined to bring those responsible to justice. The
evidence is not yet sufficient to go to the judges, but
we have information that the October 2007 killing of
10 African peacekeepers in Haskanita was committed
by two rebel splinter factions. That requires
corroboration. Requests for additional information
were sent to the AU and the United Nations, as well as
to individual States and others. Such requests are
confidential, but allow me to request publicly that all
actors respond as early as possible. The 23 May attack
on Nigerian peacekeepers and the killing of a Ugandan
peacekeeper make it all the more urgent to ensure
accountability. Increased attacks targeting aid
personnel and peacekeepers could lead us to extend the
scope of the third investigation.

I am concerned as well about allegations of the
recruitment of child soldiers. Child recruitment is a
crime that can engulf entire generations in conflict. The
first trial of the International Criminal Court will start
this month, and it is precisely about child soldiers.

Let me now clarify for the Council the next
judicial steps. I will proceed to the judges in July and
present my evidence on who are those most responsible
for the crimes described. It will be a public application.
The decision will rest with the judges. In previous
cases, the judges have taken from one to three months
to decide on the merits of the evidence.

Before I conclude, let me address the issue of
international cooperation. I want to thank all those who
have responded to our requests for information -
including on tracing the indictees - and all those who
have publicly or in bilateral meetings with the
Sudanese explained the importance of enforcing the
warrants. Those States have helped the victims, the
Court, the Council and the Sudan.

I am grateful for AU Chairperson Konare's
efforts, and I look forward to working with his
successor, Jean Ping. Deputy Prosecutor Bensouda has
been invited to Sharm el-Sheikh. I have met, and will
again meet with, the Foreign Minister of Tanzania, who
is a steadfast supporter and the current President of the
African Union.

I would like to underline the efforts of the
Secretary-General to address with President Al-Bashir
the obligation to execute the arrest warrants. Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, in working for a comprehensive
solution in Darfur and the Sudan, has consistently
shown his vision and conviction that respect for the
lives of Sudanese citizens is at the centre of any such
solution.

On 16 June, I will address the General Affairs and
External Relations Council of the European Union. The
Slovenian presidency and the European Parliament
have been outstanding in putting impunity at the
forefront of the European Union's agenda.

I have also met with the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, as well as with many of its
member States. They have played a key role as friends
and neighbours of the Sudan and as supporters of
international law and justice for all the citizens of the
world. They provide aid to the victims, they provide
resources to the peacekeepers, and they have lost
soldiers. I confirmed to them that I will fulfil my
mandate independently and impartially. Their respect is
crucial to my Office.

Security Council members and all countries with
strong ties with the Sudan can do more to bring justice
to the Darfuris and the Sudanese people.

Let me conclude. A rebellion is going on in the
Sudan. Under international law, a Government has the
right and the responsibility to maintain control of its
territory. There is no doubt about that. But there is no
military justification for bombing schools, and no legal
excuse for raping women. Those crimes have been
carefully prepared and efficiently implemented. They
are not mistakes. They are not inter-tribal clashes. They
are not cases of collateral damage. They are, quite
simply, criminal acts against civilians - unarmed
civilians. Citizens from the Sudan are being
deliberately attacked by Sudanese officials. In the
words of Harun, the people of Darfur are the enemy.
Their own State is attacking them. If the international
community does not protect the Darfuris, they will be
eliminated.

It takes a lot to commit massive crimes. It takes
planning and organization. It takes commanders and
many executioners. But mostly, it requires that the rest
of the world look away and do nothing. The Council,
when it requested my Office to intervene in Darfur,
acted in a decisive way, thinking of the Darfuris but
remembering also Rwanda and Srebrenica. At the
Council's request, my Office will present new evidence
exposing the facts and identifying those most

08-3674}

responsible. Based on those facts, I ask the Security
Council to send a strong message to the Government of
the Sudan and to issue a presidential statement,
requesting that it stop the crimes; requesting that it
arrest Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb; requesting that
all parties assist the Court; and requesting, simply,
compliance with resolution 1593 (2005). A presidential
statement will send such a message.

Silence has never helped or protected victims.
Silence only helps the criminals.

