Mr. McNee (Canada): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate on Afghanistan.
Supporting the Afghan Government and its people in
forging a stable, peaceful future remains a top priority
for my Government and for Canadians.

We extend our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his candid and insightful report on the
situation in Afghanistan. His report describes a new
future that is taking root, as the Afghan Government
reaches out to its provinces, parliament finds its voice,
women discover new opportunities and an army rises
to protect the country. The Secretary-General also
reminds us that the future we are pursuing will not be
realized if we do not act quickly and in unison to
confront a ruthless insurgency and to curb widespread
corruption.

Canada welcomes the recent appointment of
Mr. Kai Eide as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to Afghanistan. We are committed to
working with him to ensure that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is able
to fulfil its role as adviser, coordinator and leader of
the international civilian mission.

Canada also conveys its sincere appreciation to
the outgoing Special Representative, Mr. Tom Koenigs,
for his determined efforts over the course of the past
two years, and to the Acting Special Representative,
Mr. Asplund, for his steadfast direction of UNAMA
during these first months of the year.

In addition, we take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the dedicated efforts of the United Nations
and other civilian staff in Afghanistan, who carry out
their duties in challenging and often dangerous
conditions. Their courage and commitment to
Afghanistan have been essential to the progress
achieved thus far.

The United Nations remains the bedrock of the
international mission in Afghanistan. Now, more than
ever, Member States look to UNAMA for leadership
and guidance. Better aligning our efforts will require
bold decision-making and strong political leadership
by the new Special Representative. Canada looks to
him to build consensus - where it can be reached -
among international civilian actors. We will rely on
him to communicate clearly the international
community's intentions and concerns to the Afghan
Government, while being open to, hearing and
addressing their concerns.

It is Canada's hope that the Council will reflect
the need for UNAMA to renew relationships and
strengthen its offices. We hope that it will also help
UNAMA to prioritize the issues that will be central to
progress in 2008, while remaining focused on
improving the daily lives of Afghans.

Success in Afghanistan will require a degree of
coherence and cooperation that only the United
Nations can bring about. To achieve that, UNAMA
must be empowered to coordinate and represent those
international actors who are party to the Afghanistan
Compact. It must work closely with the International
Security Assistance Force to build security and to
ensure that a strengthened international military
commitment is actively enabling the efforts of a robust
and resilient civilian presence. In that regard, Canada
is very pleased that the Secretary-General will join
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Heads of
Government at the NATO/International Security
Assistance Force summit to reinforce coordination at
the very highest level.

UNAMA must continue to work closely with all
levels of the Afghan Government to be certain that
international engagement is facilitating the progressive
assumption of responsibility by Afghans. Those
relationships are central to the success of the Mission.

An enhanced role for the United Nations in
Afghanistan will require strengthened UNAMA offices
across the country. It will also require the
establishment of a permanent United Nations presence
in areas where its leadership and coordination are
needed. The heavy demands on the provincial and
regional offices of the United Nations will only
intensify as the reach of the Afghan Government
spreads further into the provinces and the international
civilian footprint continues to expand. In that context,
UNAMA must reinforce its offices. Vacant positions
must be staffed, while new ones continue to be created.

Setting priorities will be key. We call on UNAMA
to focus its cooperation with the Afghan Government
on several important issues in the coming months:
elections, subnational governance and reconciliation.
Progress on all those fronts is imperative. Indeed, the
authority of the Mission rests with the ongoing
legitimacy of the Afghan Government in the eyes of its
citizens. This is why we must support institutions such
as the Independent Directorate for Local Governance,
and it is why we must all support Afghan efforts to
seek reconciliation with those who are prepared to
choose peace.
(spoke in French)

These overarching goals should steer the work of
the United Nations. However, they must not distract us
from the reality that the people of Afghanistan confront
daily. Afghans must have access to jobs that will feed
their families; they must feel safe on their streets; and
they must be confident when seeking justice from their
authorities.

That requires a stronger focus on economic
development and more training to build a police force
that offers freedom from harassment and theft. It also
means renewed vigour in the fight against corruption
so that authority can no longer be perceived as distinct
from merit and integrity. Each of those issues requires
the sustained and serious engagement of the Afghan
Government.

Canada has a proud tradition of international
engagement. We take seriously our responsibility to
promote the values of freedom, democracy, human
rights and the rule of law. We also believe that a
multilateral approach is required to address global
problems. The long road that Canada has travelled
alongside its partners in Afghanistan over the past five
years has only deepened its commitment to those
principles. We have demonstrated our commitment
through a contribution of development aid unparalleled
in our history. We have done so through the
deployment of our brave men and women, civilians and
soldiers, to one of the most dangerous parts of
Afghanistan. And we have done so through our
unwavering support for the United Nations and its
important mission. Canada is committed to helping
Afghanistan build a stable and democratic future. It is
that determination that motivates our call for a stronger
and more prominent United Nations role in
Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we recognize that our expectations
are high and that ours are not small requests. We make
them in the full knowledge of the difficult terrain on
which the United Nations must respond. We make them
as we stand ready to support all such endeavours and
remain committed to the success of our collective
mission.

