Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to thank, through you,
Ambassadors Johan Verbeke, Ricardo Alberto Arias
and Peter Burian for their briefings on the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), respectively.

These three committees constitute an important
part of the campaign against terrorism within the
framework of the United Nations, and cooperation and
coordination between them contributes to their ability
effectively to carry out their functions. The United
Nations must arrive at a definition of terrorism that
takes human rights into account and addresses the
threat of terrorism, including through an investigation
of the root causes of terrorism and of the relationship
of terrorism to foreign occupation.

The State of Qatar believes that ensuring security
must not come at the expense of fundamental freedoms
or human rights, because these rights should not be
restricted by circumstances or time. Measures taken to
combat terrorism, whether at the local or international
levels or through the United Nations system, must be
compatible with the core purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the
rules and principles of international law, international
standards of justice and the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and they
should avoid the use of double standards, both ethical
and political.

One of the most important developments in the
period since the last joint briefing was the adoption of
resolution 1730 (2006) on procedures for listing and
delisting on the lists of Security Council sanctions
committees. My delegation has been at the forefront of
those Members that worked to enhance those
procedures, since we believe that that is important in
terms of enhancing the credibility and effectiveness of
the sanctions imposed by the Security Council, and
also on the basis of the importance we attach to
ensuring that those measures accord with due process.
However, further improvements remain to be
made to listing and delisting procedures, especially
enhancing the delisting mechanism - its
independence, effectiveness, neutrality and ability to
provide effective recourse. Due consideration must be
given to legal principles and procedures, transparency,
applicable legal standards, the rule of law, human
rights and peremptory norms, which should on no
account be violated. These conditions are essential to
make the sanctions legitimate and effective.

Although one of the core functions of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) is field visits to States, we have
noted a clear disproportion in the number of visits to
countries of the South compared to countries of the
North. This does not promote the objectivity and
transparency that must characterize such visits. We
note also that most countries to which visits have been
proposed have yet to grant approval for such visits, on
the basis that account has not been taken of the need
for objectivity in connection with these visits and
whether or not they are necessary.

We call on the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to continue its efforts to assist the
Commission, and, at this point, stress the importance of
the compliance of the Executive Directorate with its
mandate and instructions from the Committee,
especially in preparing reports and visit programmes.

As regards Security Council resolution 1624
(2005), it should be recalled that the resolution
stipulates the need to make international efforts to
strengthen dialogue and mutual understanding among
civilizations. In order to prevent certain religions or
cultures from being targeted, the media have an
important role to play in encouraging tolerance and
coexistence and in creating an environment that does
not incite terrorism. We call upon the CTC to deal with
this question in a determined fashion, to encourage
States to criminalize attacks on religion.

As the briefing on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
demonstrates, the Committee continues to work on the
careful analysis of national reports. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the fact that many States have
submitted their national reports and calls upon States that
have not yet submitted them to do so promptly, as we note
that, even after the extension of the mandate of the
Committee pursuant to resolution 1673 (2006), there still
are some non-reporting States.

The Committee also continues to provide the
necessary technical assistance to States that request it,
which is essential and which lies at the core of the
mandate of the Commission. That assistance has a
significant impact in helping those countries, so that
we can make further progress in facing the threat posed
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

