Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish
to commend China for having convened this meeting
devoted to a subregion that is very dear to us and with
which we share concerns and ambitions, and to a topic
that is particularly important to us: to consider the
potential ways and perspectives to support peacebuilding
efforts in this part of our mother continent, Africa.

The subregion of West African continues to
face several serious problems with regard to peace
and security. The topics that have raised the greatest
concern are, without a doubt, the indiscriminate attacks
perpetrated by Boko Haram and their destabilizing
consequences for the humanitarian, human rights and
security situation of the countries of the Lake Chad
basin, the continuing threats facing the Malian peace
process and the repercussions of the Ebola outbreak.

Notable improvements, such as the holding of
peaceful and credible elections in several countries
of the region, as well as progress in eradicating the
Ebola epidemic in some countries of the Mano River
Union - thanks in part to the excellent cooperation
between the United Nations and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) - have not masked
the growing threat posed by terrorism in West Africa.
Violent extremism and terrorist activities continue to
pose a very serious threat to security and development
in West Africa, further aggravating political, economic
and humanitarian problems in the region while
subordinating other threats that are equally important,
such as drug trafficking, transnational organized crime
and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

As you outlined so well in the concept note
(S/2016/321, annex) prepared for this debate,
Mr. President, the threats to peace unfortunately do not
come only from terrorist activities. Piracy activities in
the Gulf of Guinea, which has become the new centre
of gravity for piracy in Africa, have stolen the show
from the Gulf of Aden, where the phenomenon, most
amazingly, has almost disappeared in the face of the
deployment of an international military fleet. The Gulf
of Guinea, an area rich in natural resources - with
8 per cent of global oil reserves, but also fisheries and
other biological resources - has considerable shipping
traffic, thereby offering many targets for small pirate
groups, which are generally well armed and violent.

The coastal area stretching from Senegal to Angola
has become the new stalking ground for pirates. Within
10 years there have been more than 600 acts of piracy,
which have significantly handicapped the development
of the coastal countries of the Gulf of Guinea. The
economic losses are substantial for States, for which
maritime revenues represent up to 20 per cent of their
national budgets, as well as for business, including
some Western oil companies that have withdrawn
from the region. As confirmed by the reports of the
Secretary-General on the subregion, little progress has
been achieved with regard to the fight against piracy
and improving maritime safety and security in the Gulf
of Guinea.

While the Yaounde Summit in 2013 created hopes for
a coordinated response at the regional and international
levels to check this phenomenon, maritime insecurity
nevertheless continues to be a threat to the political and
economic stability of the States of the subregion, in
the absence of a joint monitoring system and of a fight
against piracy. The challenge is therefore to establish
a framework to make it possible to pool the technical
and human resources of the States of the subregion, as
well as to adopt appropriate regulatory measures and
predictable and recurrent financial mechanisms to
support the region over the long-term. In our View, that
requires the combination of the following efforts.

First, it requires strengthening international
solidarity. Through resolution 2039 (2012), the Security
Council encourages the States of the Gulf of Guinea,
ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
to develop, with the support of the United Nations
and other partners, a regional strategy, as well as the
harmonization of actions by their member States at sea
and the elaboration or strengthening of their legislation
in order to combat piracy.

The United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, under the under the enlightened and active
leadership of Mr. Ibn Chambas - to whom I give high
praise - has spared no effort to coordinate the efforts
of Member States and partners to make the decisions
taken at the Yaounde Summit fully operational. The
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea Group, for its part, is
playing a growing role in raising awareness ofthe issue.

However, nearly three years later, the conclusions
reached at the Yaounde Summit - which included a
Declaration by the Heads of State, a Code of Conduct
and a memorandum of understanding - have not yet
produced the desired results, and external assistance,
which is essential at this stage, remains limited. The
initiative of the International Maritime Organization
to establish a support fund to implement the Yaounde
decisions is praiseworthy, but it seems essential to us
that donors ramp up their contributions and that those
contributions should go beyond training and focus
on equipment.

It is time for the Gulf of Guinea to enjoy
international mobilization as effective and committed
as that which the Gulf of Aden has received. To win
the battle against piracy, the international community
must respond positively to the appeal by the States of
the region for international assistance, following the
model of what was done in the Gulf of Aden, in which
the international intervention forces could use force
and coordinate their operations.

The second effort is the strengthening of
interregional coordination. Given the scale of the
phenomenon, obviously no one country in the region is
able to resolve the problem of maritime insecurity on
its own. While it is true that interregional dialogue with
regard to the scourge of piracy was strengthened by the
establishment of an interregional coordination centre
against piracy and regional centres along the coast, the
lack of cooperation among stakeholders is still being
heavily felt. However, in that connection we welcome
the decision of the ECOWAS Chiefs of Defence Staff,
taken in Dakar in September 2015, to incorporate
Mauritania in the maritime security structure in the
Gulf of Guinea.

Member States that are the primary victims of this
scourge should redouble their efforts to operationalize
the maritime safety and security arrangement
established in the Gulf of Guinea, despite the lack of
logistical and financial resources. The countries of the
region are called on to find alternatives to sustainably
finance the operation of their marine structures,
including the regional coordination centres, which are
suffering from a lack of logistical and human resources.

Regional cooperation is sometimes paralysed by
the persistence of major border disputes among riparian
countries. Disagreements related to the maritime
border delimitation process could exacerbate security
problems. That issue should be resolved by the signing
of agreements creating joint operating areas among the
countries concerned, as suggested in in article 83 ofthe
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

Thirdly, national capacities to fight maritime
piracy must be strengthened. At the State level and in
terms of human resources, cooperation among national
entities with maritime missions remains ineffective,
with an occasional lack of communication between the
navy and maritime police or the coast guard in certain
countries. As for naval assets, and despite their efforts,
most countries do not have an adequate arsenal to defeat
the pirates in the Gulf of Guinea, who are reputed to be
the most violent in the world.

To overcome those barriers, each State should
work further to strengthen its legislative framework
and build national structures to manage and coordinate
maritime security, including through the strengthening
of cooperation with the private sector and international
organizations, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and the United Nations
Office for West Africa.

In conclusion, I recall that the initiative launched
by Morocco in May 2009, creating the Ministerial
Conference of African States Bordering the Atlantic,
will be a space and framework for intra-African
cooperation in which the actions of different
countries in the areas of development cooperation, the
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and international
security, including the fight against maritime piracy,
are mutually reinforcing.

