Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan welcomes the
adoption of a firm and strong resolution on the nuclear
test by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Resolution 1874 (2009) represents the strong
condemnation of and deep concern of the international
community over this irresponsible act.

The nuclear test by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, coupled with its ballistic missile
technology, constitutes a grave threat to the national
security of Japan. It is also a serious threat to
international peace and security and undermines the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
regime. Above all, the nuclear test, undertaken in
defiance of the Security Council resolutions, is a
serious challenge to the authority of the Council itself.
The nuclear test and launch of a ballistic missile by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea are totally
unacceptable and require a strong reaction from the
Council.

Therefore, it is significant that the Security
Council unanimously adopted the important resolution
1874 (2009), containing strong and effective measures.
We are deeply grateful to the Council members for the
understanding, flexibility and cooperation they have
demonstrated in issuing the strong and unified
message.

In our View, the following elements of the
resolution are particularly important. First, the Council
condemns in the strongest terms the nuclear test by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea on 25 May
2009. Secondly, the Council demands that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea not conduct
any nuclear test or any launch using ballistic missile
technology. Thirdly, the Council demands that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea immediately
and fully comply with its obligations under resolution
1718 (2006), including ceasing all activities related to
nuclear programmes.

Fourthly, the Council takes additional measures
to prevent the flow of arms, related materiel and goods,
and of financial resources that contribute to
programmes for weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missile programmes, through arms embargo,
cargo inspections and financial measures. The Council
also activates the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), with the support of a panel of
experts, and directs the Committee to designate
entities, goods and individuals within 30 days.

Fifthly, the Council underlines the importance of
a response from the Democratic People's Republic to
humanitarian concerns of the international community,
including the abduction issue. I would like to take this
opportunity to urge the Democratic People's Republic
to take concrete measures towards the resolution of the
abduction issue.

We strongly hope that these measures taken by
the Council will induce the Democratic People's
Republic to change its course of action and comply
with its obligations under relevant decisions of the
Security Council. At the same time, I would like to
stress that these measures are not intended to harm the
innocent people of the Democratic People's Republic.

For these measures to have the intended effective
impacts on that country so that it changes its behaviour
and abandons all its nuclear weapon and ballistic
missile programmes, it is essential for all Member
States to take necessary actions to implement those
measures fully and faithfully and to cooperate with
each other in effective implementation.

In parallel with these measures, we will seek to
facilitate a peaceful and comprehensive solution
through dialogue. We should make utmost diplomatic
efforts to realize the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula through the Six-Party Talks. It is the sincere
hope of Japan that the Democratic People's Republic
will decide to ensure its security through abandoning
nuclear weapons and achieve prosperity for its people
through cooperation with the international community.

We demand the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, mindful of its obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations, heed the message contained in the
resolution 1874 (2009), just adopted, and implement
fully its obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements. We
strongly urge it to return immediately to the Six-Party
Talks without preconditions and to make efforts
towards full implementation of the Joint Statement of
the Six-Party Talks.

