Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: I thank the Council
for the opportunity to present the tenth report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (8/2013/118),
which is before it.

As members are aware, Sierra Leone held national
presidential and parliamentary and local council
elections on 17 November 2012. The successful
conclusion of those elections demonstrates that Sierra
Leone is determined to consolidate its hard-won peace.
The country has made significant progress since the end
of the war more than a decade ago. During that period,
Sierra Leone was able to restore and consolidate State
authority, implement national recovery programmes,
including the extension of public services, and undertake
reforms in the governance and security sectors.

The capacity of vital State institutions that underpin
the country's democratic process, such as the National
Electoral Commission, the Sierra Leone Police and
the Political Parties Registration Commission, has
also grown. Adequate law and order is being ensured
by the police and security sector agencies throughout
the country. The Sierra Leone Police and the Republic
of Sierra Leone Armed Forces, both of which were
restructured after the conflict, now participate in
United Nations and regional peacekeeping operations.
Sierra Leone also implemented a successful transitional
justice and reconciliation process through the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone.

With the Government's national development
strategy, the Agenda for Change, about to come to an
end, a successor strategy for the next five years, the
Agenda for Prosperity, will soon be finalized. With the
implementation ofthe Agenda for Change, Sierra Leone
made tangible progress, particularly in the mining and
health-care sectors and in infrastructure development.
With the beginning of exports of iron ore and the
potential for the exploitation of oil and gas, Sierra
Leone's economy is expected to expand and to provide
the necessary resources in order to address some of its
crucial challenges in ensuring improved delivery of
services and better standards of living for the citizenry.
In that respect, it is vital that the Government continue
its efforts to ensure the proper management of the
country's mineral wealth and in combating corruption.

Notwithstanding the progress that Sierra Leone
has made over the past decade, challenges still remain,
particularly in tackling the root causes of the conflict.
The political divide and the polarization of the country
along regional ethnic lines that manifested themselves
in successive elections need to be addressed in order
to strengthen national unity and cohesion. Such
polarization is further aggravated by the country's
winnerftakesfall electoral system.

In that respect, I welcome President Koroma's
commitment to holding a review of the 1991 Constitution
of Sierra Leone so as to ensure an inclusive system of
Government. Such a review will not only provide an
opportunity to address the country's regional divide and
the many other complex challenges that contributed to
the conflict, but also guarantee its continued progress in
consolidating the democratic process and in achieving
sustainable development. In that regard, it is essential
that the planned constitutional review be an inclusive
process that ensures the buy-in of all key stakeholders.
The Government of Sierra Leone has expressed its
desire for international support, in particular from the
United Nations, for the constitutional review process
both in terms of facilitating political dialogue and
mobilizing the necessary financial resources.

Sierra Leone's national institutions, including
the justice and security sectors, the Anti-Corruption
Commission, the Political Parties Registration
Commission and other entities, need to be strengthened
in order for them to continue to effectively discharge
their respective responsibilities and to win the trust
and confidence of the population whom they serve.
Further entrenching the rule of law and institutions
of democratic governance is the best guarantee for
sustaining peace and achieving development and
economic prosperity.

Progress in addressing poverty and unemployment,
in particular youth unemployment, and in providing
essential public services to the population remain
serious challenges. The priorities articulated in the
Government's Agenda for Prosperity aim to achieve
those and other key objectives. In that regard, While
the Government takes the lead in attracting private
investment and in expanding the country's revenue
base to finance those priorities, international assistance
and development cooperation will also remain essential
to complement national efforts.

As requested by the Council in resolution 2065
(2012), a United Nations inter-agency technical
assessment mission visited Sierra Leone in January to
develop proposals for the transition, drawdown and exit
strategy of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) after holding a wide
range of discussions with all representatives of Sierra
Leone society.

Sierra Leone's progress is proof of what can be
accomplished through concerted multilateral and
national efforts in the post-conflict period. With the
progress made by Sierra Leone and by UNIPSIL in the
implementation of its mandate, it is now appropriate to
begin a reconfiguration of the mission and to gradually
transfer responsibilities to the United Nations country
team, the Government of Sierra Leone, national
institutions and civil society organizations, as well as
bilateral and international partners. Ultimately, that
process will end with the termination of the mission.
As recommended by the Secretary-General in
his report, UNIPSIL, in close coordination with the
United Nations country team and other partners, should
continue to perform three key residual tasks, namely,
first, conflict prevention and mediation support for
the constitutional review process; secondly, support
for security sector reform; and thirdly, support the
strengthening of human rights institutions

With respect to the first task, it is critical that
UNIPSIL continue to provide support to local
stakeholders in stabilizing the post-election political
environment. Notwithstanding the outcome of the case
filed by the main opposition, the Sierra Leone People's
Party, challenging the presidential election results, both
opposition and ruling parties must continue to work
together in the national interest and for the advancement
of the country. In that connection, UNIPSIL intends
to engage in political facilitation, mediation and
consensus-building around the constitutional review
process. The mission will also continue to provide
support to the vital national institutions engaged in
conflict prevention and mediation, such as the Political
Parties Registration Commission.

In the area of support for security sector reform,
in order to ensure a smooth and seamless transition
from UNIPSIL to the United Nations country team,
in collaboration with bilateral partners and the
Government, UNIPSIL'S tasks will focus on providing
overall strategic policy advice and on strengthening the
coordination mechanisms for international assistance
in the security sector. Furthermore, UNIPSIL will
provide support in strengthening the governance and
the command and control mechanisms of the Sierra
Leone police, as well as in improving efforts to address
cross-border threats and transnational and organized
crime, in particular drug trafficking.

Finally, as directed by the Secretary-General,
UNIPSIL will continue to support the strengthening of
national human rights and rule-of-law institutions. That
will continue to be a critical priority for the country.
Under the planned transitional arrangements there
will be a gradual reduction of the tasks performed by
the mission as of 1 April until the end of its mandate. In
anticipation of a refocused mandate, UNIPSIL and the
United Nations country team are developing drawdown
proposals that will be completed by the end of March.
Those proposals envisage staffing reductions, the
transfer of the mission's archives to United Nations
Headquarters and the liquidation ofits assets. UNIPSIL
and the United Nations country team will further
prepare a timeline and benchmarks for the transition of
all outstanding tasks. Technical and financial resources
will be critical to guaranteeing a smooth transition
to the United Nations country team. In that regard, I
call on the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
and international partners to assist in providing such
resources.

The transition of UNIPSIL to the United Nations
country team represents a moment that Sierra Leone
and the international community can take pride
in. The strong commitment of the people of Sierra
Leone and its successive post-conflict Governments
has been indispensable to the achievements made by
the country and to the successful work of the United
Nations over the last 15 years. However, I must caution
that challenges remain which call for greater efforts by
national stakeholders and the international community's
continued engagement. It is therefore incumbent on all
of us to get the transition right.

This involves not only the planned phasing out
of UNIPSIL, but equally the scaling up of the United
Nations and other international partners' support for
the continued development of Sierra Leone. That will
require the timely mobilization of resources. With
a successful transition and UNIPSIL's exit, it is also
important to make it clear that the United Nations will
remain in Sierra Leone and continue to support Sierra
Leone through the United Nations country team and
with the assistance of its international partners.

