Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his
intervention and Ms. Raemer for her testimony. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) (S/2019/938). Three years after the adoption
of the resolution, France regrets that it has not
been implemented.

The Secretary-General's report is unequivocal.
There is an unprecedented intensification of settlement
activities, with decisions affecting more than 22,000
housing units at different stages ofthe approval process,
as well as 8,000 others that have been put out to tender
since the adoption of the resolution, in December 2016.

France recalls that Israel's settlement policy
in the occupied Palestinian territories is contrary
to international law. We are very concerned about
ongoing colonisation in areas likely to undermine the
territorial continuity of the future Palestinian State,
particularly in Gilo. We are concerned about reports of
the construction of new housing units in particularly
sensitive areas, such as in the Nof Tzion settlement in
East Jerusalem and in the former market in Old City of
Hebron. France deplores the infrastructure works aimed
at strengthening integration among all the settlements
in the Jerusalem area and between those settlements
and central Israel. The destruction and seizure of
Palestinian property have also been on a steep rise
this year in East Jerusalem and Zone C. We note with
concern the destruction of 26 elements of infrastructure
financed by the international community, including by
the countries of the European Union, over the past three
months. Finally, the repeated announcements by Israeli
officials on the annexation of settlements or entire
parts of the West Bank are a major source of concern. If
implemented, they would constitute a serious violation
of international law.

We therefore call on the Israeli authorities to
renounce any project leading to faits accomplis that
would run counter to the two-State solution. We will
remain particularly attentive to developments in the
situation and ready to react, in conjunction with our
European partners.

The situation in Gaza also remains fragile. France
has unequivocally condemned the firing of rockets
from Gaza into inhabited areas of Israel, in Violation of
international law. We recall our unwavering commitment
to Israel's security. We have also recalled the right of
both Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace, dignity
and security and have deplored the civilian casualties
on both sides. It is now important that the ceasefire
reached on 14 November through the efforts of Egypt
and the Special Coordinator be fully respected.

Beyond the need to respect the ceasefire, there will
be no lasting stability in Gaza without a lifting of the
blockade paired with credible security guarantees for
Israel or without the return of the Palestinian Authority,
in the context of inter-Palestinian reconciliation. The
holding of credible Palestinian elections in the West
Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem would be an essential
step towards inter-Palestinian reconciliation and the
strengthening of Palestinian institutions established
pursuant to the Oslo Accords. In that context, I call on
the Palestinian authorities to continue their efforts to
that end and reiterate our readiness to support them in
those efforts.

I would like to recall that there is no alternative to
an agreement negotiated by the parties on the basis of
internationally agreed parameters. Only the two-State
solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States,
will fulfil the aspirations ofIsraelis and Palestinians by
enabling them to live side by side in peace and security
and bring lasting peace to the region. Any solution that
deviates from the parameters agreed by the international
community would necessarily be doomed to failure.

There is no status quo on the ground but, rather, a
deterioration of the situation that is unsustainable in the
long term; that is not in the interest of either party. It
contributes to increased tensions, undermines the two-
State solution and postpones lasting peace, which can
only fuel despair and the temptation of extremism.

The mandate of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) will remain crucial until a lasting peace
that provides a just, realistic and lasting solution to the
refugee issue is found. In that regard, France welcomes
the renewal of the Agency's mandate for three years
and calls for a surge in international mobilization to
make up its financial deficit by the end of the year. For
its part, France doubled its contribution to UNRWA
this year.

Three years after the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), it is time to implement it. The credibility of
the Security Council and of us all depend on it. In
that connection, the Secretary-General's report refers
to the decision of the European Court of Justice
of 12 November on the labelling requirement for
products from the occupied Palestinian territories and
Israeli settlements. The labelling measures meet the
requirement of resolution 2334 (2016) to introduce a
differentiation policy. France will continue to engage
to ensure the implementation of the resolution.

