The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/87, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations. I should also like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to document S/2007/ 17,
which contains a letter dated 15 January 2007 from the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(8/2007/87) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1742 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.
07-23984

