The President: I now propose to make a
statement as President of the Council.

It is my honour to preside over this meeting of the
Security Council with the Political Committee of the
Lusaka Agreement on a framework for peace. On
behalf of the Council, I extend a cordial welcome to
the Ministers and representatives of Angola, Burundi,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Namibia,
Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe; the
Organization of African Unity; the facilitator of the
inter-Congolese dialogue; the Mouvement pour la
Liberation du Congo; the Rassemblement Congolais
pour la Democratie (RCD)-Goma; RCD-Kisangani; and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We are very pleased that the Secretary-General,
Kofi Annan, has been able to join us at this very
important meeting. His presence and his contribution
here confirm the importance that the Security Council
and the Secretary-General place on bringing peace to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
countries of the Great Lakes region a indeed, to all of
Africa, and thereby to the entire global community.

Jamaica regards it as a privilege to chair this
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
given our historic bonds and heritage. Over 80 per cent
of the Jamaican population springs from African
descent, and we therefore share a special affinity with
both the problems and the aspirations of Africa.

On 7 September last year, the Security Council
Summit issued a declaration in which we committed
ourselves to ensuring "an effective role for the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly in Africa". (resolution 1318 (2000), annex, first paragraph) In my contribution on
that occasion, I stressed that in fulfilling our "charge to
maintain international peace and security, this Council
must impact on the lives of people, changing their
despair to hope and liberating them from conflict."
(S/PV4194, pp. 15-16) We expressed our deep concern
for the devastating effects of conflicts on the
humanitarian conditions of the civilian population,
particularly women and children. Nowhere has this
been more prevalent than in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is a stated objective of Jamaica's
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
November to advance peace in all areas of the world
and to give special attention to the conflicts besetting
the African continent. I am therefore very privileged to
preside over this meeting in furtherance of an
important objective of Jamaica's membership of the
Council.

At the time of our meeting last September, the
prospects for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region were on the distant horizon.
Since then, considerable progress has been made, and
the Security Council has played a major role in support
of the peace process. The Security Council mission to
the region earlier this year was an important milestone
on the road to peace. The deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) throughout that
country has continued to have an important effect on
the peace process, and the concept of operations for the
deployment of phase III of MONUC, which has been
provided by the Secretary-General, is now under
serious consideration by the Security Council.

Today, the Security Council meets with you, our
partners, in order to consolidate the gains we have
achieved and to provide further impetus for making
lasting peace a reality in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the Great Lakes region. It is part of
an ongoing dialogue between the Security Council and
the regional leaders to explore ways in which the
Security Council and countries within the region can
sustain momentum for the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have witnessed
some positive changes in the political landscape of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. We
must continue to build on them.

Yesterday, the Council met with the
representatives of the countries of the Regional Peace
Initiative on Burundi, of which most of those invited to
join us today are members. We discussed the prospects
for the implementation of the Arusha Peace Agreement
in that country. It is undeniable that there are common
interlinkages between the conflicts in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For this reason, a
solution to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must be pursued at a regional level, in a
holistic and comprehensive manner. In that regard, our
meeting today is taking note of the Secretary-General's
suggestion that the time has come for the parties to
explore ways of associating Burundi more closely with
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In our meeting today, we must seek to pay close
attention to some key issues which must be resolved in
order to realize sustainable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and throughout the Great Lakes
region.

First, there must be a credible plan for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or
resettlement of the former combatants, especially of the
so-called negative forces. In particular, we call on all
States to cease support for armed groups operating in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and call for a cessation of all hostilities
throughout the country. As MONUC deploys further
eastward, it is critical that the armed groups comply
with and fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the Lusaka Agreement.

Secondly, there is a need for a comprehensive
plan for the full withdrawal of all foreign forces from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. It is imperative
that all parties provide MONUC with the necessary
information, as is their obligation under the relevant
agreements.

Thirdly, the failure to demilitarize Kisangani
remains an obstacle to peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This Council must insist on
compliance with its resolutions. So we reiterate our call
on all parties to ensure that this issue be settled without
further delay.

Fourthly, while progress has been made in the
preparatory stages of the inter-Congolese dialogue, the
parties must renew their commitments to the political
process, and the international community must give its
full support. The determining of the political future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the people
themselves must remain a priority if there is to be a
lasting peace. The commitment of all parties to a
political process which will enable the widest possible
participation of all groups is a first essential step
towards the achievement of a democratic and inclusive
system of Government, which we regard as a
prerequisite to lasting peace.

Fifthly, we must pursue in earnest the
commitments made to address the illegal exploitation
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and seek ways to ensure that revenue from
these resources is channelled into the economic and
social development of the country for the benefit of all
its people.

Let us use this opportunity to build on the
partnership between the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole, and the countries of the
region. Let us use this opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to the cause of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. The
positive steps which we have taken so far must be
reinforced by our renewed commitment to peace. We
owe it to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region, and it is our collective
responsibility to ensure that sustainable peace is
achieved.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
our prior consultations, I shall adjourn this meeting
now and invite the Council members and all invitees to
attend the private meeting five minutes from now.

The meeting rose at 12 noon.
