The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council affirms that the rapid
appointment of a Prime Minister of Cote d'Ivoire
is crucial to relaunch the peace process leading to
the holding of free, fair, open and transparent
elections no later than 31 October 2006, and to
implement fully the road map established by the
International Working Group (IWG) at its first
meeting on 8 November 2005 in Abidjan.

"Therefore, the Security Council expresses
its deep concern at the persistent disagreements
among Ivorian parties on the appointment of the
Prime Minister and considers that the Prime
Minister must be designated without any further
delay. The Council stresses once again that the
Prime Minister must have all the necessary
powers and resources described in paragraph 8 of
resolution 1633 (2005).
"The Security Council commends the
initiatives undertaken by the Chairperson of the
African Union, the Chairperson of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the African Union Mediator, and notes that their
consultations with the parties signatories to the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement have been held, as
provided for by the decision of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 6 October
2005 and by resolution 1633 (2005). It reiterates its
full support for them and urges them to expedite
their efforts. The Security Council urges them to
identify as soon as possible the candidate for the
office of Prime Minister they deem acceptable to all
parties signatories to the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, given the consultations they have held.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the IWG, endorses its final
communique of 8 November 2005, welcomes its
decision to hold its second meeting on
6 December 2005 in Abidjan, and urges the IWG
to keep the Council informed of the conclusions
of its work.

"The Security Council commends also the
continuing efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the High
Representative for the elections, and reiterates its
support for them. In particular, it encourages the
Ivorian parties to cooperate fully with the High
Representative for the elections to resolve the
current dispute concerning the Independent
Electoral Commission and reaffirms that the High
Representative, in accordance with paragraph 7
of resolution 1603 (2005), can make all the
necessary determinations in order to help the
electoral process move forward.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
readiness, in close consultation with the African
Union Mediation, to impose individual measures
provided for in paragraphs 9 and 11 of resolution
1572 (2004) and in resolution 1633 (2005)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/58.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
05-62220

