Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has followed closely the situation in South Sudan. My
country is committed to expeditiously restoring peace
and stability to South Sudan so that the people there
can enjoy peace dividends as soon as possible. Recently
President Salva Kiir announced the launching of a
national dialogue and the unconditional acceptance of
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.

The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) held a summit on South Sudan and issued a
communique. The international community should
seize this opportunity to push for various bodies in
South Sudan to continue with the implementation of
a peace agreement in order to return to the track of
finding a political solution. The leading role of IGAD
in mediating the South Sudan issue should be supported
so that peace, stability and development can be realized
as soon as possible.

We hold that there should be prudent action with
respect to sanctions and we believe that sanctions
should serve the interest of an overall political solution.
We are not in favour of using sanctions to exert
pressure on developing countries. The transitional
Government of South Sudan has demonstrated the
political will to implement relevant Council resolution
and joint communiques. The IGAD communique
does not support the imposition of an embargo or
sanctions. The legitimate aspirations of IGAD and
African countries must be fully respected. Council
actions should be conducive to the political solution of
the South Sudanese issue, helpful to the work of the
mediation and good offices of IGAD and the African
Union and must contribute to maintaining the unity
of the Council. There needs to be prudent action with
respect to embargoes and designations in order to avoid
complicating the situation even further in South Sudan.

China has consistently supported the peace
process and provided active assistance to South
Sudan in its nation-building and stability. Recently,
theSpecial Representative of the Chinese Government
on African Affairs visited South Sudan and the region
to encourage the relevant actors to engage with one
another in peace negotiations. China is willing to work
with the international community to continue with its
constructive role in efforts towards enduring peace and
stability in South Sudan.

