Mrs. Rodham Clinton (United States of America): Let me begin by thanking Prime Minister
Hamad bin Jassim and Secretary-General Elaraby for
their thorough briefings.

The Arab League has demonstrated important
leadership in this crisis. For many months, the people
of the region and the world have watched in horror as
the Assad regime executed a campaign of violence
against its own citizens. Civilians are gunned down in
the streets, women and children tortured and killed -
no one is safe, not even officials of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent. According to United Nations estimates,
more than 5,400 civilians have already died and that
number is rising fast. The regime also continues to
arbitrarily detain Syrian citizens, such as the activists
Yahia al-Shorbaji and Anas al-Shogre, simply for
demanding dignity and universal rights.

To date, the evidence is clear that Al-Assad's
forces are initiating nearly all of the attacks that kill
civilians. But as more citizens take up arms to resist
the regime's brutality, violence is increasingly likely to
spiral out of control. Already the challenges ahead for
the Syrian people are daunting: a crumbling economy,
rising sectarian tensions, and a cauldron of instability
in the heart of the Middle East.

Fears about What follows Al-Assad, especially
among Syria's minority communities, are
understandable. Indeed, it appears as though Al-Assad
and his cronies are working hard to pit Syria's ethnic
and religious groups against each other, risking greater
sectarian violence and even descent into civil war.

In response to this violent crackdown on peaceful
dissent and protest, the Arab League launched an
unprecedented diplomatic intervention, sending
monitors into Syria's beleaguered cities and towns and
offering President Al-Assad many chances to change
course. These observers were greeted by thousands of
protesters eager to share their aspirations for their
universal rights and also the stories of what had
befallen them and their families. But as the Arab
League report makes clear - if one reads the entire
report - the regime did not respect its pledges or the
presence of the monitors, and instead responded with
excessive and escalating violence.

In the past few days, the regime's security forces
have intensified their assault, shelling civilian areas
and homes in other cities. This weekend, the Arab
League suspended its monitoring mission, pointing to
the regime's intransigence and the mounting civilian
casualties.

So why is the Arab League here before the
Security Council? It is because it is seeking the support
of the international community for a negotiated,
peaceful, political solution to this crisis and a
responsible, democratic transition in Syria. We all have
a choice. We can stand with the people of Syria and the
region or become complicit in the continuing Violence
there.

The United States urges the Security Council to
back the Arab League's demand that the Government
of Syria immediately stop all attacks against civilians
and guarantee the freedom of peaceful demonstrations.
In accordance with the Arab League's plan, Syria must
also release all arbitrarily detained citizens, return its
military and security forces to their barracks, and allow
full and unhindered access for monitors, humanitarian
workers and journalists. We urge the Security Council
to back the Arab League's call for an inclusive, Syrian-
led political process to effectively address the
legitimate aspirations and concerns of Syria's people,
conducted in an environment free from violence, fear,
intimidation and extremism.

I know that some members here may be
concerned that the Security Council could be headed
towards another Libya. That is a false analogy. Syria is
a unique situation that requires its own approach,
tailored to the specific circumstances occurring there.
That is exactly what the Arab League has proposed -
a path to a political transition that would preserve
Syria's unity and institutions. This may not be exactly
the plan that any of us ourselves would have designed.
I know that many nations feel that way. But it
represents the best efforts of Syria's neighbours to
chart a way forward, and it deserves a chance to work.

I think it would be a mistake to minimize or
understate the magnitude of the challenge that Syrians
face in trying to build the rule of law and civil society
on the ruins of a brutal and failed dictatorship. This
will be hard. The results are far from certain. Success
is far from guaranteed. But the alternative - more of
Al-Assad's brutal rule - is no alternative at all.

We all know that change is coming to Syria.
Despite its ruthless tactics, the Al-Assad regime's reign
of terror will end and the people of Syria will have the
chance to chart their own destiny. The question for us
is: How many more innocent civilians will die before
that country is able to move forward towards the kind
of future it deserves?

Unfortunately, it appears as though the longer this
continues, the harder it will be to rebuild once
President Al-Assad and his regime are transitioned and
something new and better takes its place. Citizens
inside and outside Syria have begun planning for a
democratic transition, from the Syrian National
Council to the courageous grass-roots local councils
across the country, which are organizing under the
most dangerous and difficult circumstances. But every
day that goes by, their task grows more difficult.

The future of Syria as a strong and unified nation
depends on thwarting a cynical, divide-and-conquer
strategy. It will take all Syrians working together -
Alawis and Christians hand in hand with Sunnis and
Druze, side by side with Arabs and Kurds - to ensure
that the new Syria is governed by the rule of law, that it
respects and protects the universal rights of every
citizen, regardless of ethnicity or sect, and that it takes
on the widespread corruption that has marked the
Al-Assad regime. If this is to work, Syria's minorities
will have to join in shaping Syria's future, and their
rights and voices will have to be heard, protected and
respected.

Let me say directly to them today: "We do hear
your fears and we do honour your aspirations. Do not
let the current regime exploit them to extend this
crisis." The leaders of Syria's business community,
military and other institutions will have to recognize
that their futures lie with the State and not the regime.
Syria belongs to its 23 million citizens, not to one man
or his family. Change can still be accomplished without
dismantling the State or producing new tyranny. It is
time for the international community to put aside our
own differences and send a clear message of support to
the people of Syria.

The alternative - spurning the Arab League,
abandoning the Syrian people and emboldening the
dictator - would compound this tragedy, mark a
failure of our shared responsibility, and shake the
credibility of the Security Council.

The United States stands ready to work with
every member in this Chamber to adopt a resolution
that supports the Arab League's efforts, because those
are the efforts that are well thought-out and focused on
ending this crisis, that uphold the rights of the Syrian
people, and that restore peace to Syria. That is the goal
of the Arab League; that should be the goal of the
Security Council - to help the Syrian people realize
the goal of the future that they seek.

