Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): Let me start by
expressing our appreciation to the presidency of Peru
for organizing this important open debate on youth,
peace and security. It offers a timely occasion to reflect,
ahead of tomorrow's high-level event of the General
Assembly on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, on
how best to involve youth in efforts towards that end.
We note the progress study (see S/2018/86) prepared in
response to resolution 2250 (2015), and look forward to
its full version.

In conflict-stricken and fragile regions, young
people are frequently disproportionately affected by
violence, unemployment, lack of access to education
and medical and social services. Young migrants,
refugees and internally displaced persons are often
trapped in conflict zones. Most of the casualties in
armed conflicts are young men, while young women
are at heightened risk of physical and sexual abuse.
The negative stereotypes that depict young people
as victims or perpetrators of conflict hinder their
participation in peacebuilding processes. In this respect,
we firmly believe that young men and women should
be involved in the elaboration and implementation of
youth policies, specifically those supporting youth
peacebuilding interventions.

In the face of increasing global threats, prevention
is the most effective strategy to protect our societies
from armed conflicts and violent extremism. Only by
tackling the underlying root causes can Governments
prevent the spread of and eradicate these scourges.
There is a strong need for soft strategies that identify
and pre-emptively address radicalization and other
factors that drive conflict. Young people are more
susceptible to adopting extremist ideologies. In this
regard, intercultural dialogue is a tangible instrument
for promoting respect for diversity, pluralism and
human rights among youth.

My country, with its tradition of tolerance and
peaceful coexistence among ethnic communities and
the three major religions, has successfully incorporated
multiculturalism into State policy. Since the launch of
the Baku process in 2008, it has become a key global
platform for dialogue between people. Since 2011,
the World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue has been
organized biannually by Azerbaijan. This initiative
is recognized by the Secretary-General as a global
platform for cross-cultural dialogue.

As the study points out, "peace and security are
more than just the absence of violence" (S/2018/86, para. 20). Engaging young people in meaningful and
transformative opportunities, supporting their personal
progress and recognizing their role as agents ofpositive
change is crucial in order to help them develop strong
values and principles. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development pledges to leave no one behind. Including
young people in all aspects of decision-making and
fostering their participation in global processes will
not only benefit the sustainable development of our
societies, but will also give them a sense of purpose
and identity. In this context, my country, Azerbaijan,
has successfully carried out policies that support youth
empowerment and benefit their economic and social
integration. The National Youth Foundation and the
Ministry of Youth and Sports are the main State bodies
responsible for the coordination and implementation of
youth policies.

We actively encourage and promote international
youth cooperation. In 2014, Azerbaijan hosted the first
Global Forum on Youth Policies, jointly convened by
the Office of the United Nations Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth, the United Nations Development
Programme, UNESCO and the Council of Europe. The
forum brought together over 700 participants from 165
countries and 115 Governments, thereby becoming the
biggest conference ever to be held exclusively on youth
policies. In 2017, the thirteenth World Scout Youth
Forum and the forty-first World Scout Conference
were held in Azerbaijan under the theme "Together for
positive change", with the participation of more than
1,500 delegates from 151 national Scout organizations.

Volunteering is another powerful tool for positive
youth participation. By engaging youth in various
large-scale international events, Azerbaijan has
provided the latter with many volunteer opportunities.
The ASAN Volunteers Organization, a branch of the
State agency for Government services to citizens of
Azerbaijan, provides a venue for volunteers to prepare
for future careers and develop a sense of community
and social responsibility.

To conclude, let me reiterate that we are fully
committed to supporting young people at both the
national and international levels and to encouraging
youth engagement initiatives.

