Mr. Meece (spoke in French): I have the great
honour to address the Council in the framework of the
consultations on the latest report of the Secretary-
General (8/2011/298) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). In that regard, I
express my appreciation of the important discussion
that took place in the Council on 18 May (see S/PV.6539) on developments in the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and prospects for
the future. That debate was distinguished by the
presence of Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and other eminent
guests who presented their views on the issue. My
briefing falls within the framework of the Security
2
Council's impending consideration of the renewal of
the MONUSCO mandate, which expires on 30 June.

(spoke in English)

I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
all those who offered condolences and support to the
Mission in the aftermath of the terrible tragedy on
4 April, during which a United Nations aircraft
suffered a fatal accident at N'Djili Airport in Kinshasa.
I would like to note the long hours and extraordinary
work performed by many in the Mission and Congolese
in different capacities to manage the crisis and address
the needs of the victims of the accident, as well as their
families, friends and colleagues. I would also note that
the investigation of the accident is ongoing.

As was noted in the 18 May consultations and in
the Secretary-General's last report (8/2011/20), there
has been significant progress regarding the security
situation in recent years in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo; however, there is still much to
be done. In my View, the security environment and the
related threat to the civilian population - our highest
priority concern - must be viewed on a localized basis
to obtain a full understanding of the remaining threats,
the relevant factors affecting the situation, and the
options available for action to address the problem.

In Orientale province in north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) continues to pose the primary threat to the
population. We agree with Congolese and Ugandan
assessments that the number of LRA combatants in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is at this point
limited and that they tend to be poorly equipped and
supplied. Nonetheless, they continue to use very brutal
tactics, and their cross-border movements between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and Southern Sudan make them particularly
difficult to deal with. Since 2010, we have stepped up
MONUSCO military operations in the affected area, in
coordination with Congolese and Ugandan forces, and
as a result we believe that we have successfully
forestalled some of the larger-scale LRA attacks. The
Dungu-based joint intelligence and operations
centre - staffed by Congolese, Ugandan and
MONUSCO military personnel - has helped to
coordinate information and operations.

The reality is, however, that the LRA continues to
pose a major threat to civilians in areas Where they
operate. I believe the only strategy that will
11-36878
significantly reduce or eliminate the LRA as an
ongoing threat in the region is one that focuses on the
LRA leadership, three members of whom are under
indictment by the International Criminal Court. That
strategy, however, requires a broad effort that goes
beyond MONUSCO's scope and mandate, but which
we are ready to support to the maximum extent
possible.

North and South Kivu provinces present a more
complex picture, with an interaction among various
armed groups. Of these, the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) retains the greatest
military capacity, albeit greatly reduced from its peak.
The weakened state of the FDLR does present
opportunities, as evidenced in the encouraging
numbers of combatants repatriated in recent months,
including a significantly increased number of FDLR
holding more senior rank. The recent arrest by
Congolese authorities of Bernard Munyagishari and his
pending transfer to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda in Amsha is a further encouraging step. We
are continuing to explore actively with Congolese
authorities opportunities to accelerate a decrease in
FDLR capacity as quickly and effectively as possible
to address this long-standing threat to the security of
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region.

Another significant security issue in the Kivus is
the incomplete integration of combatants from armed
groups into the Congolese army, particularly some
military members of the Congres national pour la
defense du people, who have retained parallel
command and control structures. It is essential that this
situation be addressed in order for security conditions
to improve to a satisfactory level in the Kivus. We are
continuing our dialogue with Congolese Government
authorities on this subject. Other armed groups,
including the Ugandan Allied Democratic
Forces/National Army for the Liberation of Uganda,
continue to prey on the civilian population in the
Kivus. Some Mayi-Mayi groups receive
encouragement and support from FDLR elements, as
well as non-integrated combatants. However, none of
these groups constitutes the same level of military and
organizational capabilities as the F DLR.

Major improvements have been seen in Ituri
district of Orientale province in recent years, although
some residual militia activity continues.
Encouragingly, some recent apparent attempts to
11-36878

recruit new militia elements or form new groups have
not been very successful, with growing signs that local
communities recognize that such activity brings only
ongoing violence. The increased cooperation of the
population with Congolese security forces and
MONUSCO to counter militia elements is a key and
encouraging sign for future long-term security in Ituri.

The joint assessment process established last year
pursuant to resolution 1925 (2010) has been a very
positive exercise for us and Congolese authorities to
enhance our dialogue, to assess security threats, and to
arrive at a common analysis of the situation on the
ground. I believe that it would be useful to continue
this process during the next phase of MONSUCO's
mandate, and it clearly will be a key resource for
looking at any future configuration and deployment of
MONUSCO forces based on existing security
conditions.

I am obliged to note that MONUSCO's military
operations are being negatively impacted by a shortage
of military helicopters. With the scheduled departure of
the remaining combat helicopters in early July, this
problem will become worse absent new contributions. I
am very appreciative of a recent commitment from
South Africa to provide an additional military utility
helicopter, and very much hope that ongoing
discussions with other Member States will yield timely
and positive results. Filling the gaps in MONUSCO's
helicopter capabilities will be critical to maintaining
the Mission's efforts in the protection of civilians and
other core mandated tasks.

There has been a great deal of international and
domestic Congolese attention to the illegal exploitation
of mineral resources in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and specifically the involvement of armed
groups in their mining and trade. I believe it important
that the efforts of various countries internationally be
coordinated to the maximum extent possible with
regional and Congolese national efforts to ensure that
desired common objectives are achieved. In helping to
tackle this issue, MONUSCO is continuing the trading
counters - or centres de negoces - programme with
the Government, establishing centres where such
minerals can be certified as originating from legitimate
mining operations. Much more needs to be done to
address this complex issue, and I hope that national,
regional, and international efforts will progress rapidly
and in harmony to produce concrete positive results.
3
For tackling illegal exploitation of mineral
resources, as with all regional security issues, the
greatly improved dialogue and ongoing contacts
between the countries of the region are of critical
importance. There are ongoing bilateral and regional
contacts on a regular basis, which could not be said
five or 10 years ago, and these are essential to
achieving continuing progress in improving security
conditions throughout the region, including eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We will continue
to support and facilitate such contacts as may be useful
and desired by the countries involved. Similarly,
increased attention from the African Union on regional
issues, and particularly on the regional threat of
activities by the Lord's Resistance Army, is
welcome- and, hopefully, will increase the
effectiveness of efforts to address this threat to security
in the region.

As Council members are aware, preparations for
the very important next cycle of national and
provincial elections have been under way for some
time. Voter registration has been completed in two
provinces, and is currently ongoing in all other areas of
the country. Well over half of the projected total of 31
million eligible voters have already been registered. In
addition, the election timetable has been announced by
the Commission electorale nationale independante
(CENI) for presidential, national, legislative,
provincial and local elections, with presidential and
National Assembly elections scheduled for
28 November. I am also pleased to note the recent
passage by the National Assembly of needed new
electoral legislation. I urge the rapid adoption by the
Senate as well of this essential measure. MONUSCO
has been actively supporting the electoral process -
transporting thousands of tons of materials, providing
ongoing technical support in a variety of areas and
generally facilitating elections preparations.

The election timetable is very ambitious, as the
Election Commission sought to accommodate
constitutionally mandated requirements for the
presidential elections to be held this year while
preserving the important coupling of presidential and
national legislative elections. The timetable was
announced after extensive consultations by the CENI
president with a broad range of political parties and
civil society representatives. MONUSCO, together
with the United Nations Development Programme, is
fully committed to providing all possible support to

help ensure a successful electoral cycle in accordance
with the CENI timetable.

We are of course facing challenges in our tasks.
While we have thus far been able to utilize the
Mission's financial resources for elections support, that
will not be possible for the next budgetary year without
an unacceptably negative impact on other mandated
operations. We will need supplementary financial
resources, which are currently being defined with the
relevant United Nations budget authorities. The
national elections budget established by CENI has
received good support to date, with 60 per cent of the
total committed by the Congolese Government and
much of the remainder covered by generous pledges by
international partners. Continued engagement by
international partners, however, is required to ensure
full funding of all aspects of the electoral process. It is
also critically important that an adequate number of
international and national observers are deployed. I
welcome expressions of intent from a number of
organizations in that regard, including the European
Union and the Carter Center.

Electoral security also remains a concern.
MONUSCO has been providing refresher training to
some of the Congolese National Police, who have the
primary legal responsibility for elections security. An
important initiative is also under way for the training
of 10 Police d'intervention rapide units specifically for
elections security. Two of those will be trained and
equipped by France, two others by the Congolese
Government and six by MONSUCO. The Mission is
not, however, authorized to provide equipment for
those six units. I urge all Member States to consider
funding or providing in-kind contributions to meet
their equipment needs so that they can carry out their
tasks.

I also note with concern a number of reported
incidents in the past several months of harassment,
intimidation or violence centred on electoral activities,
particularly those involving opposition parties.
Government leaders, including President Kabila, have
reiterated to me and others their commitment to
ensuring free, peaceful and fair conditions for the
elections. We will continue an active dialogue with all
involved to ensure proper and favourable conditions
for the holding of credible and transparent elections. In
that regard, last April, MONUSCO chaired with CENI
an elections colloquium involving all major parties and
civil society to discuss how to best achieve a peaceful
and open elections process and promote dialogue
among all involved. The meeting was very successful.
In follow-up, an update to the elections code of
conduct for political parties is being prepared. Other
related activities on the national and provincial levels
have been held or are being planned. We have also
indicated our support to CENI for the establishment of
a mediation committee to address disputes, as provided
in the legislation establishing the Commission.

I would like to emphasize the critical importance
of the upcoming elections. We have no illusions
regarding the magnitude of the challenges of
organizing successful elections. There are no
guarantees of success. However, all of the risk factors
that we see today were also present during the 2006
election cycle. Many in and outside of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo predicted the failure of those
elections. They were wrong. I know of no reason at this
point why Congolese elections for the next election
cycle cannot represent the kind of democratic and
successful exercise that the Congolese nation and
people both deserve and need. I would call on all the
parties to take the necessary steps to ensure that the
upcoming elections are conducted in a peaceful,
democratic and successful manner. I strongly urge the
Council's continued support for the process and for
MONUSCO's essential support role.

Before concluding, I would like to note the
importance of the United Nations continuing efforts
regarding stabilization related activities that are also
essential for the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
future success. Those include continued progress in
implementing the International Security and
Stabilization Programme in support of the stabilization
and reconstruction plan for areas emerging from armed
conflict initiative in the cast, for which more funding is
needed. I am pleased to note good progress towards the
formal adoption of a peace consolidation programme
encompassing stabilization and development activities
in the western parts of the country. I hope that this
initiative will spur additional resource mobilization for
urgently needed activities in those parts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. International and
Regional Cooperation Minister Tshibanda spoke of the
status and importance of those programs during the
18 May discussion. I fully concur with his statements.
I must stress the particular importance of further
strengthening the capabilities and functions of the
Congolese National Police, which the Government of

the Democratic Republic of the Congo has requested
MONUSCO to support. I welcome the encouraging
recent passage of legislation by the National Assembly
that provides for the role, responsibilities and structure
of the Congolese National Police. We are very much
committed to expanding police capacity and are
conducting a range of programmes. However, they are
limited by insufficient resources and cannot meet the
requests of the Government. While expressing full
appreciation to those partners already engaged in
funding Congolese National Police programmes, I
would like to appeal again to all potential donors to
fund additional police training and equipment
programmes. I assure the Council of our eagerness to
make effective use of the resources committed.

I also would like to stress the importance of
reinforced efforts to strengthen judicial and military
institutions. The growing number of military trials of
security personnel, including officers of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC), who have been found guilty of serious
abuses, including rape and other gender-based
violence, has been very encouraging. This is critical to
ending impunity, and the work of a number of military
prosecutors and their staff is most commendable.
However, capacity overall in both the civilian and
military justice systems is still weak. We in
MONUSCO are committed, with the support of other
partners, including Canada and the United States, to
the joint prosecution support cell initiative and other
programmes that support the work of FARDC
investigators, prosecutors and judges. However, more
is needed. In that regard, I very much encourage and
welcome additional partner engagement in those areas,
as well as for the important corrections sector.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, allow me to take this opportunity
to thank the personnel of MONUSCO and United
Nations agencies for their unstinting devotion and
support to the Mission. Their work has made a crucial
contribution - and I am sure it will continue to do
so- to the peace process, the holding of elections
and, more generally, to the goal of peace and security
in the region, which the Congolese people need so
much. I should like to conclude by noting the
outstanding progress made by partner countries, and
especially by the Congolese themselves. The support of
the Council and the various international partners has
been crucial in the search for lasting peace, security
and economic revival in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

(spoke in English)
I thank the Council for its continuing support.

