Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Like
previous speakers, I shall be brief. At the outset, I
thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing, which informed us
of Mr. Holkeri's activities in Kosovo. At our last
meeting on this item we expressed our satisfaction at
the assignment of Mr. Holkeri, who had an outstanding
term as President of the General Assembly a number of
years ago. We trust that the contacts Mr. Holkeri has
established with a broad range of local political
officials in Kosovo will bear the fruit wished for by
everyone, in conformity with resolution 1244 (1999).

We believe that Kosovo today is at a crucial
stage. On the one hand, we note significant progress in
achieving a substantial degree of autonomy, especially
the gradual transfer of authority and of non-reserved
responsibilities, in keeping with chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework. That process must continue.
However, a series of deplorable acts of violence - all
occurring during the period in question - resulting in
deaths and injuries would seem to continue to tarnish
the process. We condemn those acts of violence in the
most emphatic terms.

In addition to voicing our concern at those violent
incidents and at crimes against minorities, we should
like to say that in our view they must not and cannot
derail the peace process. All manifestations of
ethnically motivated violence, harassment and
discrimination run counter to the achievement of a
multi-ethnic Kosovo and violate the spirit of resolution
1244 (1999). We acknowledge the measures undertaken
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to find and bring to justice the
perpetrators of those acts. We firmly believe that
without the significant and sustainable return of
internally displaced persons and refugees, the building
of a multi-ethnic democratic society capable of
integrating all of Kosovo's inhabitants is impossible.

We agree with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of a plan to
operationalize the points of reference within the
framework of the "standards before status" policy, and,
in relation to Kosovo's final status, we call on the
parties to avoid any implicit or explicit form of
provocation.

Finally, we urge the parties to deepen and
broaden the dialogue. We welcome Mr. Holkeri's
statements concerning closer dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. Without that dialogue - or
without dialogue between UNMIK and the Kosovo
Assembly - the achievement of concrete results with
respect to the major challenges is a distant prospect.

I hope I have kept within three minutes, Mr.
President.

