We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. We believe that combining Security Council meetings on the political and humanitarian situation in Syria serves not only the goal of optimizing the Council's programme of work but also the need to comprehensively assess the situation in the country, where, with the help of a number of our colleagues, those two tracks have long been intertwined due to the politicization of humanitarian issues. We thank the Special Envoy for information on the results of his visit to Damascus and the discussions he had there, including those related to the work of the Constitutional Committee. This is a Syrian-owned and -led process. It is important to give Syrians the opportunity to negotiate without interference from the outside. The work of the Constitutional Committee should not be subject to any deadlines. We hope that, through the mediation of the Special Envoy, the work of that body will continue in line with the agenda agreed by the Syrians. For quite some time, the situation has been more stable in the areas of Syria under the control of the legitimate Government. That is happening despite measures of political and economic pressure on the Syrian people from certain Western States. Idlib, controlled by the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists, and the territories in the north-east that are illegally occupied by the United States, remain zones of instability. In the Idlib de-escalation zone, the implementation of the Russian- Turkish agreements continues, although terrorists constantly stage provocations. It is obvious that achieving lasting stabilization in Idlib and other Syrian provinces is possible only if the terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS), Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and their accomplices are neutralized. I listened very carefully to the statement made by Mr. Heusgen today, as I always do. I could comment on every sentence he made, but I will not be doing so because my statement would take too long. But I would like to refer to just one thing. There is a classic Russian novella by a master of Russian literature, Mikhail Bulgakov, called Heart of a Dog. It is about a dog that was turned into a human by genius medic Professor Preobrazhenskiy. It is set in the period following the Russian revolution, with the Bolsheviks already in power. Professor Preobrazhenskiy - an old-world, old-regime character - and his assistant sit at a lunch table, and the Professor says: "I implore you not to read Soviet newspapers before lunch because they lead to indigestion". Similarly, I implore Mr. Heusgen not to read The New York Times before Security Council meetings on Syria. We have already had occasion to comment on certain New York Times articles. We read so much false information on Russia in The New York Times that we are not surprised that he used that source today. However, we strongly discourage him from doing so in future. Given that there are no hostilities except counter-terrorism in the country, we increasingly question why our Western colleagues are calling for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria. Who are they trying to protect? With whom do they propose we conclude such an agreement? We have seen an increase in terrorist activities in other parts of Syria, including in the north-east. The recent release of 600 ISIS members from custody by the Kurdish Administration is worrisome. The dangerous consequences of such a step are obvious. We already receive information about an increase in terrorist acts on behalf of radicals who infiltrate areas controlled by Damascus and fight the Syrian army. Foreign occupation and attempts to tear the Kurds away from the multi- confessional Syrian State are fuelling separatist sentiments and contribute to the regrettable radicalization of the population and growth of tribal conflicts in the region. For our part, we consistently advocate the unity of Syria and respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We note the efforts of the Syrian Government to rebuild the country after the conflict and create normal living conditions for its citizens, including refugees. No matter how much the opponents of Damascus try to prevent it, people want to return, and do return, home. Nobody talks of forced return. People do it voluntarily. It is a fact that cannot be denied. In that regard, it is necessary to intensify the efforts of the international community to provide comprehensive assistance to all Syrians wishing to return to their homeland and to create appropriate conditions for them, including restoring basic infrastructure and communications, building housing and continuing humanitarian demining. It is a laborious process, requiring considerable financial resources. But such work needs to be started. It would be an excellent example of the approach promoted by a number of States to better integrate humanitarian work with development assistance. An international conference on the return of refugees and internally displaced persons and the restoration of peaceful life will be held in Damascus on 11 and 12 November in order to form a holistic picture of the situation of Syrian refugees in the region and the parameters of their return to their places of permanent residence. Invitations were sent to a wide range of States and international organizations. The forum will provide a platform for substantive dialogue with all stakeholders on all issues related to providing assistance to Syrians returning to their homes. Unfortunately, we are forced to say that, due to anti-Syrian bias, a number of colleagues immediately started to discredit this humanitarian initiative. We are receiving clear signals about the refusal of a number of Western States to even discuss this topic, despite the fact that the task of creating conditions for the safe and voluntary return of refugees and the rehabilitation of the affected areas is inscribed in resolution 2254 (2015). Even with this issue and with the Secretary-General's appeal to lift unilateral coercive measures, our colleagues seek a selective approach. We must search for mutually acceptable solutions, but, unfortunately, that is not happening. We see only increasing pressure on Damascus, the imposition of more sanctions, the illegal occupation of territories and profiting from and pillaging sovereign natural resources in the north-east. The needy population of Syria, most of whom live in Government-controlled territories, is deprived of that income. Against the backdrop of illegal unilateral sanctions, the country is completely deprived not only of the opportunity but also of the right to sustainable development. Furthermore, the double standards in the application of sanctions, on the one hand, and the irresponsible pollution of the environment in the north-east - with far- reaching consequences for the health of a vast number of Syrians living in these territories - on the other hand, are evidence of increasing cynicism. We are disappointed that the United Nations continues to ignore this issue. We note with satisfaction the progress in United Nations humanitarian deliveries from inside Syria, including through cross-line routes. This proves that the Government of Syria is fulfilling its obligation to provide humanitarian assistance to the population of the country, including in the areas out of its control, in a non-discriminatory and non-politicized manner. This is happening despite numerous oft-repeated accusations and assertions that there is no alternative to the cross-border mechanism. This was never a surprise to us, however, as we have always known that this cross-border issue was just a political game. Incidentally, we would like to ask Mr. Lowcock what happened to the cross-line convoy that since April was supposed to have been sent to Idlib. In conclusion, we would like to inform the Security Council that, on 16 October, 27 Russian children, aged from 2 to 13, were returned to Russia from the Al-Hol camp. After the easing of quarantine measures caused by the pandemic, the flight that transported them was the third of its kind. In total, since 2017, 102 Russian minors have been brought back from Syria to our country. Considering the north- east administration's plans to disband the Al-Hol camp, we draw the attention of our colleagues to the growing need for their countries to repatriate their citizens.
