Mr. Langeland (Norway): Over the past years,
we have seen encouraging progress in efforts to
enhance protection measures in armed conflict. Despite
progress, the situation for civilians remains grim. That
has been amply proven true as we have witnessed the
unprecedented series of crises in the Middle East,
North Africa and sub-Saharan Africa in the past
months. Norway would like to emphasize six points
that are critical to the debate on the protection of
civilians.

First, the key to the protection of civilians is that
all States and parties bear the primarily duty to protect
civilians. The protection of civilians is a broad agenda
firmly anchored in the responsibility of States to
protect their own citizens and the complementary
responsibilities by the international community to
assist countries to fulfil their obligations.

Secondly, the Security Council has a
responsibility to authorize international protection
when States fail and betray their obligations to the
extreme of widespread and indiscriminate killing of
their own people. We welcome the Council's
decisiveness in taking necessary measures under
Chapter VII to protect civilians in both Libya and Cote
d'Ivoire. Norway has clearly supported resolutions
1970 (2011), 1973 (2011) and 1975 (2011) and
contributes to the implementation of two of those
resolutions. But we want to emphasize that those are
measures of last resort and were authorized after a
series of other preventive measures, that is,
condemning acts of violence, imposing targeted
sanctions and promoting accountability through
international commissions of inquiry and referral to the
International Criminal Court.
Recent actions taken by the Security Council, in
particular resolutions 1973 (2011) and 1975 (2011),
have raised concerns regarding intentions, impartiality
and possible ramifications for the broader agenda of
the protection of civilians. For us, it is essential that
such mandates are implemented strictly to protect
civilians and do not go beyond that.
The international community should work
towards common positions without double standards
and be able to take appropriate actions when it is
necessary. We urge the Security Council to continue
responding robustly, swiftly and consistently when
international law and human rights are gravely
violated. The grave situation in Syria should not be an
exception to this rule.

Thirdly, it is important to emphasize that the
common positions on the protection of civilians
agenda, which have been developed by the
international community over the past decade, need to
be upheld and further enhanced. The updated aide-
memoire (S/PRST/2010/25, annex), the adoption of
resolution 1960 (2010), which establishes a monitoring
and reporting mechanism on conflict-related sexual
violence, and the new strategic framework for the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping missions are
important steps forward.

Fourthly, it is essential to ensure that
humanitarian principles are not compromised and that
humanitarian assistance is not used for military and
political purposes. Constraints on humanitarian access
must be systematically monitored and properly
addressed. Today's armed conflicts usually take place
in densely populated areas, with extensive civilian
losses and damage to civilian buildings and
infrastructure as a result. In our view, international
humanitarian law also includes the Anti-Personnel
Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. Norway supports the Secretary-General's
call for more work by the international community to
better understand the impact of explosive weapons in
populated areas and to develop mechanisms for
improving civilian protection in that regard.

Fifthly, it is vital that the parties to a conflict bear
the primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
alleged violations of humanitarian law conducted by
forces under their command. The culture of impunity
must end. All parties must be held accountable under
law. That is why we believe it is important to consider
the key recommendations of the Secretary-General's
Panel of Experts on Accountability with regard to the
situation in Sri Lanka during the war in 2009. We
welcome their report, which reiterates the need for
accountability in Sri Lanka. Credible allegations of
human rights and humanitarian law violations by both
parties to the conflict should immediately be properly
investigated.
Sixthly, we witness today the essential role
played by the free media in areas affected by armed
conflicts. Thanks to media reporting, the killings, rapes
and looting in Walikale territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were brought to the world's
attention. Journalists can be instrumental in preventing
mass atrocities. Resolution 1738 (2006) calls on all
Governments to protect journalists in armed conflicts
and to end violence and attacks against journalists.
That resolution must be fully implemented, and a
stronger focus on the monitoring of such violations is
necessary.

Let me conclude by reaffirming that Norway is
fully committed to the agenda of the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts. It is important that
common norms continue to be developed and
implemented.

