Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing
today and for his work as Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

I would like to begin by recalling an obvious fact,
which is that the efforts of the international community
to help the Afghan people will never truly be crowned
with success unless the progress made over the past
12 years becomes irreversible. That progress is not
insignificant. To cite only a few examples, it has ranged
from establishing a collective infrastructure, to creating
out of nothing an army that will henceforth be in charge
of the country's entire territory and an education
network with a current enrolment of 6 million children,
including 2 million girls.

How can we ensure that those achievements will
last? First, as the Secretary-General recommends in
his report (S/2013/535), we should clearly spell out
the international community's long-term commitment
of support, in order to cut short any speculation about
a political and security vacuum after 2014. Then we
must help the Afghan authorities to succeed with
their political transition. There is no doubt that the
presidential and provincial elections to be held in April
2014 will be crucial to the country's future. If they do
not appear credible in the eyes of the people, the goal
of creating a stable, peaceful society in Afghanistan
will be compromised. We therefore call for the holding
of transparent and inclusive elections. We take note
of the efforts already made by the Afghan authorities
to ensure that their conduct will be secure. It is a
considerable task, as the assassination yesterday by
the Taliban of the head of the electoral commission in
Kunduz province has unfortunately already proved.
We welcome the establishment of a legal framework
regulating the elections. We regret, however, that the
framework gives women an insufficiently prominent
role, and we call on the Afghan authorities to do more to
ensure women's participation in the electoral process,
both as candidates and voters.

Another decisive piece of the political transition is
national reconciliation. In order for it to succeed, the
peace process must be largely carried out by the Afghans
themselves, since it is clear that only inter-Afghan
reconciliation can create a path towards a lasting end
to the violence. Where negotiations take place matters
little; what is important is that they be launched and that
they can rely on the support of regional stakeholders.

Making the gains permanent is not all. The
country must also make progress in a number of other
areas, starting with human rights. In that regard, we
are worried about the resurgence in the number of
civilian victims of the conflict, particularly women
and children. We are also concerned about the lack of
ambition in improving the condition of women. On this
issue, it should be made very clear that the international
community expects the Afghan authorities to live up
to their international commitments and ensure respect
for the principle of equal rights for men and women as
enshrined in the Constitution.

N0 society can make progress ifit deprives itself of
the contribution of half of its population. It is therefore
essential that the law banning violence against women
be applied and that steps be taken to promote women's
participation in every area of public life, including the
forces of law and order. It is unacceptable that women
in leadership positions should be targeted through
intimidation and assassination. In that regard, I would
just like to cite the example of police Lieutenant
Negara, the highest-ranking female officer in Helmand
province, who was assassinated in cowardly fashion a
few days ago. When women are threatened, they should
receive the same protection accorded to their male
colleagues.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate the importance that
Luxembourg attaches to the fate of children in conflict.
We welcome the fact that, in cooperation with UNICEF
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Afghan Government has drawn up a road map
aimed at giving new momentum to the Action Plan on
Underage Recruitment in the Afghan national security
forces. We believe it is crucial that UNAMA continue
to give effective support to the Afghan authorities in
implementing the Action Plan and the activities laid
out in the road map. We urge that UNAMA continue
to maintain adequate capacity for the protection of
children, in accordance with the provisions of resolution
2096 (2013).

In conclusion, I would like to ask the Special
Representative to convey our appreciation to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for the
remarkable work it is doing in what are often difficult
conditions.

