Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
associate myself, of course, with the statement made
earlier in the debate by the representative of Spain on
behalf of the European Union.
The situation in the occupied territories continues
to be of grave concern to the British Government.
Violence and retaliation have become the norm. The
lives of civilians on both sides are still threatened on an
almost daily basis. They are unable to live the ordinary
lives that most of us take for granted. In these
circumstances, it is, frankly, difficult to have any
optimism for the future, but we cannot give up. The
international community must continue its efforts to
work towards a final settlement that sees two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side within
recognized borders, with peace and security for both.
All the peoples in the region deserve nothing less than
peace. We therefore welcome the constructive outcome
of yesterday's meeting of the "quartet" in Washington,
DC.

There can be no military solution. Dialogue and
negotiation are the only way to a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement. The road map is clearly laid
out in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002) and in the Arab peace initiative
initiated by Crown Prince Abdullah. The United
Kingdom is committed to helping to restart a peace
process. This is why we, with the United States
Government, negotiated with Israel and the Palestinian
Authority an initiative to allow President Arafat to
resume his work inside and outside the occupied
territories. British and American supervisory wardens
are now overseeing the detention of six Palestinians in
a Palestinian Authority facility in Jericho and the
Israeli Government has, as agreed, withdrawn from
around President Arafat's compound and from
Ramallah. President Arafat will be able to travel
abroad and to return.

This is a step forward, but by itself it is not
enough. We hope that both sides will build on this
modest beginning to stop the violence and start the
talking. The Council has laid out clear imperatives for
the parties in its recent resolutions. Both sides must
move to a meaningful ceasefire and resume security
cooperation. Israel must withdraw from Palestinian-
controlled areas and should implement all relevant
Security Council resolutions, but President Arafat, now
that he is free to move outside his compound, must
make good use of his freedom to exercise political
leadership of the Palestinian Authority and of his
people and do all in his power to stop the violence.
Together with Prime Minister Sharon, who also needs
to demonstrate statesmanship at this time, he must
grasp this opportunity. Both need to demonstrate that
they are committed to peace and to lead their people
down that path.

The United Kingdom is deeply disappointed that
the Secretary-General's fact-finding team has not been
able to deploy to the Jenin refugee camp to ascertain
exactly what happened there during the Israeli military
operation. Israeli Government spokesmen have said
that the operation by the Israeli Defence Forces was
necessary and proportionate. If that is true, then the
Israeli Government had nothing to hide. We welcomed
Israel's acceptance of the team when the initiative was
first proposed, but we deplore the failure of the Israeli
Government to cooperate with the United Nations and
to allow the deployment of the United Nations fact-
finding team. The Secretary-General has rightly
concluded that this will make a fact-finding mission
impossible in the near future. Given the circumstances,
we entirely support the Secretary-General's decision to
disband the team, regrettable though that is. He and the
members of the team made every effort to create the
conditions in which the team could deploy. We, like the
Secretary-General, believe that they would have
produced an accurate, balanced, credible and
comprehensive report.

The international community needs to make up its
own mind about what happened in Jenin. We believe
that a balanced fact-finding exercise would have been
in Israel's best interests. In its absence, as the
Secretary-General has said, the long shadow cast by
events in Jenin will remain.

