Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): Let me first thank the speakers for the clarity
of their statements. Their suggestions are valuable
in view of the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
recommendations ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General
(S/2018/922). I should like to join in the congratulations
offered by the Ambassador of France on yesterday's
inaugural session of the Special Criminal Court. The
Court is essential to the fight against impunity.

Today, I would like to address three points: first,
the peace process; secondly, the protection of civilians;
and thirdly, security sector reform.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic. As President Touadera
said before the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.9), it
remains the only framework for peace negotiations
in the Central African Republic. In recent months,
we have considered how the United Nations could
strengthen its support for the African Initiative. The
invitation to join the panel of facilitators extended to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga,
and the announcement of the appointment of a Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the African
Union mark important milestones. That encouraging
development can only strengthen the momentum of the
peace negotiations. The various stakeholders must now
step up their efforts.

We call on the armed groups to lay down their arms.
We remind them that the Council can apply sanctions
against those who undermine peace. With a view to
establishing lasting peace, we call on the Government
to ensure the substantial participation of women in
the negotiations. The commitment of the countries of
the region is indispensable. We welcome the Sudan's
efforts for peace in the Central African Republic,
which are an integral part of the African Initiative. We
encourage MINUSCA to strengthen its coordinating
role in support of the political process, in line with the
report of the Secretary-General.

My second point concerns the protection of
civilians. This is a key task of MINUSCA in support
of the Central African authorities. That task remains
a challenge and will be particularly difficult if we do
not give the Mission the equipment and the means to
increase its mobility. At the same time, the Council
needs to learn from its experience, positive or negative,
in the area of operations. We committed to doing so
in the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations.

My third point concerns security sector reform.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands commends the work
of the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic and other partners that have
contributed to the rehabilitation of the security forces.
Sharing the same goal, all partners must cooperate
in a coordinated and transparent way. We call on the
authorities of the Central African Republic to contribute
to that approach.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General's letter
(S/2018/463) on the logistical support of MINUSCA
to the Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA). The first
deployments of the FACA have yielded encouraging
results. However, it lacks essential means, including
basic equipment. MINUSCA has a vital role to play in
preparing the FACA to resume the paramount task of
protecting civilians. That support must be in accordance
with the due diligence policy on human rights.

I will conclude by underlining that the moment
is critical for the people of the Central African
Republic. The humanitarian situation has deteriorated
significantly. Half of the population has been displaced.
Mistrust prevails, including towards the Mission. As the
warring parties prepare to meet soon at the negotiating

table, we remind them that they hold the key to a better
future for the people of the Central African Republic.

