Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): At the outset, we thank
Ambassador Denisov, Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his detailed and
substantive briefing concerning the activities of the
CTC for the past three months and its future work
programme for the first trimester of 2005. We also like
to congratulate him on his able leadership of the CTC.
Our thanks go also to Ambassador Ruperez and his
team for their work in the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). Greece, as a new member of the
CTC, is determined to actively participate in its work
and to establish close and constructive cooperation
with the Chairman and the other members of the
Committee.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later in the debate by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. I would like, however, to add the
following points.

Greece fully supports the open debates of the
Council on the activities of the CTC. We are convinced
that they contribute to further transparency and better
understanding of the Committee's role in the global
fight against terrorism and they increase its universal
legitimacy. In our view, the effective implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) is intrinsically linked to
public perception concerning the credibility and
legitimacy of the work carried out by the CTC.
By ensuring that all States have taken effective
steps aimed at fully implementing resolution 1373
(2001), enhancing their counter-terrorism capacity and
promoting universal adherence to anti-terrorism
conventions, the CTC has proved that terrorism is a
universal challenge and that the fight against it requires
both internal and global action. Greece is firmly
committed to the full implementation of that resolution
and other counter-terrorism resolutions, including,
most recently, resolution 1566 (2004).

However, we firmly believe that counter-
terrorism activities must at all times be in conformity
with respect for the United Nations Charter and
international law, including international human rights
law and refugee and humanitarian law. In that respect,
we welcome the recommendations of the report of the
High-level Panel on Treats, Challenges and Change
concerning terrorism and, in particular, those relating
to the need for all Member States to ratify and
thoroughly implement the 12 United Nations anti-
terrorism conventions and protocols, to achieve a
consensus definition on terrorism within the General
Assembly, to rapidly complete negotiations on a
comprehensive convention on terrorism, to promote a
comprehensive United Nations strategy to fight
terrorism and to institute a process for reviewing cases
of individuals and institutions claiming to have been
wrongly placed or retained on the watch lists of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

We are encouraged by the Security Council's
continued efforts to make the CTC more efficient,
competent and pertinent to global action against
terrorism, and to accelerate the revitalization process,
particularly by making the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate fully operational.

In our view, the provision of technical assistance
to States is a key element for the effective
implementation of the resolution. In this regard, we
welcome the initiative of the Committee to start
assessing the assistance needs of Member States and -
if the State concerned agrees - to share such
assessments with interested donor States and
organizations. In this connection, we think that the
updated Assistance Matrix is an important tool for
interested States to identify and obtain technical
assistance.

Following resolution 1566 (2004), we support the
development of a set of best practices, in consultation
with relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and United Nations bodies, to assist
States in implementing resolution 1373 (2001).

Concerning the main tasks of the Committee over
the next three months, Greece welcomes the decision
of the Committee to undertake its first visit to a United
Nations Member State. Such visits, carried out with the
consent of States, could be useful in terms of
establishing a better dialogue with such States and of
providing a more accurate picture of the situation on
the ground.

Finally, we welcome the forthcoming fourth
special meeting of the CTC with international, regional
and subregional organizations, to be held in Almaty,
Kazakhstan, in cooperation with the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Government of Kazakhstan.
Such meetings enhance the current level of cooperation
with international organizations, contribute to avoiding
duplication of activities and increase the effectiveness
of resource utilization.

