Mr. Mantovani (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
warmly thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his briefing. The reasons that keep the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Timorese leaders away from New York are well
understood.

Nevertheless, I would like to convey, through the
Under-Secretary-General, our full support to the
Special Representative for his efforts and to
Ambassador Santos, whom I also thank for his
intervention. We also convey our most sincere wishes
to President Ramos-Horta for a quick and full recovery
and a swift resumption of his functions.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union.

The attacks of 11 February in Dili, which we
have strongly condemned, must serve as a warning and
as a lesson. The warning is not to take for granted,
after the successful completion of the electoral cycle,
that the democratic progress of the country has reached
the point of no return and will face no further
obstacles. The lesson is to carefully consider the
requests of the Timorese authorities for a sustained
commitment by the United Nations in the current
configuration.

Many of the findings of the Security Council
mission and of the report of the Secretary-General have
been substantiated by the unfolding of the latest events.
I refer here to the need to address the root causes of the
2006 crisis, to the importance of a cooperative and
substantive political dialogue among all political
stakeholders and to the urgency of a thorough review
of the security sector arrangements, all with the
required assistance of the international community.
These must remain the main focus areas for the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
which is operating effectively and deserves our
strongest support. The complementary action of the
international security forces is also to be commended.

We strongly hope that the latest developments
will instil a new sense of urgency in the processes of
political reconciliation and State-building. We learned
that in the aftermath of the 11 February attacks the
reactions of the legitimate institutions, and of the
opposition, were exemplary. We also welcome the
readiness of the Government of Timor-Leste to accept
the additional assistance that the international
community, and its neighbours in particular, have
immediately offered at this crucial stage.

At the same time, we must bear in mind that
national ownership and participation in regional
processes remain the only long-term recipes for
sustainability. No form of international support can
replace the genuine will of the Timorese leaders and
people to pursue stability and development, in close
cooperation with their neighbours. Obviously, this
consideration does not preclude the need for sustained
international assistance in the foreseeable future, in a
spirit of interdependence, rather than one of
dependence, with the ultimate goal being full self-
reliance.

For its part, Italy, along with its European Union
partners, has constantly supported the young Timorese
democracy at all stages of its genesis and development.
During the recent visit to Rome of President Ramos-
Horta, additional projects were considered with the
Italian authorities in the areas of parliamentary
support, human resources development and cultural
and linguistic cooperation.

In this spirit of friendship, Italy is also ready to
support the extension for 12 months of the mandate of
UNMIT. I would like to praise UNMIT, in particular
for providing a bright example in terms of gender
mainstreaming in its activities and reporting.

Finally, I would like to highlight once again that
the failure to address impunity for past crimes is the
worst enemy of peace and stabilization, as shown by
the latest events. It is therefore imperative to ensure
justice and accountability for the events of 1999 and
2006, as provided for in relevant Security Council
resolutions.

