Mrs. Migiro (United Republic of Tanzania):
Tanzania welcomes this timely debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
at the initiative of the Arab League.

We note with sadness the prevailing gloom and
suffering that continue to afflict the Middle East
region, and the Palestinian people in particular. The
current relationship between the State of Israel and its
neighbours is increasingly characterized by an erosion
of trust. We see that as a serious threat to the huge
investment already made in promoting peace and
security in the region. Tanzania believes that
agreements reached by the parties after painstaking
effort must not be allowed to unravel.

We are aware that the Palestinian question is at
the core of the crisis in the Middle East. Therefore, the
challenge before the Security Council, the United
Nations as a whole and the international community is
to steer the parties towards the full realization of both
the aspirations of the people of Palestine to peace,
independence and statehood, and those of the people of
Israel to security. It is in this regard that Tanzania
continues to support the two-State solution, as
provided for in the road map, as a practical strategy in
accordance with United Nations resolutions aimed at
achieving a just solution to the conflict in the Middle
East.

We regret that the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories is deteriorating rapidly because
of continuous - and at times excessive - military
operations in Gaza and parts of the West Bank, which
have caused death and suffering to civilians. In our
view, that state of affairs is not conducive to peace and
stability. In addition, the withholding of financial
resources from the Hamas-led Government has
crippled its functions and has caused hardship to
employees and their dependents. That is collective
punishment of the Palestinian people and does not
contribute to an atmosphere of trust and mutual
confidence.
Yesterday, in his address to the General
Assembly, President Jakaya Kikwete of the United
Republic of Tanzania encouraged the Quartet to revive
the peace process laid down in the road map. He
reiterated our belief that a just, viable, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East can be
realized only through a negotiated settlement. We
therefore call for respect for all commitments mutually
agreed upon. Moreover, we call for an end to all
actions that would escalate and aggravate the
precarious situation that exists.

For its part, Israel should strive to live on the
basis of its democratic and humane origins. It should
respect international law and put to an end all practices
seen as amounting to the violation of human rights.
Israel's restrictions on the freedoms of the Palestinian
population, its settlement activities and the building of
the separation wall must be stopped, since they do not
help the implementation of the obligations under the
road map.

It is important to underscore the significance of
open communication in a negotiated solution to the
conflict. In that regard, we commend President
Mahmoud Abbas for his genuine effort to lead the
people of Palestine into constructive engagement with
Israel for the purpose of reviving the peace process, as
well as for his endeavour to form a government of
national unity. It is in the interests of the region and of
the international community to provide him with the
needed support and assistance.

