Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), for his presentation of
the Secretary-General's report on the implementation
of the mandate of UNSOM. and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) (S/2018/411). My
delegation wishes also to thank Mr. Francisco Caetano
Jose Madeira, Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).

My statement will focus mainly on developments
in the political, security and humanitarian situation
in Somalia.

On the political situation, my country welcomes the
improved relations between the Federal Government
and the federal states, which led to an agreement on
financial and operational support for the regional
security forces in the framework of their incorporation
into the state police forces. My country welcomes also
the progress made in the establishment ofa functioning
federal State in Somalia, including the adoption by the
various parties of the political road map for the period
2017-2020, the establishment of the memorandum of
understanding on the constitutional review process,
the involvement of the federal authorities in the various
national reconciliation initiatives, and the progress
achieved in preparing for the 2020-2021 elections by
universal suffrage.

On this last point, my country welcomes the
inclusive approach adopted by the National Independent
Electoral Commission in the context of consultations
aimed at overcoming possible obstacles to the holding
of free, democratic and transparent elections.

However, Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned at the
continuing tensions in the federal Parliament and the
resulting impact on the adoption of several draft laws
that are essential for building the Somali State. We
urge the Somali political actors to resolutely engage
themselves in building a strong and prosperous Somali
State. Cote d'Ivoire therefore welcomes the appointment
of the new Speaker of the House of the People and
hopes that this will lead to a constructive relationship
between the country's legislative and executive powers.

On the security front, it is clear that despite the
air strikes against the strongholds of the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group, the latter continues to pose a serious
threat to security in Somalia, as evidenced by the
attacks carried out during the first quarter of this year
against Somali national army soldiers and those of
AMISOM. These attacks confirm once again the need
for the international community, including the Council,
to support Somalia in its security-sector reform process
in order to enable the effective implementation of the
transition plan aimed at a handover of responsibilities
from AMISOM. to the country's security forces.

My country calls upon all national and international
actors working in Somalia to pool their efforts in
providing operational and financial support for the
successful implementation of the Somali transition plan.

In this regard, Cote d'Ivoire commends the
support provided by UNSOM, UNSOS and the other
United Nations agencies present in Somalia to the
Somali security institutions in the framework of the
strengthening of their operational capacities. We note
with satisfaction that the Somali authorities, in spite of
the difficulties encountered, continue to work towards
the implementation of the national security architecture
through, inter alia, the incorporation of the regional
security forces into the national army.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the commitment
of the Federal Government and the federal states to
work together constructively in building a State based
on the rule of law, as demonstrated by the signing of
an agreement on the justice and corrections model in
Somalia. It also encourages the leaders of the federal
states to accelerate their justice and corrections plan.

My country remains concerned about the
increasingly worrisome humanitarian situation.
According to the Secretary-General's report, the level
of malnutrition is among the highest in the world, as
5.4 million people require humanitarian assistance,
with 2.1 million others displaced and dependent on
international support. That situation is exacerbated
by floods as a result of heavy rains in several parts of
the country in recent weeks, leading to the destruction
of crops and people's properties and significantly
reducing their means of livelihood. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to
date approximately 718,000 people have been affected
by the floods.

Humanitarian needs continue to increase, while the
humanitarian aid plan developed for 2018 is only 19 per
cent funded. Given that situation, while recognizing
the considerable financial and material efforts already
made, my delegation encourages international partners
and donors to mobilize in order to contribute to the
financing of the 2018 humanitarian assistance plan and
to respond urgently to the humanitarian needs of the
Somalis in need.

Like the Secretary-General, Cote d'Ivoire also
urges the Somali authorities and its development
partners to draw up an integrated strategy in order to
find viable solutions to the root causes of the famine in
the country.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its thanks to
UNSOM, UNSOS and all international partners working
in Somalia for the multifaceted assistance that they
continue to provide to the country under very difficult
conditions. We call on them to further coordinate their
efforts and strategy in support of Somalia.

