Ms. Haq: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/85) on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), in my first
appearance before the Security Council as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste.

A substantial portion of the report is dedicated to
the findings and recommendations of the technical
assessment mission, which visited Timor-Leste from
10 to 17 January and worked jointly with me and other
members of the UNMIT leadership, as well as the
United Nations country team. The assessment mission
engaged in extensive consultations with the Timor-
Leste authorities and other stakeholders across the
political spectrum, including the opposition and civil
society.

I am pleased to acknowledge the presence today
of the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, His
Excellency Jose' Luis Guterres. I would also like to
express my appreciation to President Jose Ramos-
Horta, President of the National Parliament Fernando
"Lasama" de Araujo, Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana
Gusmao and the leader of the Frente Revolucionaria do
Timor-Leste Independente (FRETILIN) opposition,
Mari Alkatiri, for their warm reception and agreement
to continue regular discussions with me on a weekly
basis. I have also received warm welcomes from the
Council of Ministers and various segments of Timor-
Leste's population, including from civil society and
representatives of the church and local communities in
the districts of Dili, Lautem, Baucau and Oecusse,
which I have visited over the past weeks.
10-2486]

Although I have been Special Representative for
only about six weeks, it is evident that remarkable
progress has been made since the events of 2006,
which led to the establishment of UNMIT. There is a
vibrant civic life, with active commercial areas in Dili
and other urban centres. Crime rates remain low and
have shown a decreasing trend over the past year, with
an average of 87 security incidents reported weekly to
police during the period from 24 September 2009 to
20 January 2010, down from an average of 118 incidents
reported weekly to police in the period from 9 July
2008 to 20 January 2009.

Timor-Leste has reached a new stage, Where there
is an intensified focus on measures needed to sustain
stability, deepen democracy and the rule of law, reduce
poverty and strengthen institutions. Timor-Leste, under
the stewardship of its national leaders, is now working
to consolidate the gains of the past and to ensure a
smooth transition to the recovery and development
phase. This will require continued efforts on the part of
the Timorese, as well as the continued support of the
international community. The problems arising from
the 2006 crisis were considerable, but the long-term
challenges ahead may prove to be even more difficult
to address.

It is important to note that many State institutions
have demonstrated increasing capacity, which has been
bolstered by better security and stability, the assistance
of the United Nations and other members of the
international community and, most importantly, the
commitment of the staff of those institutions. These
include, among many others, the Ministry of Social
Solidarity, the electoral management bodies and the
Banking and Payments Authority of Timor-Leste. This
demonstrates that, given such commitment and with
continued stability and targeted and coordinated
international assistance, other institutions can also
overcome the fragilities and challenges mentioned in
the Secretary-General's report.

Democratic processes are maturing. Needless to
say, political parties have their differences, as they do
in any multiparty democracy. However, events over the
reporting period demonstrate renewed commitment to
expressing these views in a manner that does not
undermine the process of interactive dialogue, which is
essential to proceed with recovery from the 2006 crisis.

Political leaders have shown real willingness to
work across party lines to address issues of national
10-24861

importance. For example, on 1 February, after several
months of stalemate, Parliament was able to select the
Chairman of the Anti-Corruption Commission, who
was sworn in on 22 February. This was possible in
large part because of the leadership of Prime Minister
Gusmao and all political parties represented in
Parliament, who demonstrated their willingness to
move forward on a priority national issue. Now that the
leadership has shown the political commitment
necessary to allow the establishment of the
Anti-Corruption Commission to move forward, it is
essential to focus on the building of that institution, as
well as many others, in order to increase
accountability, transparency and good governance.

Another major governance initiative is the
possible formation of municipalities, and we await
clarification by the Timorese authorities of their plans
for municipal elections. While all political leaders with
whom I have interacted expect that these elections will
be highly contested, it is hoped that they will be
conducted in the same peaceful manner as the village
(suco) elections.

President Ramos-Horta continued his important
efforts to facilitate and encourage mutual engagement
among leaders on issues of national importance. He has
informed me that his joint meetings with the Prime
Minister and the Secretary-General of FRETILIN will
be held regularly. The efforts of the President also
extend down to the community, as he meets regularly
with people at the grass-roots level in Dili and the
districts. The various initiatives that support his "Dili,
City of Peace" campaign are an admirable reflection of
his proactive efforts to establish a stable and peaceful
democracy. It is also encouraging that recent
statements by F RETILIN have committed the party to
ensuring peace and stability.

Long-term security and stability depend on the
development of a national police force that is
professional and impartial and operates with due
respect for the rule of law and human rights. The jointly
owned process of resumption of primary policing
responsibilities by the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) will require continued concentrated efforts to
ensure that it provides the necessary foundation for
longer-term institution-building efforts. The need for
such a foundation informed the development of the
mutually agreed criteria for resumption.
3

I have just received assessment reports on the
districts of Dili and Ermera and the Special Police Unit
from the joint technical team consisting of civilian and
police representatives from the Government and
UNMIT. The team concluded that Dili and the Special
Police Unit do not yet meet the criteria for resumption
and require further measures to strengthen capacities,
while Ermera has met the criteria. As per the usual
practice, action plans for Dili and the Special Police
Unit will be developed and implemented to prepare
them for resumption.

In the meantime, resumption maintains its
momentum. All of the districts have been assessed and
the PNTL has resumed primary policing responsibilities
in four districts and three units, with resumption in two
additional districts, Baucau and Ainaro, scheduled for
March. With this momentum sustained and with both
UNMIT and the Government continuing their
concentrated efforts to meet the mutually agreed
criteria and to ensure the integrity of the certification
process, there is a strong possibility that the resumption
process can be completed by the end of 2010. In this
regard, I would note that the report of the Secretary-
General particularly focuses on the need for the
Government to address PNTL logistical challenges.

I am determined to move this resumption process
forward, in close cooperation with the Government of
Timor-Leste, including in the context of the team that
will be planning the downsizing of UNMIT during the
period through 2012. Reconfiguring and reorienting the
UNMIT police component towards post-resumption
challenges will be one of my main priorities. This
includes supporting further skills development for the
PNTL in critical areas such as the appropriate use of
force, community policing and criminal investigations.
PNTL accountability mechanisms must also continue
to be improved to avoid impunity for acts of
misconduct. Appropriate disciplinary and criminal
investigations have been initiated in recent incidents of
alleged abuse by the PNTL in Dili. Encouragingly, the
Timorese leadership and the President of Parliament
have expressed concern and specifically asked for
reinforced UNMIT support to the PNTL Department of
Justice, which is the unit responsible for disciplinary
investigations.

As the resumption process progresses and
UNMIT police increasingly need to focus on the
institutional development of the PNTL, the difficulties
springing from the lack of sufficient numbers of
specialized police trainers and advisers are likely to
become even more acute. In this connection, I appeal
to police-contributing countries to consider this
carefully and to make every effort to provide police
officers with the necessary technical skills and
competencies, as well as the training background
required for effective skills transfer. This will be a
major area of focus for UNMIT but will need to be a
collective undertaking for the United Nations and
contributors alike. As recommended by the technical
assessment mission and stressed by the Secretary-
General in the report, where specialized personnel
cannot be provided by police-contributing countries or
where continuity in functions is particularly important,
consideration should be given to seeking additional
civilian personnel with required expertise to assist.

Regarding the overall security sector, the clear
definition and delineation of roles and responsibilities
of the PNTL and the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), and the strengthening of
civilian oversight and management capacities, are
particularly critical outstanding issues. It will thus be
important for the package of national security
legislation under consideration by Parliament and the
related subsidiary legislation to be adopted - as well
as the national security policy under preparation - to
adequately address these issues.

Perhaps the greatest long-term challenges for
Timor-Leste will be socio-economic. I am pleased to
note that the Government demonstrated its renewed
commitment to the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and coherent, transparent, coordinated and truly
Timorese-owned planning processes. On 26 January,
the National MDG Steering Committee held its first
meeting, chaired by the Minister of Finance. The Prime
Minister is currently leading preparation of the medium
to long-term National Strategic Development Plan. I
look forward to early consultation by the Government
with relevant stakeholders on the proposed Plan and its
finalization, as it will be critically important for there
to be alignment between the Plan and national budget
allocations, as well as for assistance strategies of
international partners to take it into account.

In my visits outside the capital, local community
members expressed their desire that development efforts
should more effectively reach rural areas. Timorese
leaders themselves have expressed similar concerns, and
it is essential that the Government redouble its efforts
to ensure that development benefits are felt equally in

10-2486]
rural and urban areas. This will entail appropriate
budgetary allocations to the social services sectors and
the strengthening and decentralization of line ministries.
Also, significant efforts by Government and Parliament
in such areas as gender-responsive budgeting will
require continued and intensified commitment in order
to ensure the empowerment and meaningful
participation of women in all sectors of society.

I also note that more than 60 per cent of the
population is under the age of 25 and that 48 per cent is
below the age of 17. This is a potential asset for the
future of the country. However, with an estimated
15,000 to 20,000 new entrants in the labour market
every year, and with the current unemployment rate of
18.4 per cent among young people nationwide, the lack
of employment opportunities is also a serious challenge
to sustaining economic growth and human
development and, I might caution, will have serious
security consequences if not adequately addressed.

The rule of law with due respect for human rights
requires commitment to accountability and judicial
independence. On 15 February, two additional
defendants charged in relation to violence that occurred
during the 2006 crisis were found guilty of violence
against persons and property and illegal use of firearms,
ammunition and explosives. One was sentenced to
imprisonment for eight years and the other to six years
and six months. This is another step forward in judicial
processes towards fulfilment of the recommendations
of the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry.

In my meetings with Timorese authorities, I
continue to reiterate the United Nations position that
there can be no amnesty or impunity for serious crimes
such as genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Although the President acted within his
constitutional prerogatives, I discussed with him
concerns that the pardons issued on 25 December 2009
could exacerbate perceptions of impunity. I would also
like to reiterate that the four F-FDTL members
convicted of manslaughter in the shooting deaths of
eight PNTL officers in 2006, one of whom was
pardoned and three of whom received sentence
reductions, have yet to pay the court-ordered
compensation to the victims' widows.

I would like to recall that the report of the
Secretary-General and the technical assessment
mission highlighted the broad desire of the Timorese
leaders and other national stakeholders across the
10-24861

board for a continued UNMIT presence, concentrating
on the four mandated priority areas, through the crucial
period up to 2012. Keeping in mind the priorities
identified by the assessment mission for the 2010-2012
period in each of UNMIT's mandated priority areas,
adjustments and refinements to the United Nations
approach will inevitably need to be made in order to
take into account changing and evolving conditions on
the ground.

In the coming days and weeks, I will work
closely with the Government and other relevant
national stakeholders, the United Nations country team
and international partners to develop proposals for the
reconfiguration of the mission through 2012, subject,
of course, to the Security Council's agreement that
such a presence is necessary. This will include a
gradual drawdown of UNMIT police, which, as the
report notes, should be approached cautiously and be
subject to an assessment in late 2010.

Before I conclude, let me thank the Deputy
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, Finn
Reske-Nielsen and Takahisa Kawakami, as well as all
the staff of UNMIT and the United Nations country
team who have been so steadfast in their support of
efforts to assist Timor-Leste. Most importantly, let me
also express my admiration for the determination and
will of the Timorese people who continue to strive for
a peaceful and better future for their country. I look
forward to receiving the guidance of the Security
Council and hope that it will renew its commitment to
the people of Timor-Leste.

