Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: I would like to begin by
thanking the Council for the opportunity to present the
eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2013/547). The report
highlights major developments that have taken place in
Sierra Leone over the past six months, and the progress
made towards the completion of UNIPSIL's mandate

and transfer of its remaining tasks to the United Nations
country team on 31 March 2014.

Since I last briefed the Council, in March (see S/PV.6933), there have been notable developments
in Sierra Leone. The United Nations and Sierra
Leone's development partners have continued their
support to the Government in the implementation
of its national development strategy, known as the
Agenda for Prosperity (2013-2018). The strategy lays
the foundations for rapid and sustainable economic
growth and democratic transformation by focusing on
key economic, social and governance sectors. The total
cost of the Agenda is about $6 billion, with a funding
gap of more than $2 billion. Closing such a significant
funding gap and achieving the goals set by the strategy
requires far more international support, as well as the
mobilization of substantial domestic resources, through
increased domestic and foreign investment. Most
importantly, it demands the full ownership, absolute
dedication and hard work of all Sierra Leoneans.
Robust systems and institutional and legal frameworks
that would attract foreign and domestic investment
with good corporate social responsibility are also key
to the successful implementation of the Government's
agenda.

The launching on 30 July of the long-awaited
constitutional review process is another significant
development of the past six months. We are pleased that
the process is led and owned by the Sierra Leoneans,
as amply demonstrated in the composition of the
Constitutional Review Committee that is spearheading
the review process.

We commend President Koroma for his leadership
and commitment to an inclusive and transparent
constitutional review process. The review presents a
historic opportunity for strengthening Sierra Leone's
democratic institutions, anchoring the rule of law and
human rights, leading to a modern and more inclusive
system of governance, promoting equitable economic
development and social justice for all; those will in
turn foster greater cohesion and unity among Sierra
Leoneans. Funding for the review process has been
secured through contributions from the Government of
Sierra Leone, the European Union, the United Kingdom
Department for International Development and the
United Nations.

With the support of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole, Sierra Leone has
made significant progress over the past decade in the
consolidation of its hard-won peace and democratic
transformation. Sustaining those gains and achieving
the country's ambitious development aspirations would,
however, require continued efforts and commitment
to strengthening and empowering the country's
democratic institutions and promoting the rule of law
and democratic governance. In that respect, attention
and priority should continue to be given, inter alia, to
combating corruption, ensuring the professionalism and
independence of the security and justice sectors, and
building the capacity of national institutions, including
Parliament, to effectively play their role.

We commend the Government's political
commitment to combating corruption, in particular
President Koroma's zero-tolerance policy. In the
same vein, we wish to underline the importance of
continued support for the efforts of the Anti-Corruption
Commission to effectively discharge its mandate.

Sierra Leone's political parties, in particular the
ruling All People's Congress and the main opposition
party, the Sierra Leone People's Party, have an
important role to play in maintaining and consolidating
the country's multiparty democracy and political
pluralism. To that end, it is incumbent on them to resolve
all intra- and inter-party disputes through dialogue and
working together, putting the country's interest above
all others.

As requested by the Council, UNIPSIL has
finalized and is implementing a transition and exit
plan aimed at the mission's full drawdown by 31 March
2014. The plan addresses both the implementation of the
mission's remaining mandate, as outlined in resolution
2097 (2013), and the transfer of residual tasks to the
United Nations country team. In that regard, following
consultations with the Government, the United Nations
country team and other partners, we have finalized
programme documents covering key activities in the
three priority areas, namely, constitutional review,
security sector reform and conflict prevention. Those
activities will be implemented during the next two to
four years, with funding to be secured from bilateral
sources, the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund.

The drawdown and closure of various components
and field offices of UNIPSIL are also proceeding as
planned. As indicated in the report before the Council,
the mission's aviation unit and the Democratic
Institutions Section have been closed. The Human
Rights Section will complete its work by the end of
December 2013, with the human rights-related work
of the United Nations transferred to the Resident
Coordinator's Office. The remaining components ofthe
mission, namely, the Political and Peace Consolidation
Section and the United Nations Police, will continue
their work, with reduced capacity, until the closure of
the mission.

With respect to UNIPSIL's field offices, the
regional office in the eastern province was closed in
April, and the remaining three offices will either be
closed or transferred to the United Nations country
team by the end of December. Given the importance of
continuing the work of the United Nations in the field,
I am encouraged by the interest some United Nations
agencies have shown to take over UNIPSIL's facilities
and maintain a presence in the various regions of Sierra
Leone. However, the scope of those agencies' presence
will depend on availability of funding.

Most importantly, as UNIPSIL is making good
progress in the implementation of its transition and
drawdown plan, the United Nations country team has
also stepped up its work in finalizing a United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for the period
2015-2020. The Framework will replace the joint
UNIPSIL/United Nations country team strategy or the
United Nations joint Vision, and serve as the United
Nations strategy to support the Government's Agenda
for Prosperity.

The implementation of UNIPSIL's transition and exit
strategy is on course, and we are firmly set to complete
a full drawdown on 31 March 2014. At the same time,
Sierra Leone has embarked on major undertakings: the
launching of the country's development agenda * the
Agenda for Prosperity - and a constitutional review
exercise. Those are ambitious undertakings, but they are
also essential for Sierra Leone's economic development
and democratic transformation and in addressing the
root causes of the conflict identified in the report of the
Sierra Leone Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

There are already high expectations. Success in
meeting those expectations and building a prosperous,
democratic and peaceful country is not only the
responsibility of the Government or a particular group,
but a shared responsibility of all Sierra Leoneans,
including the country's political parties, civil society,
traditional leaders and others. I therefore call on all
Sierra Leoneans to set aside their political differences
and group interests and work together in a spirit
of national unity to promote the development and
democratization agenda of their country.

In concluding, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank the people and the Government of Sierra Leone,
in particular President Ernest Bai Koroma, for their
continued support for the work of the United Nations,
including the seamless and timely implementation of
UNIPSIL's transition plan. I would also like to thank
the Security Council for its continued interest in Sierra
Leone and our activities in the country.

