Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): It gives me great
pleasure to welcome the High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres, who has been on the
job a few months now. I wish to thank him for his very
informative and comprehensive briefing on the
important issue of refugees and internally displaced
persons. As we all know, the Security Council is
paying particular attention to these issues, which form
part of all the crises that we have on our agenda.

We all are committed to the need for the survival
and absolute protection of refugees from attacks,
forced recruitment and sexual violence, especially
against women and children. We support the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and deeply respect the
dedication of its staff, many of whom have even
sacrificed their lives while carrying out their tasks in
perilous circumstances.

Armed conflicts in general result in the creation
of large numbers of refugees seeking asylum in other
countries, mainly neighbouring ones. We have seen this
scenario of human suffering play out again and again
throughout the world.

Africa has a considerable share of conflicts,
tensions and victims. The Sudan is the most recent
example, with more than 200,000 people fleeing the
country and almost 2 million internally displaced
persons in Darfur. UNHCR'S assistance is vital because
it is lifesaving.

In that respect, my question to the High
Commissioner is whether we in the United Nations
system have the potential to devise and implement a
mechanism for responding to crises as they emerge in
order to dispatch immediately available humanitarian
aid to the population under threat.
I have another question regarding protracted
refugee situations. Can he tell us to what extent
intensifying cooperation between UNHCR and regional
organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has given, or could
give, new impetus to the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees?

Another significant issue is how we identify and
deal with actual refugees seeking asylum. Greece is
very much interested and involved in this area, because
every year we receive a large number of illegal
immigrants and refugees. The truth is that we live in a
changing, challenging and complex world. In our
national capacity, we have to protect our borders and
security, in particular against the threat of terrorism,
while ensuring that we provide asylum protection to
those who are entitled to it under international law.

In that framework, and as a European Union
member State, Greece looks forward to the
establishment of a common European asylum system
by 2010, as set out in The Hague programme.

On the other hand, we are encouraged by recent
positive indications of a decrease in the total number of
refugees in past years and of an increase in the number
of voluntary repatriations, especially in Afghanistan,
Liberia, Rwanda and southern Sudan. We, too, believe
that repatriation is the best solution, but only when
linked to an environment of stability, security,
reconstruction and development. We hope that the
newly established Peacebuilding Commission will
provide a unique opportunity to ensure, along with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
protection of refugees and their reintegration into post-
conflict societies.

Refugees' humanitarian needs cover the whole
spectrum of protecting the essence of human life - the
dignity and human rights of every person.

In closing, I should like, therefore, to commend
once again the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and Mr. Guterres
personally for their tremendous work, which benefits
millions of people.

