Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): We are grateful to the Non-
Aligned Movement for its initiative in requesting this
open debate, which could have been convened even
earlier at the initiative of the members of the Security
Council themselves. Developments in the past few
months have raised very serious concerns, as the
international community seems to be drawn into the
dreadful logic of war.

This is a critical matter that concerns the
Membership of the United Nations as a whole.
International peace and security are clearly at stake, as
is the very credibility of our Organization, its
principles and methods of work. Not only should the
Security Council benefit from the views of non-
Member States on the most appropriate steps to be
taken, but also the wider membership of the United
Nations needs to be appraised on the difficult political
choices which are being considered by the Council.

In moments like this, our collective choices must
be guided by the need to ensure unconditional respect
for the norms of international law embodied in the
United Nations Charter and for the mandatory
decisions adopted by the Security Council, as well as
by the possibility of resorting to the instruments
provided in the Charter in order to ensure the
maintenance of peace and security; the use of military
force must only be considered as a measure of last
resort.

As Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Lafer stated
at the Assembly's second meeting, at the outset of the
general debate of the current session:

"The use of force at the international level
is admissible only once all diplomatic alternatives
have been exhausted. Force must be exercised
only in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and in a manner consistent with the
determinations of the Security Council.
Otherwise, the credibility of the Organization will
be undermined in a way that will not only be
illegitimate, but that also gives rise to situations
of precarious and short-lived stability. In the
specific case of Iraq, Brazil believes that it is
incumbent on the Security Council to determine
the necessary measures to ensure full compliance
with the relevant resolutions. The Security
Council's exercise of its responsibilities is the
way to reduce tensions and to avoid risking the
unpredictable consequences resulting from wider
instability."

There must be no mistake whatsoever on what the
entire international community expects from Iraqi
authorities. The fact that Iraq has blatantly refused to
cooperate with the United Nations in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions is a
matter of great concern, and not without consequences
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Iraq must abide strictly and unconditionally by its
obligations under those resolutions. The international
community requires full and verifiable assurances that
Iraq has completely demobilized its programmes of
weapons of mass destruction and that it is not in a
position to resume them.

The Security Council must act in accordance with
the international community's desire that inspections in
Iraq be resumed as soon as possible, with a View to
ensure the elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction. To that end, full compliance and
cooperation on the part of the Iraqi authorities is
absolutely necessary. Inspections must be carried out
independently by the United Nations and the
International Atomic Energy Agency with unrestricted
cooperation on the part of Iraq.

The Council should also be encouraged to define
positive incentives for full compliance that would lead
to the alleviation and gradual lifting of the sanctions
regime. If and when they are needed, further measures
of enforcement should be considered by the Security
Council in the light of an evaluation of the findings of
the inspections.

We trust that this debate will give the Security
Council a clearer picture of the views of the Member
States on this matter of great concern to us all.

