Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada wishes to express its gratitude to the Security
Council for having organized this public debate on
threats to international peace and security. We note that
this is, in fact, the continuation of a debate begun a
month ago at a meeting that resulted in the creation of
resolution 1456 (2003). We should like to take this
opportunity to express our opinion on that resolution,
as well as on the larger United Nations framework
devoted to the fight against terrorism.

Canada believes that resolution 1456 (2003)
makes an important contribution to the foundation laid
by resolution 1373 (2001) and to the existing
international legal counter-terrorism framework.

(spoke in English)

An important thread woven throughout this most
recent resolution is cooperation. We have all come to
understand the interdependence of our current security
environment. Where one of our partners is vulnerable
to terrorist exploitation, we are all put at risk.

It is in our mutual interest to enhance our
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Canada
views the creation of an international framework of
linked mutual legal assistance treaties as an important
step in the fight against international terrorism and
transnational crime. Such treaties allow our respective
judicial and law-enforcement agencies access to
witnesses and alleged suspects of crime. Other
agreements, such as memorandums of understanding,
are valuable tools that allow the exchange of security,
intelligence and information related to law enforcement
between individual agencies.

Canada also supports the Security Council's call
for States to assist one another to improve their
capacity to prevent and fight terrorism. Canadian
federal departments and agencies have provided
training, funding and expertise to more than 40 States
worldwide to help combat terrorism and fight against
transnational crime. We will do more.

As with official development assistance, donor
States need to avoid duplication and to ensure that gaps
are filled in the provision of counter-terrorism
capacity-building assistance. It is important to avoid
increasing the administrative burden on recipient
States. Canada is working with some donors to this
end, but we would encourage other interested donors to
join with us in exchanging information.

We have always looked to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) as a focal point for the coordination
of counter-terrorism capacity-building assistance, and
we hope that that will remain a priority focus for the
CTC under the Spanish chairmanship. If anything, we
are looking for more guidance from the CTC on
priorities and on ways that Canada, as a donor and non-
Council-member State, can help. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee has, in our view, capably fulfilled
its mandate to date, and we wish to congratulate
Ambassador Greenstock on his leadership.

As resolution 1456 (2003) notes, there is a need
to strengthen controls on nuclear, chemical, biological
and other potentially deadly materials. International
treaties, such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, are
key mechanisms to help strengthen disarmament
objectives and curb the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

Canada is actively participating in the
negotiations on an amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. We look
forward to a successful conclusion of negotiations next
month. To support the efforts of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to strengthen the
physical protection of nuclear facilities worldwide, the
Government of Canada will be making an additional
extrabudgetary voluntary contribution of $100,000 to
the IAEA's nuclear security action plan. Canada
believes that the IAEA has a pivotal role to play in
providing assistance to those Member States that may
have inappropriate or insufficient levels of physical
security at nuclear facilities. We remain committed to
supporting the Agency's work in that regard.

Export control supplier regimes - such as the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Australia Group, in
which Canada is very active - also help to ensure that
materials and technology that can contribute to the
spread of weapons of mass destruction do not end up in
unwanted hands. In this area, an ounce of prevention
has become a ton of cure.

In resolution 1456 (2003), we note the Security
Council's emphasis on creating a climate of mutual
tolerance and respect as an important component in a
holistic approach to combating terrorism. In Canada's
multicultural context, it would be impossible to talk
about counter-terrorism measures without being
intimately aware of the potential implications for
minorities. These potential implications were in the
forefront of our reflections at the time we drafted
Canada's Anti-Terrorism Act. That Act also sends a
clear message not just on terrorism, but also against
acts of hatred and discrimination.

Canada subscribes to this holistic approach,
which seeks to address situations of conflict and
violence as a part of the broader fight against terrorism.
We believe that just and equitable societies are best
equipped to prevent terrorism. Their populations are
less likely to be vulnerable to terrorist exploitation.
Canadians have long promoted human rights, good
governance and democratic development as essential to
the development of stable and secure societies. The
Government of Canada is resolved to enhance
cooperation with our international partners to combat
terrorism.

