Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Madam
President, for calling this meeting with the urgency that
the situation requires. I hope that the Security Council
will shoulder its responsibility and act in a firm and
united way in response to what we have seen.

Wejoin other members ofthe Council in condemning
the monstrous and cowardly attacks reported to have
been carried out with chemical weapons yesterday on
the people of Idlib. The pictures emerging are truly
shocking. We have seen the lifeless bodies of those
struck down as they went about their daily lives and the
heartbreaking images of children desperately gasping
for air. Our thoughts are with the families and friends
of those who died and who have been injured, but there
is also a sense of outrage. The attacks on the hospitals
that followed are equally appalling.

The use of chemical weapons is illegal and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security
and can amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity. What happened in Idlib must now be
investigated without delay. If the allegations are proven
to be correct, then this will be a gruesome addition to the
already-confirmed cases ofthe use ofchemical weapons
and other serious international crimes committed by
the Syrian regime. Those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria must be held accountable,
as the Council agreed in resolution 2209 (2015).

In the light of what we have seen over the last
24 hours, it is important that the Council now show
a united front. We must do all that is necessary to
facilitate the important work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). Sweden therefore fully
supports the draft resolution put forward this morning
by the United Kingdom, France and the United States.
There is an urgent need for OPCW fact-finding mission
to establish the facts and report its findings as soon
as possible, including to identify those responsible. In
order to do so successfully, they must receive the full
cooperation of the Syrian authorities.

This attack further underlines the importance of
the Council's continued focus on chemical-weapons
use in Syria. As we have stated before, the Syrian
authorities must cooperate fully with the OPCW to
allow it to verify the accuracy and completeness of
the chemical-weapons declarations. This is critical for
addressing the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
that remain.

We appreciate the work of the JIM. and we welcome
that it will soon be fully operational. We look forward
to reports containing more information on the four
previously identified cases involving Da'esh and the
Syrian regime as well as the new cases, including this
most recent attack, to be presented by the OPCW Fact-

finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.

In conclusion, we will continue our efforts in the
Council and elsewhere to ensure that those responsible
for the heinous crimes in Syria are held accountable.
Sweden has contributed to the JIM. as well as to the
impartial and independent mechanism mandated by
the General Assembly which is now being set up. The
work of the Commission of Inquiry for Syria must also
continue. We have also actively supported the European
Union's recent introduction of targeted sanctions on
individuals implicated in the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.

The attack in Idlib underlines the importance of
the Security Council's work to end the use of chemical
weapons. We cannot shy away from our responsibilities.
We must now redouble our efforts.

