Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Like others before me, my delegation would like to
congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Council and assure it of its support.
We also congratulate Sweden on its excellent work
during its presidency last month. And we would like
to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. John Ging,
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for the quality oftheir briefings on the political
and humanitarian situation in Yemen.

Cote d'lvoire continues to be concerned about the
political impasse and increasing violence seen in Yemen
in July. We urge the opposing sides to exercise restraint,
and we welcome the halt to the bombing and the Houthis'
suspension of their attacks in the Red Sea. We call on
the parties to the conflict to redouble their efforts to
support the peace initiatives that are under way. Cote
d'Ivoire also welcomes the acceptance of the Special
Envoy's good offices by the parties to the conflict and
all the countries that have influence on the opposing
parties with a view to establishing a lasting ceasefire
so as to enable intra-Yemeni peace negotiations. In
that regard, we reiterate our support to the Special
Envoy's proposal to transfer the management of the
port of Al-Hudaydah to a committee supervised by the
United Nations, a solution that could make a significant
contribution to reducing tensions between the parties
and could be a starting point for the settlement of a
conflict that has led to the loss of so many human lives.

The humanitarian situation is also a continuing
source of concern for my delegation. We especially
deploretheattacksoncivilianinfrastructure,particularly
water supply services, which are compromising the
efforts to prevent new cholera epidemics in Yemen. In
the face of this alarming situation, my delegation calls
on the parties to show restraint, respect international
humanitarian law and protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We reiterate our call for a de-escalation
of the fighting that would give humanitarian aid
unimpeded access to civilians in Yemen in the port city
of Al-Hudaydah and every region of the country.

Cote d'lvoire reiterates its belief that there can be
no alternative to a political settlement to the crisis in
Yemen. We therefore once again invites all stakeholders
to end hostilities and commit constructively to a political
settlement to the crisis in order to end the impasse
plaguing the country. We call on the international
community to support the efforts by the Special Envoy
for Yemen to bring the parties to the negotiating table
and thereby give new impetus to a political dialogue in
the country.

