Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I convey my delegation's appreciation to Peru
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine, at this
critical juncture for Palestine and the Middle East.

I align myself with the statement to be made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic Venezuela,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Israeli occupation of Palestinian land is at
the core of and central to all conflicts in the Middle
East. That injustice has continued for more than
seven decades and has intensified through the Israeli
expansionist, aggressive and apartheid policies towards
Palestinians and the region. No political theatre by the
United States and the Israeli regime can cover up the
aggressive and expansionist policies of that regime and
its behaviour towards its neighbours as the main source
of threat to the peace and security of the region. While
Palestinian territories and the Syrian Golan Heights
remain under illegal Israeli occupation, the Minister of
Regional Cooperation of that regime boasts that Israel
has carried out more than 100 strikes on Syria and
Lebanon, all of which played directly into the hands of
terrorists when and where they needed them.

Each time we meet in this Chamber, we receive
news regarding illegal settlements or aggressive policies
implemented by the apartheid Zionist regime. The
Israeli regime now works day and night to negate all
rights of the Palestinians and to entrench its occupation.
Indeed, Israel is a rogue regime, by definition. That is
an undeniable fact for the international community,
except for those who believe that illegal occupation,
illegal settlements, apartheid, sieges, regular attacks
and mass murder are the legitimate actions of a regime
that proclaims itself to be the only democracy in the
Middle East.

As one prominent Palestinian scholar said three
decades ago, what is so extraordinary is that what the
Israelis are now doing in the West Bank and Gaza is
really a repetition of the experience of apartheid and
what the United States did to the Native Americans,
putting them in reservations or simply exterminating
them in the hope that the problem would go away. Those
words are more true today than ever.

As a result of the new and ongoing mass murder
in Gaza, dozens of unarmed Palestinian civilians have
been killed and thousands wounded so far. Those latest
attacks conform to the pattern that has been followed
by the Israeli regime during the course of the past seven
decades. Given the circumstances, there is no doubt
that those vicious attacks and killings are planned and
deliberate. Those who support and enable the Israeli
regime to commit those types of crimes also have the
Palestinians' blood on their hands.

The unlawful announcement on Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the imminent transfer of the United States Embassy
to that city are another example of the policies that are
exacerbating the problems. Those measures gravely
contravene international law and the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The
exceptionalism that has long been accorded to the Israeli
regime must now end if the Council is serious about
establishing peace and security in the Middle East. The
impunity that the regime has enjoyed for so long would
not have been possible without the help it receives from
the United States and certain interest groups.

In conclusion, at a time when the Palestinian people
are facing rising Israeli aggression, Iran reaffirms its
long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian people,
recognizing their decades of resilience despite so much
suffering and injustice. Iran reiterates its strong support
for their legitimate and inalienable rights, including to
self-determination and freedom, in an independent and
viable State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital.

