Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Special Envoy David Nabarro and Special
Representative Anthony Banbury for their briefings.
We commend their hard work in coordinating the
United Nations and partners' efforts to combat the
unprecedented Ebola epidemic and appreciate the strong
leadership of the Secretary-General in spearheading
this challenging task. We also thank the representative
of humanitarian workers, Mr. Thomas Mauget, for his
briefing, and would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the health workers who are risking their lives
at the front lines of the fight against Ebola.

The Ebola outbreak has taken human lives with
rampant speed. When we had an open debate in the
Council in September (see S/PV.7268), the disease had
claimed over 2,000 lives. Now, however, the death toll
exceeds 5,000. Ebola is turning into a complex crisis,
with profound social, economic and humanitarian
dimensions. A more comprehensive and unified
international response is absolutely crucial in this
regard. Having said that, I would like to share a few
observations on this matter of common concern.
First, as a number ofactors and resource channels are
involved in tackling this epidemic, close coordination
led by the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER) must be ensured. It is important
that all parties act in coordination with the United
Nations-led effort. UNMEER must continue to identify
and close any gaps for a rapid, efficient and coherent
response to the crisis.

Secondly, it is necessary to consider the long-term
strategy for rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
countries hit by the Ebola outbreak. The Ebola crisis
is ravaging the very fabric of the affected societies and
is threatening the gains made through international
peacebuilding activities in those countries. The recent
precarious food situation in the affected countries,
including the disruption of production and soaring
prices, is also worrisome. Immediate measures should
be taken to ensure food security in those countries.

Thirdly, to ensure sustained international
assistance, it is imperative to reinforce the protection
of health workers, including by providing more
resources and assistance, such as efficient and timely
medical evacuations. Current data from the World
Health Organization indicates that 584 health workers
have contracted the disease and 329 have died, as of
16 November. The high rate of infection among health
workers can be attributed to shortages of protective
equipment, insufficient medical personnel and difficult
working conditions in isolated areas.

Fourthly, we need to continue to pursue
people-based responses in the fight against the Ebola
epidemic. We recognize that community-level actions
in changing behaviour to reduce the likelihood of
contracting the disease, such as safe barriers, have
led to some progress in tackling Ebola in Liberia. We
call for such approaches to continue. Mitigating fear
and building trust through communication with local
communities is essential.

The Ebola epidemic is far from contained, and a
gap anywhere in the response leaves space for the virus
to spread. Some may say that there is finally a light
at the end of the tunnel in Liberia. However, we must
remain vigilant, given the unreported cases of the virus
and the complicated reality of the fight against Ebola.
As the Secretary-General recently said, "Now is no
time to let down our guard".

The Republic of Korea has made a contribution
of $5 million to the Ebola Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund, and also pledged an additional $5 million
to support the global response to tackle the Ebola
epidemic. Furthermore, my Government sent an
inter-agency advance team to Sierra Leone this month
to prepare for the planned deployment of medical
personnel to counter the spread of the deadly virus.
We will consistently support and join the global battle
against Ebola until it is put behind us.

