Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to express my
delegation's thanks to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director
of the Coordination Division of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for providing
us with updates on the most recent developments with
regard to the Syrian Arab Republic. We are aware that
their efforts and the work they do together with their
respective teams are fully working towards a lasting
resolution of the conflict.

With regard to the political process, the Government
of Equatorial Guinea has not changed its position on the
need to comply with resolution 2254 (2015) and will
continue to support the current negotiating process
led by the Syrian people under the auspices of the
United Nations. We are aware that it continues to be
difficult to specify the dates for the formation of the
constitutional committee and for the commencement
of the committee's work. We therefore urge the
parties, especially the Syrian authorities, to take all
the measures necessary and give priority to their
cooperation with the Special Envoy and very actively
expedite the conclusion of that process.

As we have recently stated, it is necessary for
all parties to move into an active phase of the peace
negotiations. There should be no further delays in
the formation of the constitutional committee, and
the stalemate in the Geneva negotiations should not
lead to the collapse of the Astana process. We again
encourage the Special Envoy to continue to explore all
opportunities to overcome obstacles to the formation
of the committee, so that its first meeting can be
convened without further delay. While we hope that the
next meeting on Syria in Astana, scheduled for April,
contributes, in the framework of detailed consultations
with the Special Envoy, to advancing the negotiations
on the composition of the middle third list of members,
Equatorial Guinea will continue to maintain its full
commitment to a peaceful resolution of the Syrian
crisis within the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).

With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
Government believes that it is essential to keep Syria
at the top of the international agenda and to generate
financial support for that country, where nearly
12 million innocent people have suffered from atrocities
and other collateral effects ofwar for the past eight years.
We also welcome the holding of the third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the
Region, which succeeded in raising approximately
$7 billion in assistance to finance the United Nations
humanitarian response plan for Syria and the region.

In the face of the bloody offensive in Baghouz, the
last bastion of the Islamic State in Syria, Equatorial
Guinea, can only call on the parties to exercise
restraint and prioritize the protection of civilians in
accordance with international humanitarian law. We
must underscore that this offensive, one of the longest
and most deadly of the conflict, has killed thousands
of people - not only fighters, but also many civilians.
In that regard, we stress the need for collective action
and the assistance of international humanitarian
organizations and United Nations agencies to prevent
the situation in the country from deteriorating.

While we appreciate the efforts under way to
ensure that a third humanitarian convoy reaches
Rukban camp, we continue to insist on the need to
evacuate the more than 40,000 people who live there
under appalling conditions. We also remain concerned
about the situation in Idlib, which is why we are calling
for a resumption of hostilities to be avoided at all costs
and for the laying of the foundation for the safe and
voluntary return of refugees to Syria. All parties to the
conflict must ensure full humanitarian access to all
segments of the population and respect international
humanitarian law.

In conclusion, we reiterate once again that we are
aware that the military situation on the ground may
evolve in one direction or another, but what is clear to
everyone is that a political process led by the Syrians
under the auspices of the United Nations is necessary
to achieve peace.

