Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Wane for his insightful briefing.

First of all, I would like to express our deepest
condolences and solidarity to the people and the
Government of Burkina Faso and to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) following the recent terrorist attack,
which claimed the life of Togolese peacekeepers and a
number of civilians in Burkina Faso.

The situation in the Sahel remains fragile due to
the threat from Boko Haram, the Islamic State and
other terrorists, violent extremists and organized crime
groups. We therefore welcome the formal launch of the
joint force at the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
Heads of State Summit in Bamako on 2 July. We fully
support the decision in order to better combat terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Such a force will
positively contribute to maintaining stability in the
region and complement the efforts of MINUSMA and
Operation Barkhane.

The provision of steady financial support continues
to be the main challenge due to a significant gap
in funding the force. We commend and encourage
the continuation of the commitment of the G-5
Sahel countries, as well as the support provided by
European Union and France. We encourage countries
and international organizations to make considerable
pledges at the donors' conference to be held in Berlin
in September, with a view to mobilizing adequate
resources for the force to achieve its goals.

At the same time, it is unlikely that a strictly military
approach will be enough to address instability in the
region. Instability is the result of the sedimentation of
problems of which violent extremism is only the most
recent layer. For us, an important threat therefore is the
challenge to the legitimacy of the State and competition
between pastoralists and crop growers, which results in
clashes among the various communities.

There is a need to focus on the root causes of the
conflict and on promoting development. Kazakhstan
is convinced that a subregional and comprehensive
approach that links security, development and
humanitarian efforts is the most efficient way to achieve
peace and prosperity. Those goals will be achieved only
through more effective implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Addressing
impunity and corruption, advancing structural reforms
in the areas of security, justice and the rule of law,
promoting human rights, increasing resilience and the
engagement of women and young people are equally
important parts of the Strategy

We also welcome the announcement of the alliance
for the Sahel - a joint initiative by France, Germany
and the European Union to improve development
cooperation in the region and promote innovative
initiatives among the European Union, the World Bank
Group, the African Development Bank and the United
Nations. We should strive for initiatives that complement
current efforts to address the many underlying causes of
instability in the region. Concerted efforts to promote
a strong policy on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, with long-term funding for its effective
implementation, are also vital for ensuring peace in
West Africa and the Sahel.

