Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for the initiative oforganizing this debate. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and the Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support for their analyses.

Peacekeeping operations are an emblematic activity
of the United Nations and we must work continually to
improve their efficacy. France supports the principle of
inter-mission cooperation, which is one of the aspects
of the consideration of the reform of peacekeeping
operations that we launched in 2009, jointly with the
United Kingdom. Inter-mission cooperation enhances
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations by providing
for improved management of available resources and
by improving the response of the Organization when
tackling crises or other emergencies.

First of all, inter-mission cooperation optimizes the
use of the means available for peacekeeping operations
by facilitating the pooling or temporary redeployment
of means, equipment or units belonging to missions
that are deployed in the same region. When unforeseen
events threaten to destabilize a country, inter-mission
cooperation can be an adaptive and effective response
that will provide personnel and equipment in a timely
manner to missions that require them. Furthermore,
inter-mission cooperation allows economy of scale in
order to meet the requirements of good management
and budgetary constraints.

Such cooperation is a flexible mechanism of proven
efficacy. I will provide three examples. In West Africa,
cooperation between United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) during the post-electoral crisis played
a leading role in increasing UNOCI's level of personnel
and attack helicopters at a time when UNOCI most
required them. Such mission-cooperation was also used
preventatively to support UNOCI during the Ivorian
legislative elections of December 2011, and reciprocally
to support UNMIL during the general elections in
Liberia in November 2011. That cooperation ensured
that one of the two missions could always count on the
support of the other at a time when the Council was
working towards an orderly reduction of the number of
Blue Helmets deployed in West Africa.

Inter-mission cooperation has also been useful in
East Africa, where helicopters of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) were temporarily
deployed to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS).

In the Middle East, the rapid deployment of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria was made
possible only by the logistical support provided by
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
redeployment of military observers, civilian personnel,
equipment and vehicles from other missions.

In order to make better use of this mechanism and
to safeguard its flexibility, progress must be made in
two areas.

First, we believe that must take due account
in our consideration of all the components of
missions - military, police and civilian - and all
types of resources, including major, unit and specialist
equipment. The example of the deployment of helicopters
from UNMIL to UNOCI should not obscure the fact
that there are untapped opportunities for cooperation in
other areas, such as joint planning, information sharing
or logistical support.

Beyond the necessarily temporary pooling of
assets, in particular all-too-scarce aerial assets such
as helicopters, inter-mission cooperation must be
encouraged and even made systematic in order to
pool logistical support structures, which will enable
substantial streamlining of mission support, and to
share information, which will enable the regional
dimension of crises to be taken into account. This is
particularly useful when missions are deployed on both
sides of a border or when such complex processes as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are
under way.

Inter-mission cooperation, along with cooperation
between missions and peacebuilding offices or regional
organizations, should allow for increased efficacy in
the struggle against cross-border threats that could
destabilize entire regions. Thus, in order to respond
to the threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army in
Central Africa, MONUSCO, UNMISS and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
were encouraged to share their information and their
experience in the context of the regional strategy
developed by the United Nations.

The cooperation between UNOCI and UNMIL
entered a new phase this year through a closer sharing
of information, coordinated operations launched on
both sides of the border and the support of the Ivorian
and Liberian Governments to strengthen their own
security cooperation. This integrated strategy must
be sustained and further strengthened in order to
make progress in disarming combatants, securing the
border zone between C6te d'Ivoire and Liberia, which
the Council visited last May, and encouraging Ivorian
refugees to return home.

In terms of the second area that needs to see
progress, we believe there is a need for a clearer legal
basis and for inter-mission cooperation to be included in
operational planning from the very start of operations.
Using standard language in the memorandums of
understanding could, for example, facilitate cooperation
while respecting the mandates that have been assigned
by the Security Council to each mission and, of course,
ensuring close coordination with the troop-contributing
countries.

Inter-mission cooperation can and must still
make further progress. It is in our common interest
to streamline the means available to peacekeeping.
Continuing to enhance the efficacy of peacekeeping is
a duty of the Council and one way of paying tribute to
the commitment of Blue Helmets of all nationalities,
who often give their lives in service to peace.

