Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): It is indeed a
pleasure and an honour to have among us today His
Excellency Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, the Foreign
Minister of the new Mozambique Government, whom I
most cordially welcome on behalf of my delegation. He
epitomizes the success story of his own people and their
political leaders, and of United Nations peace-keeping.
Traversing the period since 4 October 1992, when the
opposing parties in the Mozambican civil war signed the
General Peace Agreement in Rome, has not always been
easy; not always has there been every ground for optimism.
I recall a feature last year in The New York Times Sunday
Magazine which dealt with developments in Mozambique
almost as an example of all that can go wrong. And yet
here we are, greeting in the personage of the Foreign
Minister an accomplishment of great importance.

During last fall's general debate in the General
Assembly, my Foreign Minister, Mr. Josef Zieleniec,
highlighted the case of Mozambique as an important case
study from which the appropriate lessons ought to be
drawn. He suggested that the following were among the
success factors at play here:

"a well-crafted peace plan; a realistic mandate for the
United Nations force; the fact that the politicians
concerned put the interests of their country above all
else; the tenacity of United Nations personnel in
carrying out their mandate". (Ofi'icial Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 15th meeting, p. 15)

The way we are trying to use these or similarly defined
factors as a gauge in other operations as well is evident,
for example, from the Secretary-General's reflections in
his recent Supplement to the Agenda for Peace.

Even during this moment of celebration, though, we
are all aware that success is not all-encompassing. The
residue of its long civil war persists in the country in a
number of ways. We are disturbed by the amount of
weaponry that circulates freely. The Secretary-General's
recent remarks concerning "micro-disarmament" are very
pertinent in this context. Mine clearance will entail a long
and arduous effort. And, conversely, fatigue with war has
slowed the building up of the country's new democratic
army.

Apart from these tasks, we see three types of
challenges ahead: political ones, economic ones, and
United Nations-connected ones.

Mozambique's democracy is very, very young and
very fragile - and small wonder. Strengthening it will
require careful nurturing for years to come. However, we
are encouraged that in their election programmes both
major parties declared their adherence to the important
principles of protecting the peace and pursuing a policy
of national reconciliation. Mozambique can and should
become a model for other countries, especially in Africa,
by demonstrating that winning elections does not
necessarily lead to the arrogance of power and,
conversely, that losing elections does not lead to political
obliteration. Both of the country's major parties have over
the years demonstrated their viability and both no doubt
have contributions to make, in one form or another, to the
country's future. It is hard to exaggerate how important
a flourishing democracy in Mozambique will be for the
stability of southern Africa as a whole, including
tormented Angola.

Both parties also focused on raising living
standards - and this is the country's second challenge.
Mozambique is today one of the poorest countries of the
world, when measured by the economic standards of its
people, and even my quick visit there last year as a
member of the Security Council Mission left me with an
indelible impression of its poverty. The task of improving
the lot of the people will perhaps be the toughest of all.
But the support for a market-economy development model
which both parties profess is encouraging. In our

 

experience, at least, it is the fastest way to mobilize hidden
resources of entrepreneurship and industriousness that the
country has, including for example those Mozambican
expatriates who, having received international assistance to
complete their studies abroad, have so far not returned, to
contribute to their own country.

Given these political and economic issues, it is
imperative that the United Nations maintain a strong and
well-coordinated presence in Mozambique - and this is
our third challenge. The United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ) - to which Czech military
observers have also contributed - is leaving but we cannot
in good conscience let the fragile success of peace collapse
under the weight of a myriad of post-war problems. Peace-
building, peace reinforcement, peace nurturing are what
Mozambique needs, with the indispensable assistance of the
international community, including the United Nations. This
is not the time, and Mozambique is not the place, to let
various United Nations agencies do their own thing without
tight coordination and without strong political leadership.
We therefore sincerely hope that the Secretary-General will
maintain in Maputo a well-defined political presence.

The success of Mozambique is real but it has been
greatly underreported. Dramatic successes are perhaps not
as attractive to the press as dramatic failures. In the opinion
of my delegation, though, what we have learned in
Mozambique is extremely valuable not only in connection
with one country, with one peace-keeping operation, but
also as a model to be emulated in other peace-keeping
situations. We congratulate once again the ONUMOZ force
and its leaders, the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Ajello, and Mozambique's political
leaders - but, above all, we congratulate the people of
Mozambique.

