Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): The peace
process is a process that commands legitimacy and
consent from all parties. At the moment, in the peace
process, the international community needs more than
ever to demonstrate in word and indeed the ability to
make a practical contribution to progress and to avoid
the posturing that undermines those seeking a durable
settlement. If we fail to show faith in that process and
fail to show the courage to pursue it, then the great
prize of peace, justice and security for Israelis and
Palestinians side by side will become remote.

In the view of the United Kingdom, the
Annapolis process has again shown the necessity of
strong United States leadership. An agreement has not
yet been reached under the Annapolis process, but the
two parties are talking again - seriously and in detail -
about a final settlement.

We do not agree that the current process is worse
than useless or worse than the alternative. During the
course of the last nine months, the Palestinian
Authority has been addressing the challenges of
economic and security sector reform. The ceasefire in
Gaza has been established. It is fragile but holding.
Turkey has helped bring together Israel and Syria for
talks. There is progress on reforms inside the
Palestinian Authority and as I saw for myself,
cooperation around Jenin shows that when we have
local engagement we can make local progress. I also
believe that the process has helped to restate the
fundamentals of peace: two States based on 1967
borders, secure, at peace and democratic, with
Jerusalem as the capital for both and a just and agreed
settlement for refugees.

The critical issue in the coming weeks and
months will be to ensure that those processes are
durable and that we do not fall back into a vicious
circle of violence. In our view, that means three
responsibilities for all of us. First, the responsibility of
the international community to reiterate its unanimous
support for the process launched at Annapolis. We look
forward to strong messages from the Quartet meeting
this afternoon and from regional partners. The parties
need to stick with what will be a difficult process
involving compromises on both sides.

Secondly, we must continue to support those
working for peace with practical measures. The United
Kingdom is helping to support the Palestinian
Authority in the development of its security structures.
We are working closely with the Authority in support
of its economic development plan, including through a
$500 million support package. Those responsibilities in
the areas of security and the economy need to be
fulfilled right across the region as well as in the
European Union.
Thirdly, all parties must support the prospects for
peace. The United Kingdom has repeatedly made it
clear that settlement-building, contrary to Road Map
commitments and the aim of the two-State solution, is
wrong and should stop. Israel's need for security is best
served by a strong Palestinian security force and a
functioning Palestinian economy free of restrictions on
movement and access. At the same time, however, the
brutal actions of Hamas and its supporters only make
that harder. The armament and rearmament of
Hizbullah represent a grievous threat to peace in the
region.

In addition, we will all have seen and must
deplore the egregiously offensive comments made by
President Ahmadinejad in the General Assembly on
Tuesday. I am truly sorry that the Council could not
find unity in a denunciation of those remarks today.
The remarks refer to "a cesspool created by itself and
its supporters". That is no way to talk about another
State Member of the United Nations, but it is a
quotation from the President of Iran on Tuesday this
week.

There is a real risk that, if we do not capture the
progress achieved by Annapolis, we will slip
backwards. It is vital that we sustain the process into
and through 2009 - a process built on democratic
consent, international legitimacy and the trust of the
parties. Annapolis has begun that process and needs to
be taken further.

That means recognizing the historic opportunity
afforded by the Arab Peace Initiative and building on
the Israeli-Syrian opening. We should forge a new
momentum, a genuinely comprehensive approach,
building on those elements. The peoples of the region
cannot afford another 50 years of conflict.

But we have a choice: now is the time to look
forward, not to look at the past and point fingers. The
people of the Middle East need strong and determined
leadership focused on the common elements of their
future, not the failings of the past. That is the sort of
leadership we are determined to support.

