Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to express to Minister El Othmani Chad's warmest
congratulations on his great country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
for having chosen for its agenda the important issue of
peace and security in Africa, particularly in the Sahel
region. That is the focus of international events, owing
to the crisis that has raged for a short while now in Mali.

Before continuing my statement of behalf of the
Chairman of the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States
(CEN-SAD), a post held by my country. I would like
to convey to you, Mr. President, and to all Council
members, the regrets of the Chadian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and African Integration for not being
here today. He would very much have liked to attend
this important meeting personally but had to remain in
the country for a high-level visit to N'Djamena by our
Libyan brothers and neighbours, with whom we jointly
secure and develop a large part of the Sahelo-Saharan
area. In other words, there is a link between our concern
today and that visit.

For approximately a decade, the Sahel has been
a transit area for all kinds of traffickers - in human
beings, drugs, cigarettes, arms and so on. The immense
size of the Sahel, the porous State borders and the
weakness of States in monitoring borders have allowed
all those traffickers to operate undisturbed, particularly
as they have managed to join forces with a part of the
local populations in that highly lucrative business. The
Libyan crisis, and the flight of hundreds of combatants
in the Libyan army who were originally from the area
and who brought with them weapons, equipment and
money, have spread the phenomenon and transformed
the Sahel into a vast safe haven, where certain groups
have even wanted to build an independent State.

Separated from Libya by a long desert and a
mountainous border, Chad has always guarded against
its territory being used as a transit area. On two
occasions, mafia and terrorist groups, including that
of the Algerian Abdul Kadir Al Para, known as the
One-Eyed Man, have been arrested. More recently, since
the Libyan crisis began, the Chadian Government has
taken measures to secure its border, thereby stopping
any infiltration of troops or weapons.

This is the place to recall that there is no development
without security. That is true for the Sahel. The countries
of the region, supported by the international community,
must therefore seek and agree on better coordination of
their fight against terrorist and criminal armed groups
of all kinds rampant there. But eradicating insecurity
is not enough in itself to stabilize the Sahel without an
extensive development programme, since the Sahel is
prone to drought and desertification. Famine is also
endemic. Grazing land for flocks is becoming scarce
and agriculture lacks irrigation. Lands are lost every
year. Flocks are decimated, and those who raise them
are ruined and reduced to begging.

The international community must therefore
redouble its efforts to increase its development assistance
to the Sahel region by building infrastructure - a very
ambitious programme of roads, clinics, schools, tourist
sites and airports - so as to make the cities, wadis and
palm groves vibale. In short, axes of development that
can stabilize the population and improve their living
conditions must be established.

CEN-SAD was to play that role following its
establishment by the Sahelo-Sahara countries.
However, the Council will agree that that role has
been deflected. An extraordinary summit, planned for
January 2013 in N'Djamena, should review the charter
for CEN-SAD's establishment to refocus its objectives
on the development and security of the Sahelo-Sahara
region. We welcome the involvement of Morocco in
that restructuring, which hosted the Executive Council
meeting and has proposed hosting another summit.

With regard to events in Mali, Chad believes that
the north of that brotherly country, just like the Sahel
region, is in the process of becoming a true and solid
rear base for terrorist and extremist operations of all
kinds. Meanwhile, the international community is
unable to speak in one voice and contents itself with
minimal compromises. Compromise is insufficient
to concretely, urgently and effectively deal with the
challenges weighing upon the subregion, the entire
African continent and beyond. The more time that
passes, the more that base will strengthen and the more
difficult it will be to take.

With regard to possible African or international
military intervention in northern Mali, Chad will, as its
position of principle, do its part when the time comes.
However, while reiterating its solidarity with the Malian
people, Chad will adopt a definitive position when the
United Nations speaks with one voice together with the
Malians, the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union. Chad believes that it is
urgent to provide assistance to the Malian population,
which is subjected to the abuses of armed groups, and
to put an end to a situation that threatens international
peace and security.

Before I conclude, allow me to wonder if it is
appropriate to talk about a north-south opposition in
Mali. Besides the problems posed by a fringe of the
Tuareg minority, is there also a north-south issue in
Mali? In Mali - a country that was exemplary until
quite recently, where there was good governance and
no population seemed to be marginalized - is it right
to see the situation in terms ofa conflict between north
and south?

