Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I want to
begin by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina for his very comprehensive briefing
of the situation. I reiterate our full support for him and
commend his work on the subject.

I also associate myself with the statement to be
made shortly on behalf of the European Union.

France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2247 (2015), demonstrating that the members
of the Council share the same fundamental principles
regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina: support for the
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) Operation Althea, authorized under
an executive mandate; respect for the commitment of
the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to a European
perspective for their country; the importance of respect
for the international arrangements originating from
the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement; and the need
to cooperate with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

The unity of the Council around that common pillar
sends a signal of peace to the region. It reminds us of
the international community's agreement to support the
independence and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as of its respect for that country's
choices, provided that it respect international law and
the framework set by the Dayton Peace Agreement.

As others have said before me today, 2015 is heavily
symbolic for Bosnia and Herzegovina, because it marks
the twentieth anniversary of the events of Srebrenica,
which have been qualified as genocide by the ICTY and
the International Court of Justice, and the anniversary
of Dayton-Paris Accords. That dual anniversary
reminds us of our common obligation. It highlights not
only the great progress that has been made since the
mid-1990s, but also how the factors that cause division
can reappear at any time. In that context, France
expresses its concern over the proposed referendum
the authorities of Republika Srpska have referred to in
recent months, aimed at challenging the competence of
the jurisdiction of the central State. Such an approach
runs counter to the spirit of the Peace Agreement.

Our position on this is clear. The Republika Srpska
must comply with the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There is room for improvement in the
functioning of the jurisdiction of the central State. The
efforts undertaken in partnership with the European
Union-led Structured Dialogue on Justice must speak
to those issues. However, any viable solution can be
achieved only through good-faith dialogue among
the various compoents of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - the central State and the Entities - in
compliance with constitutional requirements. Political
leaders have a crucial role to play in that regard. We call
on them to abandon the outdated rhetoric of division.

France fully supports Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
sovereign choice to move closer to the European Union.
We are indeed convinced that the European integration
can meet the economic and social aspirations of the
population. That perspective is beneficial for the
country and for the rest of the Balkans. Closer ties with
the European Union are an expression of a decision
made by the Bosnians themselves through their
collegial Presidency. It is reflected in a commitment to
economic, social and political reforms that paved the
way for the entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement on 1 June and the endorsement,
a few weeks later, of the Reform Agenda for Bosnia and
Herzegovina for 2015-2018. The European Union will
continue to assist the authorities in the implementation
of those reforms. EUFOR Althea will continue its
work in order to enable the Bosnian security forces to
operate independently and to participate thereby in the
consolidation of a pacific and forward-looking society.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, despite
its fragility, seems to have taken the path towards
normalization. The presence of the international
community remains no less necessary at the present
stage, and is firmly based on the framework of the
Dayton-Paris Accords. We therefore call on all parties
to cooperate with the institutions mentioned in the
Peace Agreement, in particular, the Office of the
High Representative and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. However,
without undermining the founding principles of the
Dayton-Paris Accords, our common goal should be to
develop the international presence so that it is fully
adapted to current realities. The reflection on the
reconfiguration ofthe Office ofthe High Representative
should therefore continue.

Twenty years after experiencing the horror of the
war, Bosnia and Herzegovina is making strides in the
right direction. The United Nations, European Union
and regional partners must continue to show their
presence, alongside that country in the same unanimous
way that the Council has shown today.

