Mr. Wittig (Germany): When the people of Syria
peacefully took to the streets more than a year ago, their
legitimate demands for freedom and participation were
met with deadly force. Instead of initiating meaningful
political dialogue, the regime of President Al-Assad
responded with increased repression.
From the start, we have warned against this spiral of
violence. We had strong concerns about the mayhem it
might bring to the whole region. We called on President
Al-Assad to embark on a process of credible political
reform. The Arab League, with the overwhelming
support of the international community, laid out a plan
for a peaceful political process. But President Al-Assad
did not listen.

Together with our partners, we worked to have the
Security Council act to stop the violence and human
rights abuses at a time when such action could have
prevented worse from happening. It is well known to
all how those attempts were rendered futile. Today,
more than 15,000 deaths later, Damascus is at war
with the Syrian people. What started as a peaceful
protest movement has in some parts evolved into armed
opposition. That, too, could have been avoided.

But with every day that the Al-Assad regime
escalated its violent repression, with every new shelling,
with every new massacre it became more difficult for
those Syrian voices that promoted peaceful change
to convince those who had lost hope for a political
solution. According to the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the situation in Syria is now one of civil
war. Let me be clear: responsibility for that lies fully
with President Al-Assad and his regime.

Al-Assad has failed to protect the Syrian people.
He has broken all commitments, made first to his
people, then to the Arab League and later to Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan. Mr. Annan personally told
President Al-Assad that he had to send bold signals; but
what he sent instead were tanks, mortars and helicopter
gunships.

The Security Council has a responsibility to help
the Syrian people find a peaceful solution. Kofi Annan's
six-point plan, endorsed by the Council, was meant to
de-escalate the crisis, bring down the level of violence
and start a meaningful political process. As a first
step, the Syrian Government had to stop using heavy
weapons and withdraw both heavy weapons and troops
from population centres. Remember, it was Al-Assad
himself who made that commitment. We supported
those decisions, and we supported sending observers to
Syria, despite the severe risks and reservations. But the
hopes we had placed in those resolutions (2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012)) were soon shattered. As Kofi Annan
himself has said, none of the elements of the six-point
plan have been implemented. Instead of silencing the
heavy weapons, the Al-Assad regime unleashed its
tanks and attack helicopters. Al-Assad used the heavy
weapons that he had pledged not to use anymore.
The Council cannot continue business as usual.
The Joint Envoy, Mr. Annan himself, has been clear
about what he expects from Damascus and from the
Security Council. First, he told President Al-Assad to
immediately stop using heavy weapons in populated
areas. Secondly, he has repeatedly stressed that the
responsibility to act lies first with Damascus. And
thirdly, he has repeatedly called on the Council to
insist on the implementation of its decisions and to
send a strong signal that there will be consequences for
non-compliance.

Our draft resolution (S/2012/538) would have
done what Mr. Annan himself has asked us to do. By
endorsing the Annan plan and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex) under Chapter VII of the Charter,
we would have obliged both sides * I repeat,
both sides - to immediately implement the draft
resolution's provisions. The draft resolution would have
threatened Damascus with sanctions aimed at stopping
the indiscriminate shelling of populated areas. Such
shelling violates international humanitarian law and
Security Council resolutions and hinders any chance
of a political process. Ending it would have finally
opened up space for the observer mission to again play
a meaningful role.

In conclusion, let me make a further point clear.
Our goal has been to achieve unity in the Council. We
have conducted our negotiations in that spirit, a spirit
that was not reciprocated by all Council members.
The draft resolution would not have set the stage for
military intervention, as some have falsely claimed. It
would not have undermined Joint Special Envoy Annan
and the observer mission; quite the contrary, it would
have supported him and the observers on the ground.
And while it would not have been a silver bullet for
bringing about peace in Syria, it would have provided a
realistic chance - maybe the last chance 4 for finally
breaking the vicious circle of violence.

Today was an opportunity lost. History will show
us the price that the people in Syria and beyond will
have to pay. As for my delegation, I can say that
together with our partners, we have tried our utmost. In
the end, this was and is our moral responsibility. While
the days of President Al-Assad are numbered, people in
Syria are going through times of unspeakable hardship.
I want to assure the Syrian people that Germany
will continue to support all those who cherish peace,
freedom and democracy. One day there will be a new
Syria. We call on all those within the Syrian regime
to seriously consider their future options, because one
thing is certain: there will be change.

