Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Allow me also to thank Mr. Lajcak for his
briefing, as well as Mr. Spiric' for his statement.

The overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is encouraging. My delegation would like to
acknowledge the progress made in several areas, in
particular as regards police reform and the adoption of
legislation on the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union. That should
enable the country to join the European Union and to
put in place the necessary conditions for lasting peace
and sustainable development. We also welcome the
initiatives to address the issue of refugees and
displaced persons.

Despite the difficulties encountered, we urge the
parties to consider all possible ways to emerge from
the deadlock on the issues of constitutional reform,
defence, justice and administration. Those reforms
would contribute to achieving the goals set by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.

Reforming the economy is crucial to this country
in the midst of rebuilding. We should welcome the
initiatives taken and the resulting progress. We note in
particular the commitment undertaken by the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina in signing the
economic reform platform. We hope that its
implementation will have a positive effect on the life of
the communities and that it will support the peace
process. We urge the international community to pay
greater attention to that matter and to provide the
necessary support.

It is also necessary to encourage initiatives aimed
at inter-communal reconciliation, so as to ease the
ongoing tensions among the various communities,
especially given the upcoming municipal elections.

We would also like to commend the efforts of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We encourage all States to continue to
cooperate fully with the Tribunal.

We encourage the mediation efforts and
numerous initiatives of the High Representative and his
Office to implement the Framework Agreement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge the High
Representative and the Steering Board to continue their
work.

There are still key issues pending that require

further efforts. The international community must

continue to mobilize in order to support Bosnia and

Herzegovina and peace efforts in the country in the

context of the Dayton Agreement. Regional stability
and security are at stake.

