Mr. Cheshire (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Dominican Republic for convening this important
debate. At the outset, New Zealand aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Nauru on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum.

In September last year, the leaders of the Pacific
Islands Forum affirmed that climate change presented
the single greatest threat to the livelihood, security
and well-being of Pacific people. Our leaders chose
their words deliberately. Climate change is not a future
challenge to be endlessly discussed; it is a real and
immediate threat.

The Security Council has recognized the
demonstrable links between climate change and
security. When the effects of climate change intersect
with environmental and social issues, it drives
instability and conflict. The issues outlined in the
concept note for this debate (S/2019/1, annex) are the
reality for the States of our region.

In the Pacific, climate-related disasters are
increasing, as they are across the world. Cyclones, storm
surges and droughts are increasing the vulnerability of
communities across the region and threatening hard-
won development.

The Pacific States are also already feeling the
effects of slow-onset disasters. Sea-level rise is the
most obvious risk to low-lying atoll countries, but the
warming ocean, ocean acidification and salt pollution
of freshwater supplies and agricultural soils are just
some of the many compounding challenges that climate
change brings to our region.
Climate change has already caused some people to
migrate, so far mostly within their countries. There is
no prospect of return for communities that have been
forced to abandon their lands to the advancing sea.
Such displacements are not anomalies; they are our
collective future if the current trends continue.

As part of the Security Council's efforts to prevent
conflict, the threats to international peace and security
caused by climate change should be identified and
responded to as they emerge. New Zealand firmly
supports the Secretary-General's efforts to ensure
a more coordinated and integrated response to the
impact of climate change. To help to bring additional
coordination and focus to the efforts across the
United Nations system, we stand in full support of
the proposal by Pacific small island developing States
for the appointment of a high-level representative for
climate change.

Furthermore, we join others who have spoken today
and encourage the Secretariat to enable the Council
to comprehensively address such threats by including
relevant analysis and risk assessments on the impact of
climate change in all reports submitted to the Security
Council. As the Secretary-General has said, climate
change is the defining issue of our time. It is a threat
to livelihoods, a threat to well-being and a threat to
international peace and security.

