Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As I
begin my statement, which I am making on behalf of
the three African countries that are non-permanent
members of the Security Council - Cote d'Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea and Ethiopia - I would like to thank
the Bolivian presidency for convening today's briefing
on the role of natural resources in armed conflicts. On
their behalf, 1 would also like to express our sincere
gratitude to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
his briefing and relevant analysis of the correlation
between natural resources and the conflicts that impact
the African continent with particular virulence.
Although the importance of natural resources for
economic growth and development in Africa is well-
known, their control is a considerable challenge for
countries that appear to be vulnerable or affected by
instability and armed conflict. Over the past decades,
regrettably the African continent has been a theatre
for many armed conflicts, which have resulted in
unprecedented mass atrocities and humanitarian
crises. Originally begun for sociopolitical reasons,
several crises in Africa have subsequently morphed
into armed clashes for the control and exploitation of
vast territories rich in natural resources, such as gold,
diamonds, oil and timber. Because such resources also
fuel the majority of the conflicts on our continent,
they clearly have an adverse impact on peace, stability
and economic and social development. Indeed, the
lack of governance and an inequitable distribution
of natural-resource dividends are key factors in the
outbreak, funding and continuation of armed conflicts.
The issue of access, control and distribution of natural
resources therefore appears to be a major underlying
cause of the conflicts that persist in Africa.

The current challenges in finding a peaceful
solution to crises in the Central African Republic and
Libya, as well as to those that resulted in bloodshed
in Liberia and Sierra Leone, clearly demonstrate the
unavoidable nature of armed conflicts that are fuelled
by the pillaging of natural resources by armed groups.
In its concern about conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa, the African Union (AU) has placed its focus
squarely on the issue of the link between conflicts and
natural resources, which has been at the centre of many
Peace and Security Council meetings focused on the
close correlation between Violent conflicts and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in Africa and
the ways and means to address it.

The responses to the challenges raised by natural
resources in conflict prevention and resolution must be
based on strategies that enable better management of
access to natural resources, and on the strengthening
of national and international control mechanisms in
order to prevent them from being used as a means of
financing conflicts. Discussions within the Peace and
Security Council have therefore highlighted the need
to put in place effective national strategies for the
management of natural resources, in order to ensure
that income is used not to fuel conflicts but rather to
benefit local communities. In that way, they become
an important asset for the sustainable economic and
social development of our States rather than a factor
of instability.
Furthermore, while it is undeniable that many
conflicts in Africa are fuelled by poor governance and
trafficking in natural resources, it is also important
to highlight and strongly denounce the involvement
of actors from outside the continent who benefit from
the exploitation and illegal trade of resources. Those
actors at the margins of armed conflicts jeopardizing
the development of our continent, as is rightly pointed
out by the Bolivian presidency in today's concept
paper (S/2018/901, annex), are generally armed groups
or multinational companies, international financial
networks or foreign interests whose actions promote
the outbreak of violent conflicts and ongoing instability
in regions rich in natural resources.

We believe that it is the Council's responsibility
to take appropriate measures, in accordance with the
principles and objectives of the Charter of the United
Nations, to ensure the preservation of the sovereignty of
States in the management of their natural resources. In
our opinion, every State must have the sovereign right to
control and use its natural resources in accordance with
the principles of international law and good governance.
The Security Council must also strengthen its role in
combating the illegal exploitation and trafficking of
natural resources in areas where they contribute to the
outbreak and continuation of armed conflicts.

Today's meeting also gives us the opportunity
to highlight another major challenge facing our
continent - illicit financial flows related to the illegal
exploitation of and trade in natural resources. Such
illicit flows, due to their scale, have a negative impact
on the continent's ongoing development and governance
programmes. According to some estimates, they could
reach $50 billion per year, about twice the amount of
official development assistance to Africa. In reality, such
estimates cannot help but reflect a larger phenomenon,
given the lack of accurate data on all illicit transactions
on the African continent. It is therefore imperative to
ensure the effective and transparent management and
equitable distribution of natural resources in order to
safeguard the interests of the country concerned and
the well-being of its people. Equity, transparency and
accountability in the management of natural resources
are therefore essential to conflict prevention and the
promotion of sustainable development in Africa.

We recognize and welcome the efforts of the
international community to improve the international
legal framework for the use of and trade in natural
resources. They have resulted in the establishment
of relevant standards through instruments such as
the Kimberley Process and the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative. For its part, the African Union
adopted the African Mining Vision in February 2009,
which calls on the AU Commission to integrate the
peace and security dimension of natural resources into
conflict-prevention and early-warning mechanisms,
conflict management and peacebuilding policies and
programmes. It is also important to highlight the work
of the African Union High-Level Panel, chaired by
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, former President of South Africa,
whose report contained useful recommendations on
addressing the complex issue of illicit capital flows
from Africa.

Despite the efforts being made, the expected results
will be effective only if there is close cooperation with
external actors, including multinationals involved
in the exploitation of natural resources. We believe
that ensuring greater control of supply and marketing
chains and accountability for individuals, groups
or multinationals involved in the illegal trade in
natural resources is also essential. In addition, it is
more important than ever that international partners,
transnational corporations, the private sector, civil-
society organizations and all stakeholders support the
promotion of transparency, equity and development-
oriented natural resource governance. That is key to
conflict prevention and resolution on the continent.

Our Council has used various tools to address the
links between natural resources and conflict, including
natural-resources sanctions, ranging from a diamond
and timber embargo to a ban on charcoal exports and
maritime measures prohibiting illegal oil exports.
The report produced by Security Council Report is an
excellent research tool that provides a useful analysis of
the conception and implementation of these sanctions
regimes. It is urgent that we take stock of the lessons
learned from the implementation of these measures in
order to strengthen the Council's role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts linked to natural resources.

