Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like at the outset to thank Minister
Vuk Jeremie for his important statement. We welcome
the presence at this meeting of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and
we thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Zannier, for his introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/281).

The report notes the positive evolution of the
political and security situation since the elections.
Unfortunately, this is at odds with the allegations of
serious violations of human rights.

Gabon, while reiterating its commitment to
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, remains
convinced that, as we emphasized during earlier
debates, a lasting and peaceful resolution of the
situation in Kosovo will require dialogue and
consultation among all stakeholders. That is why we
firmly believe that resolution 1244 (1999) represents
the political and legal basis for a negotiated solution to
the situation.

We welcome the developments in the political
situation, including the resumption of direct dialogue
between the parties on 8 March in Brussels under the
auspices of the European Union (EU). This augurs well
for the continuation of talks, given the importance of
the matters that were raised on that occasion, namely,
the living conditions of the people living in Kosovo
and technical subjects related to peace and stability in
the region. My country urges the parties to continue to
work in that direction and to maintain the political
determination necessary to see the negotiations
through. We welcome also the improvement in the
security situation north of Kosovo despite continuing
tensions on some fronts.

As the Council is aware, the reconciliation
process in Kosovo always comes up against the failure
to resolve three major issues, namely, missing persons,
the return of refugees, and cultural and religious
heritage. As those issues are of pivotal importance, my
delegation urges the parties to continue, with United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) facilitation, to address them with a View to
achieving a lasting, consensus-based solution.

The possibility of establishing a climate of
confidence between the parties could be compromised
by allegations of inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. We urge
the Council to spare no effort in determining the facts
and identifying those responsible. Crimes of such
gravity cannot remain unacknowledged or unpunished.

Hence we call on the Council to promote the
establishment of an appropriate mechanism for the
carrying out of an in-depth, impartial and independent
inquiry, with the participation of UNMIK.

Lastly, we reaffirm our support for Mr. Zannier
and the staff of UNMIK and for all other partners on
the ground in the important work that they are doing
within the context of resolution 1244 (1999).

