Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Permit me to begin by
expressing appreciation to the Russian Federation for
organizing today's open debate on the important topic
of new trends in peacekeeping under the agenda item
entitled "United Nations Peacekeeping Operations".
We also thank you, Mr. President, for the concept note
(S/2014/3 84, annex), which is extremely useful and raises
most of the pertinent issues in connection with new
trends in peacekeeping. The concern expressed and the
reference made in the concept paper to the fragmented
nature of the approach towards the new developments
that United Nations peacekeeping is called upon to
respond to, appear to us to be very valid and pertinent.
The fact that such concerns call for a serious look into
the whole concept of peacekeeping, including doctrine
and principles, is becoming undeniable. I also wish to
express my appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his statement earlier and to commend his leadership.

It is obvious that, at the intergovernmental level,
the task of formulating the concepts and strategies of
peacekeeping in the new period we seem to be in belongs
to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Undoubtedly, the Special Committee would have to be
up to the task, for the task is indeed very critical. The
contribution of the Secretary-General is also going to
be indispensable in that exercise.

In what follows, I want to highlight how urgent this
new thinking about peacekeeping is becoming. Failure
to adopt this new thinking might eventually discredit
the entire idea of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That would be a tragedy indeed, as United
Nations peacekeeping continues to be a vital means
for promoting peace, security and stability. However,
the work of finding and developing universally agreed
concepts, doctrine and strategies for new practices in
peacekeeping must be speeded up.

Current peacekeeping practices are displaying
certain anomalies that do not help to enhance the
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping. In some
instances, the deployment of Blue Helmets is considered
to inappropriate because, the argument goes, there is no
peace to keep. However, increasingly, as experiences
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali
have shown, developments on the ground have made it
imperative to use force beyond what is required for self-
defence. The experience in cote d'Ivoire highlights the
same trend in a more graphic manner. Those are indeed
ad hoc arrangements that lack the underpinnings of
well thought-out and agreed principles and doctrine.

That is why it is difficult, for now, to think of
abandoning the principles that have been the basis for
classical peacekeeping. However, we cannot pretend
that there are no problems with respect to the way in
which those principles are interpreted and applied. That
also requires some serious thinking, ifwe are to rectify
the situation. Thailand has already mentioned some of
the points I would like to raise in that regard.

The principle of impartiality, no doubt, needs to be
upheld, but that must not lead to a search for middle
ground between a claim that is manifestly unjust and
unfair, on one hand, and one with demands that are
limited to the protection of universally recognized
rights. It is also possible that the principle ofthe consent
of the parties could be interpreted in such a way as to
cause it to lose meaning. There are groups that are so
far beyond the pale that asking for their consent might
be both unwise and impractical. We have indeed begun
to encounter more of such instances lately. We should
also not overlook the fact that there might be situations,
as the Secretary-General indicated earlier, in which
it is difficult to identify the parties. The idea of the
non-use of force except in self-defence might lead to
peacekeepers focusing more on their own safety, even
in the face of potential mass atrocities and civilians
facing mortal danger.

All of this requires serious debate, as do the new
trends in the use of high-tech equipment and advanced
technologies and the related political, ethical and other
issues that can legitimately be raised. But again, all
of that is also the result of changes on the ground and
the evolution of the challenges that United Nations
peacekeeping is called upon to address. It is impossible
to deny that there are changes taking place. That is the
beginning of wisdom and progress in this area.

The other point that this debate should take into
account is the increasing role of regional mechanisms
in the area of peacekeeping. In that regard, we wish
to emphasize the need for further strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations such as the African Union in the areas
of policy formulation, capacity-building and burden
sharing.

Unfortunately, Africa continues to host over
70 per cent of United Nations peacekeeping forces,
indicating the level of the peace and security deficit in
the continent. It would therefore be no exaggeration to
say that the success of peacekeeping efforts in Africa
will significantly determine the overall effectiveness of
that endeavour. To address this monumental challenge,
Africa, for its part, is building the African Peace and
Security Architecture, including the African Standby
Force. Here also, there is a need to flexible in the way
the collaboration is carried out.

We are of the view that supporting the African
Union and its institutional capacity to effectively plan,
deploy and manage peace support missions should be
considered a critical aspect of the overall objective of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
No doubt that will require greater partnership,
inclusiveness and purposeful leadership. We commend
the Secretariat and the African Union for the efforts
exerted thus far.

Finally, Ethiopia applauds the many achievements
of United Nations peacekeeping over more than 60
years and feels honoured to have been associated with
that noble endeavour since its inception. We honour the
sacrifices ofthe men and women who have served under
the blue United Nations flag - military, police, and
civilians - in the furtherance of peace. We remember
in particular and with deepest gratitude those who have
lost their lives in the service of world peace.

