Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing. The
situation in Darfur remains of concern, despite regional
and international efforts to end the war through dialogue
and national reconciliation.

Fighting between Government forces and the
many armed groups continues, particularly in northern
Darfur and Jebel Marra, although its intensity and
frequency have somewhat decreased. That is further
compounded by sporadic, yet deadly, clashes between
the various tribes in eastern, southern and northern
Darfur. Civilians caught between multiple fire-fights
find themselves in extremely difficult security and
humanitarian situations. Civilian victims number in
the hundreds, including over 121,000 persons who have
been internally displaced since December's briefing
(see S/PV.7337). We strongly condemn that situation
and all forms of violence perpetrated against civilians,
particularly women and children. Attacks targeting
the peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and humanitarian workers
are inadmissible. The perpetrators of such attacks must
be identified and brought to justice.

In the context of war, insecurity and instability, it
would be difficult, even impossible, to create conditions
conducive to genuine justice in order to prosecute the
alleged perpetrators of the crimes committed in Darfur.
That is why we reiterate the appeal made by the African

Union to work concurrently on the dual tracks of peace
andjustice. That is the only way to givejustice a chance
to succeed on all fronts. It is also why it is necessary
to support and promote the inter-Sudanese dialogue
process taking place under the auspices of the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, towards a lasting
political solution to the crisis in Darfur.

Furthermore, we welcome the liberation in early
April of the civil society members who had been
imprisoned. We launch a heartfelt appeal to all Sudanese
stakeholders to prioritize dialogue and national
reconciliation. Chad reiterates that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Darfur. The international
community must make every effort to ensure that the
armed movements and the Government return to the
negotiating table on the basis of national reconciliation
and the integration ofjustice into the peace process in
order to combat impunity.

