Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Land-mines pose a
global challenge to the international community, less
because of their explosive power than because of the
indiscriminate and inhumane manner in which they have
been used. Brutal anti-personnel mines have been deployed
with appalling frequency against civilians, maiming or
killing 25,000 people per year. Moreover, mines laid during
a conflict remain armed and dangerous long after the guns
fall silent, threatening reconciliation efforts and
undermining economic recovery. Land-mines truly are, as
one commentator has called them, "weapons of mass
destruction in slow motion".

The ready availability of land-mines only exacerbates
the problem. Easy to produce, and with an ample number
of suppliers, land-mines are very inexpensive. Not only are
land-mines easy to acquire, but they are also easy to
emplace. If we combine these factors with the painstakingly
slow, dangerous and expensive process of mine removal,
the conundrum we face is clear. The average anti-personnel
mine costs as little as $3 to produce, and yet costs up to
$1,000 to remove.

Demining methods, meanwhile, have advanced little
since the Second World War. The net result is that land-
mines are being laid far faster than they can be cleared.
We now face more than 100 million mines in 65 different
countries worldwide, and the figure is increasing by up to
1 million new mines per year.

My delegation believes that coping with the land-
mine scourge will require the international community to
make concerted efforts from two directions.

First, any comprehensive effort to solve the problem
must eventually address the supply side of the equation,
including through restrictions on production, export and
modifications in design, such as the inclusion of self-
neutralizing timers. The Republic of Korea has played a
part in this effort, announcing a unilateral year-long
moratorium on land-mine exports last year. The large
number of land-mine producers, however, and the
divergence of views on the efficacy of production and
export controls, means that a consensus on supply-side
issues will not come easily.

Secondly, in the meantime, there is a pressing need
for the international community to focus on the end-user
side of the equation, such as through demining and
restrictions on the use of land-mines. What I believe we
need to focus on today, in our discussion of the role of
demining in peace-keeping operations, is how to enhance
the capacity and efficiency of mine-clearance in affected
countries.

It is against this background that I would now like
to elaborate on why demining is a particularly pressing
concern in the context of United Nations peace-keeping.

First, the vast majority of peace-keeping missions
launched since the end of the cold war have been in
response to intra-State conflicts, and it is in precisely
those conflicts that land-mine emplacement is particularly
widespread.

Secondly, in those peace-keeping missions, uncleared
land-mines often prevent peace-keepers from fulfilling
their mandate. Clearly, land-mines endanger peace-
keepers, just as they do the local population. Mines stand
in the way of the efforts to achieve other parts of a peace-
keeper's mandate, such as distributing humanitarian aid,
repatriating refugees, or ensuring fair elections.

 

Thirdly, land-mines can jeopardize an affected
country's post-conflict economic and psychological
recovery. Not surprisingly, fields will lie fallow and
factories idle until farmers and workers feel safe enough to
return to their jobs. Mines paralyse agriculture, render roads
and bridges impassable, and impose staggering medical and
psychological costs on the population.

Clearly, for all these reasons, peace-keeping operations
in mine-ridden countries cannot succeed without proper
demining. Now how can we ensure that mine-clearance
efforts in peace-keeping are effective? My delegation is of
the view that there are several concrete steps that we can
take towards this end.

First, we must ensure that demining be made an
integral part of United Nations peace-keeping operations
whenever deemed necessary. In this regard, we wish to
suggest that the Security Council should review the scope
of the mandates of existing peace-keeping missions to make
sure that authorization for demining is adequately provided
for. Moreover, we believe that demining operations
coordinated by the United Nations should be granted a
mandate to continue even after the actual peace-keeping
operation has ended.

Secondly, in carrying out demining tasks, we should
concentrate on nourishing the indigenous capacity for safe,
fast and effective mine-clearance in order to help affected
countries help themselves in the long run. Ultimately, the
primary responsibility for demining lies with the country
affected. After all, complete demining will almost certainly
require a longer time-frame than the mandate of peace-
keeping missions can sustain. Before their time expires,
however, United Nations peace-keepers can give affected
countries a jump-start along the long road to recovery by
helping them develop their own repository of demining
expertise. This knowledge can then be continuously drawn
upon, even after the "Blue Helmets" have returned home.

Efforts by peace-keepers to foster indigenous demining
capacity will have to include the following steps: land-mine
assessment, followed by training in mine-awareness;
education and training in mine-clearance; and finally,
transition of authority to the host Government. The transfer
of demining technology and the provision of essential
equipment are clearly no less important steps. In this
regard, my delegation wishes to point to the valiant work
of the Cambodia Mine Action Centre (CMAC) as a useful
model. Founded by the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) in 1992, CMAC was
later reconstituted as an official organ of the Cambodian
Government upon UNTAC's withdrawal. The CMAC
demining programme is making extraordinary progress
through the training of local deminers and such innovative
concepts as a village demining programme involving
selected village residents.

Thirdly, in addition to peace-keeping missions, we
should strengthen the capacity and resources of the United
Nations to provide rapid demining assistance on an ad
hoc basis, whenever the need arises. To this end, it would
be worthwhile to further explore how we can strengthen
the United Nations demining standby capacity programme
and expand the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine-clearance. In this vein, my delegation
wishes to note that the Government of the Republic of
Korea has been a recent contributor to the Fund.

No country can ignore the horrendous magnitude of
the land-mine problem. It has become a global crisis
warranting a global response. It is only appropriate,
therefore, that the United Nations should have played a
major role in seeking a solution. The United Nations
should continue to lead us in the quest for a
comprehensive answer to this global crisis. My delegation
firmly believes that we will be able to find such an
answer only when the whole spectrum of land-mine
problems, ranging from humanitarian concerns to
disarmament imperatives is fully addressed.

In tandem with many other ongoing efforts by the
international community towards the eventual eradication
of this scourge, United Nations peace-keeping operations
give us the opportunity to contribute to the management
of a more immediate danger by actively cultivating the
ability of stricken nations to clear already-laid land-mines.
We must help mine-ridden nations, particularly those in
the developing world, help themselves in shaking off this
danger, so that civilians can once again farm their fields
and walk the roads of their countries without fear.

I wish finally to take this opportunity to express my
delegation's sincere thanks to you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to organize this open meeting
devoted to the discussion of the issue of demining in the
context of peace-keeping, and for your Government's
outstanding contribution towards the resolution of this
issue.

