Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for the updates on her Office's
activities since June.

Ukraine remains deeply concerned about
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
indiscriminate killings and other crimes committed in
Darfur. Gender-based violence, including ethnically
motivated sexual crimes, continues to take place
in Darfur as signalled by the relevant report of the
Secretary-General. In our view, that warrants the special
attention of the Security Council. Unfortunately, like
previous reports, this report still notes that States have
failed to arrest people sought after by the Court. Article
27, paragraph 1, of the Rome Statute provides that the
Statute shall apply equally to all persons without any
distinction based on official capacity. In particular, in
an official capacity as a Head of State or Government,
a member of a Government or Parliament, an elected
representative or a Government official shall in no case
exempt a person from criminal responsibility under
the Statute.

It is well known that the Court does not possess
any enforcement mechanism and can fulfill its mandate
only in cooperation with States. Resolution 1593 (2005)
includes a clear requirement for the Government of the
Sudan to fully cooperate and provide any assistance to
the Court. Yet the reality is that the Government of the
Sudan has not responded to requests from the Court.
The Court often gets those requests back unopened.
Ukraine considers such a stance inappropriate and
disrespectful to the Court. We call on the Government
of the Sudan to provide any necessary assistance to the
Court and the Prosecutor.

Irrespective of being party or non-party to the
Rome Statute, all Member States should consolidate
their efforts to ensure accountability and prevent
grave crimes in Darfur and elsewhere from happening.
Non-cooperation with the ICC in such situations is a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. Our
common failure to bring to justice those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law and abuses
of human rights can stimulate violence in the rest of
the world.

Finally, in such turbulent times for the authority
and activities of the ICC in Africa, Ukraine would like
to express its full support to the work of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the ICC on this case, as well as other
important cases. I again thank Prosecutor Bensouda.

