Mr. Al-Nasser (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the
State of Qatar, and in my capacity as Chairman of the
Islamic Group here in New York, it gives me pleasure to
congratulate you, Sir, on you presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. We are confident that your
wisdom and diplomatic expertise will assist us in achieving
the results that we desire.

The international community has been shocked by the
inhumane practices against the Kosovars. They represent a
stark violation of human rights, of all international
covenants and conventions, and of the lofty and noble
objectives of such conventions. The killing, destruction,
rape, displacement and ethnic cleansing perpetrated by the
Serbian forces in Kosovo are an affront to humanity - an
affront that will continue into the new millennium unless
efforts are made to put an end to this tragic situation,
punish the perpetrators and bring them to justice in
accordance with international law, which punishes such acts
of genocide.

The suffering of the thousands of refugees in
neighbouring States makes it incumbent upon us to act as
quickly as possible so as to put an end to it. This suffering
constitutes an additional burden on neighbouring States. We
urge States, humanitarian organizations and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
increase their humanitarian assistance to refugees and to the
displaced civilians, as well as to other victims in and
around Kosovo. We also call for efforts to be made to
enable the refugees and displaced persons to return safely
to their homes and to guarantee their right to live in
dignity, freedom, peace and security, in accordance with
assurances contained in all relevant conventions.
The Islamic Group strongly condemns the inhumane
Serbian practices in Kosovo and calls for their immediate
cessation. At the same time, we support the international
efforts made in this regard, particularly the diplomatic
efforts made by the Secretary-General in search of a just
and permanent political solution that would guarantee the
political and social rights of the Kosovars and their right
to security, and put an end to the policy of ethic cleansing
of Yugoslavia. It should guarantee the right of the
Kosovars to return to their homeland very soon, without
any obstruction, under international protection.

Here, I should like to recall the statement by the
Ministerial Meeting of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Kosova, issued in Geneva on 7 April, which is
included in document S/l999/394. I should also like to
recall the meetings of the delegation of the OIC Contact
Group with the Foreign Ministers of the Russian
Federation, Italy, Germany and Albania in their search for
a just solution for the crisis that takes into consideration
the social and political rights of the Kosovars and their
right to security.

Political disputes and the divergent positions of some
parties have blocked agreement on a resolution that would
address the overall situation in Kosovo. But there could
be no logic in such differences preventing the Security
Council from adopting a resolution on the humanitarian
situation of the Kosovars and of refugees and displaced
persons in and around Kosovo in the hope of returning
them to their homes before winter and of bringing an end
to their suffering. In our view, nothing could have
justified a delay in adopting such a resolution relating to
the humanitarian aspects of the tragedy.

We joined in sponsoring the resolution the Council
has just adopted because of our unequivocal belief that
the cause of the people of Kosovo is a just one. We
believe also in the need to bring to an end the suffering
of that people as soon as possible. Here we convey our
thanks and appreciation to the members of the Security
Council for adopting this resolution.

