Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to
express our condolences to the delegation and people of
the United States over the horrendous acts of violence
that took the lives of so many innocent people in
Orlando.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2292 (2016) because it believes
that the threat posed by the presence of terrorist and
other armed groups to peace and stability in Libya and
throughout the region calls for a common effort of the
international community to take effective measures
against the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons in violation of the arms embargo. We believe,
indeed we are convinced, that illegal arms trafficking
is one of the main contributors to destabilization and to
the propagation of terrorism in the region.

In authorizing the interdiction of ships on the
high seas suspected of transporting arms to be used
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant or Da'esh
or other terrorist organizations in Libya, respect for
international law must be upheld, which includes
obtaining the consent of the vessel's flag State prior
to any inspections. The authorities of those flag States
should cooperate with such inspections. We must
also bear in mind the need to not cause undue delay
to or undue interference with the exercise of freedom
of navigation in accordance with the relevant legal
instruments of the law of the sea. We believe that the
practice of interdicting vessels on the high seas off the
coast of Libya with a view to combating the traffic in
arms and related materiel should not be extrapolated to
other possible cases, nor should such practice take place
in the territorial waters of Libya without that country's
express consent.

We are convinced that the fight against terrorism
requires the effective implementation, Without any
double standard, of Security Council resolutions that
prohibit the financing and transfer of arms to terrorist
groups, which are committing appalling crimes in the
Middle East and Africa in violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights.

Moreover, our delegation is aware of the tremendous
challenges faced by the new Libyan authorities in this
transition phase with regard to the urgent need to
address the proliferation of weapons and the presence
of various armed groups, the majority of which are
operating outside of the effective control of the Libyan
State. Foreign terrorist fighters, as well as terrorist and
extremist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida, have continued to consolidate
their presence in Libya, exploiting the institutional
collapse and existing political divisions as well as the
absence of strict border controls resulting from the
armed intervention by certain NATO countries in 2011.

As indicated last week by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Kobler (see S/PV.7706),
Libya is awash in weapons. There are approximately
20 million weapons in a country with only 6 million
inhabitants, which reach Libya illegally by land and
by sea. This is the alarming reality that is fuelling the
conflict and endangering the gains made in the context
of the political process as well as by the Government of
National Accord.

In this regard, Venezuela believes that it is
vital that the Libyan authorities implement a viable
plan that would enable the State to fully assume its
security functions as quickly as possible, including
the monopoly over the use of force provided for in the
relevant provisions of the Libyan Political Agreement.
This includes the development of national security
institutions, the demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, and the implementation of official
security-sector reform programmes. The international
community as a whole must support Libya in these
objectives.

The adoption of this resolution is taking place in
a decisive context in terms of making progress in the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement, a
process promoted by the United Nations and that we
all supported. We reiterate that the implementation of
the Skhirat Political Agreement, of 17 December 2015,
is the only way of achieving a peaceful and sustainable
solution that could provide the necessary assistance
and support to Libyan State institutions, so as to enable
them to function smoothly and contribute to finding
a peaceful, negotiated political solution to the armed
conflict in Libya.

Lastly, we wish to reiterate our firm commitment
to the principle of full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Libya.

