Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank you for
convening this timely open debate on the situation in
Somalia. I thank the Secretary-General, the Prime
Minister of Somalia and the Special Representative of
the African Union for Somalia for their statements, to
which I listened attentively.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the head of the delegation of the European
Union, and I would like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.

Italy continues to support the invaluable
endeavours of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Ambassador Mahiga,
and remains fully engaged in all the relevant
multilateral forums, as well as bilaterally, in promoting
the Somali peace process. Indeed, Somalia continues to
represent a risk in terms of worldwide terrorism,
international organized crime and humanitarian crises.

The Islamic extremist group Al-Shabaab is still a
serious threat to the Transitional Federal Institutions in
Mogadishu, to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and, above all, to all Somalis, who have
been suffering now for some 20 years. The ongoing
drought could easily turn into a humanitarian
catastrophe. In all regions controlled by Al-Shabaab,
international aid is barred, while food and water
provided by United Nations agencies in the territories
beyond their reach are at risk of running short. Piracy

11-2583]
remains a clear and present danger to a widening area
of the Indian Ocean.

Somalia needs stronger international efforts for
stabilization and security and to prevent the risk of
terrorism spilling over. Like other countries, Italy
strongly supports AMISOM. and the Somali security
forces and Police in their strategy to establish effective
control of the territory. We are also engaged in
sustaining the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
in its reconstruction, and thus in implementing a
civilian strategy of economic and social recovery.

The European Union Training Mission, in which
Italy has been taking part since its inception, is
working well. The United States and Italy have
renewed their financial support for 8,000 additional
soldiers. This, however, is not enough. The TFG's
security forces remain in dire need of a serious
overhaul of their organization, command and control.

The Somali Prime Minister has today renewed his
appeals for stronger political and financial assistance to
the TFG from the international community. The short
time left until the natural end of the transitional
mandate, despite the ongoing discussions on its
extension, calls for immediate action. Addressing the
need for a new institutional set-up following August,
through concrete actions and a coordinated approach
by the international community, remains crucial.

Key international actors seem to share the notion
that the open-ended political outreach efforts set by the
Djibouti peace process need to be intensified. Thus, the
role of local entities must also be increased if the
legitimacy and representation of any institutional
architecture is to be secured. To this end, we advocate
increased cooperation between the TFG and the local
administrations.

To encourage this enhanced cooperation and
better coordination between the central institutions and
local Powers, the international community, while
remaining steadfast in its support for the TFG, should
guarantee greater assistance to the stable regions that
have not fallen under the control of Al-Shabaab, such
as Puntland, Galguduud and Somaliland.

11-2583]
Italy deems it necessary to have stronger and
urgent international efforts to help the TFG tackle the
serious problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia,
which has grown in scope and intensity. Despite the
ongoing efforts of various naVies in the area, piracy
remains a major threat, and the situation has
deteriorated. We have been actively participating in the
European Union Atalanta and the NATO Ocean Shield
naval operations, and Italy is keen to hold the
command of the NATO fleet in the second half of 2011.

Italy continues to prioritize the prosecution and
detention of captured pirates, which represent the most
logical consequence of the huge patrolling effort and a
necessary requirement for an effective fight against
piracy. We therefore support the recommendation put
forward in the report of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia (S/2011/30, annex) to create an
extraterritorial Somali court with an international
component, and would welcome the adoption of
Security Council measures to that effect.

Furthermore, Italy supports the call for increased
efforts to control illicit financial flows linked to piracy
off the coast of Somalia, and is willing to facilitate
discussion among interested members of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia on the
appropriate way forward. We are also ready to lead an
international effort to develop actionable proposals for
disrupting piracy-related financial networks and to
report our findings to the plenary meeting of the
Contact Group.

Somalian instability represents a threat for the
region and fosters a multitude of problems, including
terrorism. As a matter of urgency, the international
community must come together on a comprehensive
strategy to encourage development, peace and security
in Somalia.

