Mr. Vale de Almeida: As this is my first time
addressing the Council during your presidency, Sir, I
wish you, on behalf of the European Union (EU), the
greatest success for the month of May.

I am honoured to speak on behalf of the EU and
its 28 member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.

In recent years, the European Union has welcomed
an in-depth analysis conducted by the United Nations to
review the global peace and security architecture. The
reform currently being implemented by the Secretariat
is a crucial step in adapting our collective action,
making it fit for purpose. The Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) initiative, which aims at renewing our collective
engagement and attaining excellence, is another
important milestone in this direction.

The European Union and its member States
continue to stress the paramount importance of political
solutions to conflicts and addressing root causes and
drivers of conflict, as well as the priority that should
be given to prevention. This is a central component of
our own EU Global Strategy for Foreign and Security
Policy and drives our efforts to strengthen the EU
Common Security and Defence Policy, structures and
instruments. This is also in line with the Secretary-
General's determination to place prevention at the
centre of United Nations peace and security efforts.
Only an integrated approach can lead to truly sustaining
peace and, in that respect, the quality of training and
the overall performance of the peacekeepers are of
paramount importance.

The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
personnel in fragile political and security environments
has resulted in a rise in the number of deaths, as well
as other security incidents. We unwaveringly support
measures being developed and undertaken to improve
the safety and security of United Nations personnel.
We are committed to exploring all options that
contribute to the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers on the ground and, by so doing, ensure
better protection for civilians and guarantee a more
effective maintenance of peace.

The European Union and its member States have
been leading efforts over the past few years to ensure
the safety and security of United Nations personnel. In
that context, we welcome United Nations initiatives to
better integrate modern technology and peacekeeping
intelligence capabilities into peace operations. By
helping to improve the situational awareness of troops
and police in real time, this will contribute to the
implementation of mission mandates, to the protection
of civilians and to the security of personnel, including
humanitarian actors, on the ground.

But technology alone cannot be the solution.
Instead, a coherent combination of modern technology
with relevant methods placed at the disposal of well-
prepared and trained staff is imperative. We continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations to further
develop these capacities for current and future
missions, including through our own United Nations-
EU Strategic Partnership on Peace Operations and
Crisis Management.

In many ways, training is central to carrying out
peacekeeping mandates. In the spirit of A4P, we believe
that properly training and equipping mission personnel
before and during deployment - whether they belong
to a military, police or civilian component, and on
the basis of consolidated standards - is crucial to
ensuring mission success as well as to safeguarding
the safety and security of peacekeepers. It is essential,
in our view, that such training include predeployment
and in-mission training and be adapted to operational
challenges and focused on gender and human rights
components, including child protection, women
and peace and security, and combating sexual and
gender-based violence, as well as sexual exploitation
and abuse. This is especially relevant in increasingly
complex environments and could also be enhanced in
cooperation with regional actors.
Moreover, for us, relevant and appropriate training
remains the cornerstone of any performance policy.
We welcome the Secretary-General's emphasis on
increased accountability and his efforts to strengthen
the system's ability to deal with sexual exploitation and
abuse swiftly and decisively. We remain committed
to working in the long term with partners, all troop-
and police-contributing countries and stakeholders
in the spirit of genuine cooperation. This will ensure
that prevention measures are further strengthened,
victims are provided with assistance, allegations are
duly investigated and justice is served by the countries
that contribute the personnel. We also want to see the
Secretariat optimally configured and delivering as one.

In line with resolution 2436 (2018), we very
much welcome progress on the development of the
comprehensive performance assessment system, with
clear standards of performance for assessing and
evaluating all United Nations civilian and uniformed
personnel. Robust and objective methodologies based
on clear, well-defined and identified benchmarks are
central to improving not only mission planning and
evaluation, but also mandate implementation at large.

Finally, we continue to underscore the importance
of the protection of civilians as a core task of
peacekeeping. In this regard, regular assessments
constitute an indispensable part of our performance
policy, as they ensure that the protection of civilians
under threat of physical violence is fulfilled. The
establishment of the Strategic Planning and Monitoring
Unit within the Executive Office of the Secretary-
General is a welcome step forward towards improved
assessments and enhanced operational output. The
European troop- and police-contributing countries will
continue to support the Secretariat in delivering both the
capacity and willingness to create safer environments
for communities under peacekeepers' protection.

TrainingisprimarilyaMember State's responsibility
in order to provide well-trained and well-equipped
uniformed personnel and partake in a collective effort
to better prepare, train and equip these personnel.
However, the European Union, through the deployment
of its own missions and operations, implements a whole
array of action in matters of training and capacity-

building with a View to complementing United Nations
efforts in this regard.

Indeed, the European Union will continue to
be a loyal partner, not only by supporting United
Nations peacekeeping operations, but also within the
framework of our strengthened Common Security and
Defence Policy. We continue to support each other
and asset-sharing in-theatre, be it in Mali, the Central
African Republic, Somalia, Libya, the Balkans or Iraq.
We share best practices on conduct and discipline, and
lessons learned from strategic reviews and assessments
of our missions and operations. In our biannual
steering committee meetings between the EU and the
United Nations, we discuss operational needs, agree on
benchmarks and ensure the strategic direction of our
partnership, all to better align our efforts and improve
our modalities for cooperation in different areas.

This is reflected in the recently adopted 2019-
2021 priorities of the United Nations-EU strategic
partnership. As one of our eight priorities, we have
agreed to contribute to the enhancement of performance
by reinforcing cooperation on training and capacity-
building, including on exercises. To this end, we
are exploring how our services could help facilitate
support from EU member States for different types
of trainings, including on human rights, international
humanitarian law and gender, as well as other relevant
trainings. This means engaging more systematically
with the European Security and Defence College, as
well as with the European Association of Peacekeeping
Training Centres.

We are also deeply committed to advancing the
women and peace and security agenda. We welcome
the recently approved uniformed gender-parity strategy
for the period 2018-2028, as well as all efforts aimed
at increasing the number and participation of women
in peacekeeping and the integration of a gender
perspective into all phases of the policymaking process
and analysis. Part of the solution lies in increasing the
quantity and quality of training for women personnel.

We made women and peace and security the first of
the joint priorities of the United Nations-EU Strategic
Partnership on Peace Operations and Crisis Management
for the period 2019-2021, as well as a cross-cutting
priority across all areas ofour cooperation. Our missions
and operations around the world are already working
together on the ground to enhance the integration of
a gender perspective throughout their activities. We
are mapping ongoing cooperation on the ground and,
as mentioned during the United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial on 29 March, we have agreed to organize
a joint United Nations-EU workshop in Brussels on
enabling factors for engaging more women in all roles
and areas of expertise and at all levels of peacekeeping
and crisis management. The aim of thatjoint effort is to
build on ongoing work and existing data in this area and
to arrive at a set of practical recommendations that will
be shared widely. We hope to encourage a practice of
regular, informed and practical exchanges on enabling
factors for engaging more women in peacekeeping
between EU member States, other United Nations
troop- and police-contributing countries and experts in
that area.

In conclusion, the EU welcomes the emphasis
that Secretary-General Antonio Guterres puts on
partnerships - and the EU-United Nations partnership
in particular - as key to global peace and security.

