Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
country's gratitude to the Russian Federation for
its outstanding presidency of the Security Council
this month. My country's delegation commends the
convening of this important meeting presided over by
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation. We also congratulate your friendly country,
Mr. President, on hosting and organizing the FIFA
World Cup with distinction.

My country's delegation has considered the
concept note (S/2018/524, annex) for this meeting, and
we highly appreciate the principled policy adopted by
the friendly Russian Federation and other significant
States Members of this international Organization,
based on seeking basic solutions to crises and conflicts
according to international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Such crises, which have ravaged the
globe for decades, are the result of the Government
policies of certain countries with major military,
economic and financial power that believe that they
can use the work of the international Organization to
serve their own interests and determine the destinies
of the peoples of the world. Those countries - some
of which are permanent members of the Security
Council - monopolize and steal the riches of others,
fabricate crises and wars and control them indirectly
and directly to serve their own interests and agendas,
which represent a fundamental threat to international
peace and security.

Consequently, those Powers are currently defying
the collective will of the international community, while
rejecting the multilateral system, and stop at nothing
to serve their own interests, including by distorting
the Charter of the United Nations and manipulating
the provisions of international law to justify their
policies. Those Powers carry out direct acts of military
aggression and occupy other countries' territories
by force, characterizing their acts of aggression and
occupation as wars against terrorism. Those Powers
support the continued Israeli occupation of Arab lands,
claiming that it is based on a historical right even though
that is a falsification of history. They support terrorism
by claiming that it is a moderate bloody revolution and
a rainbow spring.

At the same time, those Powers deny the right of
peoples to resist occupation and aggression, and say that
those people's right to defend themselves is a form of
terrorism. They align themselves with the most powerful
Wahhabi dictatorships, which are the underlying cause
of international terrorism in the world together with
the Israeli Zionism. Such alliances are characterized

by strategic partnerships. In addition, those Powers
impose economic, commercial and financial sanctions
against many peoples throughout the world, which is a
flagrant violation of the provisions of the Charter, while
using the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as
a pretext to claim that no one must be left behind. In
that regard, we must not forget that one of those Powers
withdrew from UNESCO, the Human Rights Council
and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Who
knows - perhaps Power may also withdraw tomorrow
from this international Organization.

My country, Syria, believes that any serious and
balanced approach to the underlying causes of the
crises in the Middle East - the cradle of civilization,
as all colleagues have said before me - must be based
first and foremost on acknowledging that the main
cause continues to be the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands, including the Syrian Golan, rather than the
propaganda disseminated by some claiming that the
cause of the crises is the result of ethnic and religious
conflicts. The international community has not been
able to end the Israeli occupation of occupied Arab
lands or ensure the establishment ofa Palestinian State
with Jerusalem as its capital. Any attempt to fabricate
regional and national crises to save Israel and deprive
Arab countries, including Palestine, of their rights, and
any proposed deal characterized by theft violates the
relevant international resolutions and will only lead to
more crises, the pursuit of conflicts and the escalation of
threats to international and regional peace and security.

For the past eight years, Syria has suffered from
one of the most bitter crises that the world has known
in decades. It is a violent terrorist war that certain
Governments have supported, financed and fuelled.
They have earmarked millions of dollars to militarize
the Syrian crisis. Those Governments have established
and funded armed terrorist groups that have adopted
extremist religious slogans that are totally foreign to
Syrian society. Those same Governments have focused
their efforts on recruiting young people throughout
the world, brainwashing them into becoming foreign
terrorist fighters, and sending them to Syria and
Iraq. Governments and intelligence agencies in Arab
countries and the region have facilitated travel for
thousands of those extremists through their territories,
in particular Turkey. Meanwhile, other States have
turned a blind eye to terrorists travelling to Syria.

Those thousands of terrorist fighters therefore now
represent an international crisis whereby their countries
of origin fear their return. Nevertheless, the United
States continues to train terrorists and armed fighters
in 19 areas it occupies in the heart of Syria, including
the Al-Tanf area and the Rukban camp on the border
shared by Syria, Jordan and Iraq. The United States is
providing them with rations, weapons, ammunition,
fuel and support from 22 American bases outside of
Syria. It provides the terrorist Da'esh organization with
the facilities necessaryto carry out its attacks against
the Syrian Arab Army.

Even worse, those Governments have politicized
the issue ofproviding humanitarian assistance in Syria.
They attempt to control the work of the United Nations
by falsifying information, fabricating evidence and
manipulating the reports on the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, which are based exclusively on
false information from the White Helmets, one of the
deceptive branches of the terrorist Al-Nusra Front.
The group was established by British intelligence and
recently received $6.7 million from the United States to
enable it to distort facts about the Syrian Government,
blackmail it along with its allies and end their war on
terrorism for the entire world.

I am affirming once again that the Syrian
Government has not used toxic chemical weapons.
It has no chemical weapons. They were destroyed
on an American ship in the Mediterranean Sea. The
Council knows that, and so does the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. I also want to
stress that it was armed terrorist groups that used those
chemical weapons, producing them with cutting-edge
technology provided by some western States, and we
will provide the United Nations specialized agencies
with proof of that in the near future, evidence that we
will present in addition to the 147 letters that we have
submitted to the members of the United Nations on the
use of chemical weapons by terrorist groups in Syria.

Unfortunately, the opportunity that the Russian
Federation has provided in holding today's meeting to
address these crises conscientiously and hear new ideas
aimed at helping the peoples concerned deal with their
problems has not been seized by certain States that have
failed to uphold their ethical and political principles.
We have heard the statements from Britain, France and
the United States, repeating the inappropriate political
language that we have been hearing for decades in
the halls of this Organization and whose purpose is to
try to blind people to their aggressive policies, which
have destroyed dozens of Member States and resulted
in the looting of their riches. Needless to say, those
same States are the main cause of the problems in
the region thanks to their old colonialist policies and
their support for the extremist, aggressive policies of
Israel. They interfere in the internal affairs of countries
in the region and give direct or indirect support to
foreign terrorist groups, which they refuse to put on the
Security Council sanctions list. They are attempting
to overthrow certain Governments in the region with
the fallacious arguments that we have heard in their
political statements.

The Syrians who believe in their country and their
independence have fought terrorism and defeated it in
large areas ofthe country. They will continue their efforts
to achieve that goal in order to put an end to terrorism
and liberate the whole of Syria from occupation.

Finally, I would like to address my colleague the
representative of Turkey's reference to his country
fighting terrorism in northern Syria and liberating
4,000 square kilometres. I want to remind him that
the basic principles of international law oblige his
Government to coordinate and cooperate with Syria.

First, if his Government had good intentions,
it should have first cooperated with the Syrian
Government to fight terrorism. Under international
law, a State is prohibited from any incursion into the
territory of another State, especially a neighbour with
which it has historical ties. It is prohibited from any
incursion into the territory of another State without
that State's request, and that request was never made.
Secondly, Turkey's military forces entered our territory
without a request or authorization from the Syrian
Government. Thirdly, the Government of Turkey is the
main source of the terrorism that spread to many parts
of my country, particularly northern Syria, because it
facilitated the training and financing of terrorists and
extremists and allowed them to enter Syria from all
over the world, something that Turkey's Government
and intelligence services knew about. Fourthly, Turkey
is part of the crisis that represents a threat to regional
peace and security due to its policies, much like those of
Israel. Fifthly, Syria has a right to liberate the entirety
of its occupied territories, whether they are occupied
by Israel or Turkey. We have the right to fight terrorism
and those who support it on any part of our land.

