I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing and his commitment. I would also like to commend his efforts to engage with all stakeholders at both the national and the international levels. The Niger continues to support the calls of the Special Envoy and the Secretary-General for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria so as to enable a coordinated fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. A complete ceasefire is indeed critical for any progress on the political process, but is also essential for smooth and swift humanitarian operations, especially in the north-east and in Idlib province. It is very encouraging to see the Russian-Turkish ceasefire, signed on 6 March, to halt fighting in the Syrian province of Idlib, still holding. It needs to be supported. It might not be the solution we would like to see for the Syrian crisis, but it has reduced hostilities to enable Syria to address the ongoing threat of the COVID-19 pandemic. My delegation therefore reiterates its call for continued diplomatic work between the Astana guarantors, the Council members and Special Envoy Pedersen to build on that momentum and to make progress on the political front, as mandated by resolution 2254 (2015). My delegation believes that the Syrian crisis can be settled only on a non-politicized and non-militarized basis, because only a climate of security can allow the establishment of a peace process. We therefore call on all belligerents to build on the ceasefire and refrain from any action that could escalate the situation. Similarly, we remain convinced that the formula for ending the Syrian crisis must be inspired by the Syrians themselves, in their various components, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We also call on all parties to be more flexible during negotiations at the Constitutional Committee level in order to advance the political track for lasting peace in Syria. Furthermore, the Niger calls on both sides to show empathy in these unprecedented times by ensuring medical care for all detainees and the release of any arbitrary detainees and abductees, and by clarifying the situation of the missing persons. Lastly, the Niger recognizes the danger posed by terrorist groups in Syria. We believe that the Government has the right to fight terrorism, but must respect obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law with regard to the principle of proportionality and the protection of civilian and civilian infrastructure. The Niger commends the admirable contribution of the Syrian Women's Advisory Board and all Syrian women as they play a leading role in de-escalating tensions, maintaining non-violence, raising awareness and fighting the spread of COVID-19 in towns and in refugee and internally displaced persons camps.
