Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
efforts. Our thanks go also to all the other members of
the Council. I also wish to reiterate our heartfelt thanks
and appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, for his constant, tireless efforts to put an end to
the tragedy in the Middle East.

The Council is about to adopt yet another very
important draft resolution by consensus. I would like to
say here that we appreciate very much the position of
our sister country, Syria, reflected in its willingness to
support the draft resolution and to cooperate with all
international efforts for the reasons set out a few
moments ago by the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

The Security Council has important assets,
embodied in resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1397 (2002)
and in today's draft resolution. Let us benefit from
those assets in order to help the peace efforts in the
region. Let us start with the first step called for in the
draft resolution: the implementation of resolution 1402
(2002) without delay.

I also wish to refer to the important statement
made by President Bush today, which is now being
studied by President Arafat and the rest of the
Palestinian leadership, who are experiencing difficult
circumstances, of which I am sure all members are
aware. Of course, we greatly value what the statement
reflects in terms of the readiness of the United States to
be deeply involved in the peace efforts at the highest
level. We also fully appreciate the new step in response
to the political and security situation.

We have noted that the statement calls on Israel to

put an end to military operations and to withdraw from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah. We have also
noted that the statement calls for an immediate
ceasefire and for the implementation of the Tenet plan
and the Mitchell recommendations as they stand. We
have also noted the call to put an end to the settlements
and to combat terrorism, including the infrastructure of
terrorism networks.

We have also taken note of the call for an end to
the occupation and for Israel's withdrawal to the
borders in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). This is based
on a vision of two States, Israel and a politically and
economically viable Palestine.

All of that is definitely positive. It goes without
saying that we have reservations concerning the
unjustified criticism addressed to President Arafat, the
elected President of the Palestinians and the symbol of
Palestinian identity.

We believe that we need to overcome the
legitimate fears of the Palestinian side so that we can
all move forward as rapidly as possible towards the
implementation of agreements and can put an end to
the ongoing tragedy in order to establish a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Whatever the circumstances, we, of course, welcome
the visit of Mr. Powell to the region. I can assure the
Council that President Arafat is entirely willing to
cooperate with Mr. Powell to ensure the success of his
mission in order to put an end to the ongoing tragedy
and to return to the path of peace.

I thank all friendly countries, our Arab brothers,
the Non-Aligned Movement, the members of the
Security Council and particularly the States that have
sent special envoys to the Middle East.

