Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I am grateful
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for her eleventh report and briefing to the
Security Council. I would like to begin by underscoring
the United Kingdom's strong support of the Court. I
thank the Prosecutor and her Office for their detailed
work, as set out in the latest report. We fully support her
Office's ongoing investigation efforts, which continue
to play an important part in challenging impunity and
ensuring accountability for those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the most serious crimes in Libya.

Since the last report, there is cause for cautious
optimism about Libya. Following the Libyan Political
Agreement of 17 December, Prime Minister Al-Sarraj
and the Presidency Council have made progress in
establishing a new Government of National Accord.
The recent ministerial meeting in Vienna on 17 May
reaffirmed the breadth of strong international support
for the Government, while highlighting the many
challenges ahead. The backdrop to the long overdue
political settlement in Libya has been one of almost two
years of intense conflict after the collapse ofthe central
authority and a split in the State institutions in mid-
2014. The United Kingdom continues to be concerned
about reports that all sides have committed serious
human-rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law, some of which may
amount to war crimes. The violence has substantially
reduced the ability of the international community
and the ICC to monitor the situation and has further
weakened the criminal justice system.

The people of Libya deserve peace and security.
Their aspirations will not be fully realized if there
is impunity and those responsible for the horrific
crimes there are not held accountable. Against that
background, the United Kingdom is concerned that the
difficult security situation in Libya has prevented the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC from undertaking
investigative activities there. We urge all parties to
implement the Libyan Political Agreement as soon
as possible in order to resolve the security situation.
However, we commend the continued engagement
of the Libyan Prosecutor General and the Libyan
representative to the Court. We urge all parties to assist
the Prosecutor in her investigation and we encourage
States and relevant international organizations to help
the Libyan authorities in their efforts to build the rule
of law in Libya.

The spread ofDa'esh is a serious threat to all Libyans
and the wider region. We condemn their barbaric crimes
and call for the perpetrators to be held accountable. We
commend the courage of the Libyans on all sides who
have resisted Da'esh in Benghazi, Derna, Sirte and
elsewhere. We welcome Prime Minister Al-Sarraj's
call to all Libyans to unite behind the new Government
against Da'esh.

We thank the Prosecutor for her briefing on the
cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. We are concerned about the fact that Libya
remains unable to surrender Al-Qadhafi to the Court,
due to his unavailability to Libyan State authorities.
The United Kingdom reiterates Libya's obligation to
cooperate fully with the ICC, including by surrendering
Al-Qadhafi, and notes the Prosecutor's request to
transmit the arrest warrant to Mr. Al-'Atiri. We continue
to be concerned about Al-Qadhafi's death sentence
and about reports of torture and inhumane treatment
during Al-Senussi's detention. We are pleased to hear
that the Libyan authorities are taking action, and we
look forward to getting information on developments in
that regard, including on whether those subject to arrest
warrants have been apprehended. It is crucial to ensure
that the individuals alleged to be responsible do not
become fugitives from justice. We also look forward
to the Prosecutor's further views on Al-Senussi's trial
once the full report of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya on the conduct of the trial is available.

The United Kingdom wholly endorses Prime
Minister Al-Sarraj's commitment to Libya as a stable,
peaceful, non-sectarian country that can contribute to
stability and peace in the region. In order to do that,
Libya needs the support of the international community
in restoring effective Government and building united
and professional armed forces that can protect civilians
and institutions, and fight Da'esh, while complying
with international standards. Reform of the security and
justice sectors is critical to enabling Libya to facilitate
the rebuilding of State institutions and a return to
stability. Along with our international partners, we
will continue to work with Libya to provide it with the
support it needs to meet the challenges it faces.

We fully agree on the importance of cooperation
between national, regional and international law-
enforcement agencies.We recognize the financial and
capacity constraints facing the Prosecutor's Office
and its efforts to achieve efficiency savings in key
areas. We are working for a budget outcome that both
meets the needs of the Court and is sensitive to the
resources available.

In conclusion, the governing leadership in Libya
has given us room for hope. Libya has taken step after
step to move from being a country at war to a country
with a future brighter than many had predicted just
two years ago. The ongoing work of the Prosecutor's
Office will be marked as an important contribution to
ensuring that justice prevails and true stability takes
root in Libya.

