Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
outstanding introduction to our debate today. I wish also
to pay tribute to the very effective and dedicated efforts
of all those who are working in difficult conditions in
Iraq to implement the humanitarian programme.
In examining the Secretary-General's report today,
the Security Council is considering once again the very
serious humanitarian crisis in Iraq. I think it would be
useful to review the main characteristics of this crisis in
order to show the extent to which the Iraqi people have
been profoundly affected by the deterioration in their
living conditions.

 

Under the direction of Ambassador Amorim, the
humanitarian panel reported that Iraq had experienced "a
shift from relative affluence to massive poverty". It also
confirmed that the disturbing figures given by United
Nations agencies on the nutrition, health and social situation
of the country are reliable and exact.

According to the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), the mortality rate for children under five rose
from 56 per 1,000 in the period 1984-1989 to the current
131 per 1,000. The infant mortality rate is among the
highest in the world. One dramatic statistic in a recent
British parliamentary report deserves mention: If the
progress in health observed during the 1980s had been
maintained through the following decade, 500,000 children
would have survived.

The situation is scarcely better in the educational
sector. According to UNICEF, the school attendance rate
fell by 20 per cent between 1991 and 1999. The UNICEF
representative who spoke to the Committee on Monday
pointed out that education had lost value in Iraq today as
the country's young people see their parents forced to
accept jobs at a lower level than their studies had prepared
them for. This "embargo generation" is a lost generation.

In the area of social services, the situation has also
deteriorated. Only 41 per cent of the population has regular
access to clean water, the quality of which has also
deteriorated, according to the World Health Organization.
Power cuts are frequent and growing longer. Iraq's
health-care system has suffered greatly from the shortages
of clean water and electricity. At this point, it is in a
decrepit state, according to the International Committee of
the Red Cross.

Lastly, the almost daily bombardments have had
negative humanitarian effects on the civilian population.
According to our information, these military actions killed
144 civilians and injured 446; 42 per cent of the Victims in
the air raids have been civilians.

An entire society is today living without structure and
being destroyed. This will have long-term consequences for
Iraq and for regional balance as a whole. Admittedly, the
Iraqi Government bears a heavy share of the initial blame
for this disastrous situation. But the Security Council can
no longer disregard its own responsibility in the matter,
which is indisputable and increasingly condemned by
international public opinion.

Of course, in order to assist the Iraqi people, on the
Security Council adopted resolution 986 (1995), the so-
called oil-for-food programme, and significantly improved
it with resolution 1153 (1998). As the report emphasizes,
despite the difficulties encountered and its shortcomings,
the programme has provided real assistance to Iraqis,
especially in the areas of food and health. But we must
keep in mind the conclusions of the humanitarian panel's
report, which in paragraph 58 states,

"The panel reiterates its understanding that the
humanitarian situation in Iraq will continue to be a
dire one in the absence of a sustained revival of the
Iraqi economy, which in turn cannot be achieved
solely through remedial humanitarian efforts."

Resolution 986 (1995), even though improved by
resolution 1153 (1998), is only a partial and temporary
response. Only the suspension of civilian sanctions, which
can be envisioned in the context of implementing
resolution 1284 (1999), then lifting them completely once
the conditions have been fulfilled, will allow the country' s
economy to start growing again. Meanwhile, the members
of the Security Council have a responsibility to improve
the Iraq programme.

That is why we have closely examined the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
addressed, on the one hand, to Iraq and, on the other, to
the sanctions Committee and the Security Council. These
recommendations, which are intended to improve the
effectiveness of the humanitarian programme, are
welcome. With regard to the proposals addressed to Iraq,
we hope that programme officials in New York and on
the ground will examine with the Iraqi authorities ways
and means to implement them quickly.

With regard to the recommendations addressed to the
Committee, we hope they will all be applied resolutely
and speedily. Many of these recommendations - on the
oil supervisors, the procedures for reimbursement and the
illegal contractual clauses - are aimed at correcting long-
standing difficulties on which no progress has been made
for months. This paralysis of the sanctions Committee is
unacceptable. The French delegation, which has made
numerous compromise proposals, is prepared to resume
discussions without delay to break the present impasse in
the Committee.

Several of the Secretary-General' s recommendations
concern the issue of holds, which have very serious
effects. The report details their very negative impact on

 

implementing the humanitarian programme. It is certainly
legitimate to make sure that before goods are sent they are
not liable to be used for prohibited ends. But the Council
should recognize that the number of holds has become, as
the Secretary-General has rightly said, so high that it is
unacceptable. As the Russian Ambassador emphasized,
$1.75 billion worth of contracts, an unprecedented level, are
currently on hold. I would like to point out in particular the
high rate in certain sectors essential to improving the
humanitarian situation, such as electricity, water and
agriculture. In these sectors, the rate of holds exceeds 50
per cent and has even reached 100 per cent in phase V of
the telecommunications sector. With such high rates, the
humanitarian programme can no longer function in these
sectors.

The programme to purchase spare parts for the oil
industry is also characterized by an excessively high rate of
holds. The Secretary-General invites the Council to give its
attention to this today, recommending that it approve an
additional amount of $300 million for each of the final two
phases.

Even last year we believed that the Security Council
should assume its responsibilities in this area. We have not
changed our opinion. The last report of the independent
group of experts mandated by the Secretary-General
presents, like previous reports, an eloquent picture of the
Iraqi oil industry. The situation in all sectors of the industry
continues to deteriorate, endangering the lives of workers,
causing serious harm to the environment and damaging oil
wells. Unless more spare parts are sent to Iraq quickly, the
oil industry's capacity to maintain the current level of
production will be compromised. Insofar as Iraq's entire
revenue comes from the sale of oil, this warning should not
leave the Council indifferent. If oil prices were to fall
tomorrow, Iraq's ability to finance the humanitarian
programme would be seriously diminished.

Consequently, we hope that the Secretary-General's
recommendation will at last be heard by the Council. But
this alone will not suffice. This measure will have a
positive effect only if the spare parts are delivered quickly.
The practice of excessive holds in this sector must therefore
end. Spare parts with a total value of only $250 million
have actually been delivered, whereas the Council has made
available the equivalent of $1.2 billion in four phases. The
decisions taken by the Council are therefore being largely
ignored.

It is precisely to correct these malfunctions that France
insisted that resolution 1284 (1999) contain an ambitious
humanitarian section. It made a significant contribution to
the drafting of that part of the resolution, which contains
many technical improvements. Their implementation at
this time does not, however, live up to our expectations.
We regret in particular the fact that in the four months
since the resolution was adopted, few measures have
actually gone into force. The mechanism for notifying the
Secretariat of contracts for food, medicines, agriculture
and education will at last be implemented because holds
were lifted yesterday. The application of paragraph 18, on
the approval of the contracts for oil spare parts by
independent experts is pending. Yet the implementation of
these two provisions would lead to a significant drop in
the number of holds.

The arrangements requested from the Secretariat, in
application of paragraph 24 of the resolution, to
implement a local cash component have still not been
communicated to the Council. This measure could,
however, improve the programme. All the humanitarian
agencies agree on this point. We hope that these
arrangements are presented to the Council as quickly as
possible. Ms. Bellamy appealed to the Council several
months ago to implement a local cash component. Could
she give us her ideas on this issue today so as to help the
Council consider how her recommendation could be
quickly implemented?

We hope that the Security Council will be better
informed of the situation on the ground, in particular by
hearing from representatives of United Nations agencies
and from the Humanitarian Coordinator on a more regular
basis. We are convinced that if the Council were better
informed, it would want to correct the shortcomings of
the current humanitarian programme. But we need more
in-depth consideration of this matter. In this connection,
I echo the Secretary-General's very pertinent comments
this morning.

In 1999 the panel observed that, irrespective of the
improvements that might be brought about, the magnitude
of the humanitarian needs was such that those needs
could not be met within the context of this programme.
That statement is more pertinent than ever. It should
prompt the Security Council to work in good faith and in
a spirit of consensus for the implementation of the
positive guidelines of resolution 1284 (1999) in order to
encourage Iraq to cooperate, and thus to enable the
sanctions to be suspended and then lifted. But beyond
that, this situation should make the Council question, in
the future, the effectiveness and consequences of broad,
indiscriminate sanctions that hurt civilian populations

 
exclusively and whose human cost clearly exceeds any
political benefits that the Council could expect of them.

