Ms. Urruela Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We are living in complex times overshadowed
by the terrorist threat. It is imperative that all Member
States fulfil their obligation of preventing the
proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction, their
delivery systems and related material, as well as their
acquisition by non-State actors, and ensuring that
States have the necessary resources and capacities to
meet those obligations. As we have seen, the threat of
terrorism has no respect for borders and no country or
region is immune from a potential attack.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is the bedrock of the
international non-proliferation regime. We wish to
underscore in particular its preventive and cooperative
nature as it seeks to bolster adherence to its provisions
in the area of non-proliferation, without downplaying
its direct link to compliance on the part of all States
with the obligations emanating from the other pillars
of disarmament, including the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.

Guatemala is firmly committed to full compliance
with resolution 1540 (2004). In addition to having
submitted our third report and updated our matrix,
as required under resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006), Guatemala has requested technical assistance
from the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) to develop a national action plan for the
implementation of the resolution. Various relevant
legislative steps are also under way. Last month,
members of the 1540 Committee's Group of Experts
paid their first visit to my country to help us begin
drafting the national action plan. Representatives of
various governmental bodies met with the Panel and
together identified the key elements to be included in
the plan.

The recently completed comprehensive review
process ofresolution 1540 (2004) identified areas where
implementation of the resolution can be improved. It
also recognized some elements and practices that are
already being implemented, such as the important
role being played by the Group of Experts in terms
of training. While we would have preferred a more
ambitious and far-reaching outcome of the review, we
would like to highlight some of the recommendations
contained in the report, which we think represent a step
in the right direction.

The universal, comprehensive and balanced
implementation of the resolution will be possible only
if all Member States play a central role and have the
resources to do so. In terms of assistance, during the
open formal consultations that took place in June,
Guatemala, like other delegations, recommended
that the Committee expand its role beyond that of
matchmaking, going so far as to put together its own
assistance and capacity-building programmes for
States. In that regard, we welcome the invitation to
the Committee to develop, together with relevant
international organizations, projects to help States meet
their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
In addition, we welcome the decision to pursue
the regional approach in general and to continue to
strengthen and foster communication and cooperation
with specialized regional and international bodies in
order to achieve full implementation of the resolution.
We welcome in particular the role played by the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean and
the role played by the Organization of American States
in assisting States that seek their support in establishing
national action plans, bringing their legislation into line
with the resolution and building capacity in various
relevant Government bodies, among others.

With regard to the Committee's resources and
administrative structure, we regret that it has not
been possible to make progress in strengthening the
special political mission that supports the Committee's
work. We hope that the Committee can soon reach
agreement on this important issue, in particular given
the success of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.

Finally, the best way to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and to stop them from
falling into the hands of non-State actors is to ensure
that they no longer exist. An important first step is their
legal prohibition; the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention are examples
of how that can be done. However, the worst and most
deadly weapons, which imperil the very existence of
humankind - nuclear weapons - are the only weapons
ofmass destruction that have not been prohibited. Faced
with this unacceptable risk, my country is committed
to furthering multilateral efforts currently under way
to begin negotiations on a legally binding instrument to
prohibit nuclear weapons.

