Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in F rench): I
should like to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Holmes, for his very detailed briefing. We, too, are
very pleased at his appointment, and we wish him
every possible success in his highly important mission.
We welcome the fact that his first trip was to a region
where the humanitarian situation is particularly
serious - a situation that our Council has addressed
and must continue to address.

The gravity of the humanitarian situation, as just
described to us, in the Sudan, in Darfur, in Chad and in
the Central African Republic raises numerous questions
and makes it clear that it should be a source of great
concern to us. I believe that what is most striking in
Darfur is the deterioration of humanitarian indicators,
which are nearing emergency levels, despite the fact
that a slight improvement had been noted last year
owing to the extraordinary and tremendous efforts
undertaken by humanitarian workers in Darfur. In his
letter to the Secretary-General dated 6 March,
President Bashir reiterated the stability of those
indicators.

It is therefore particularly disturbing, I think, to
hear that the deterioration of the situation in Darfur
could seriously undermine the remarkable work done
by actors working in the field. I believe that the
courage demonstrated by the thousands of
humanitarian personnel who continue working despite
the violence, harassment and threats they face, and
despite the constraints imposed on their access to the
approximately 4 million people in Darfur who depend
on international assistance, should be commended by
the Council. I am fully confident that the presidency
will find a way to express the Council's appreciation of
the work being done by humanitarian personnel in the
field, who deserve our full support.

Moreover, we find particularly disturbing the
continuing displacement of persons in Darfur since the
early part of the year. Tens of thousands of people have
been forced to flee their homes since January because
of the prevailing situation of insecurity and the
violence against civilians. Camps have reached the
limits of their capacity, even as additional displaced
persons continue to arrive daily. I believe that the
Council must focus on this issue. In addition, the
shocking information we have received concerning acts
of savagery and the widespread occurrence of acts of
sexual violence must strengthen our resolve to act and
to bring the perpetrators to justice.

I think that, given this tragic situation, the
Security Council is in agreement on the overall
strategy that should guide us in our endeavours to
address humanitarian and political issues and to
strengthen the presence of peacekeeping forces in the
field. I shall comment on each of these points.
First, I believe that we must do everything in our
power to improve the security situation in Darfur, in
terms of protecting civilians and of ensuring the safety
of humanitarian workers. I took note of the fact that
President Bashir, in his recent letter addressed to the
Secretary-General, stated that the protection of
civilians was the responsibility of the Sudanese police.
I believe that the Security Council cannot accept such a
statement - that the United Nations cannot accept
such a statement. As Mr. Holmes stated, the Sudanese
Government has a particular responsibility to avert a
humanitarian catastrophe.

The seriousness of the humanitarian situation, as
described by Mr. Holmes, the continuing violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights,
and the acts of violence that daily force increasing
numbers of Sudanese to flee their homes are clear
evidence of the fact that a generalized climate of
violence persists in Darfur and that the Sudanese
authorities are not discharging their responsibilities
with regard to the protection of civilians.

Of course, the responsibility to protect - and
this is something that we discussed at length in
2004 - lies mainly with the Government, but failure
on its part to discharge that responsibility forces the
international community to intercede. All parties on the
ground bear responsibility for that persistent climate of
generalized violence, and the Council must therefore
be prepared to draw the necessary conclusions.

Secondly, it is crucial to facilitate access by
humanitarian workers to all persons requiring
assistance. France has taken note of the guarantees
recently provided by the Sudanese Government aimed
at facilitating international humanitarian operations in
Darfur. That is a step in the right direction, but it is
only a step. We hope that the Sudanese authorities, at
all levels, will implement those measures in a resolute
manner.

Allow me to recall that the removal of the
obstacles impeding humanitarian operations is one of
the common goals agreed in the joint communique
signed by the United Nations and the Sudanese
Government in July 2004.

However, humanitarian efforts cannot resolve the
underlying problem in the Sudan, which requires a
political solution. In that regard, I should like to
reaffirm France's full support for the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations and African Union mediators,
Jan Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim, to ensure that all
parties abide by the ceasefire and to promote the
resumption of the Abuja Agreement political process.

I should like to reiterate our support for the
efforts of the Secretary-General, working jointly with
the African Union, to deploy in Darfur a peacekeeping
force with the capacity to ensure the safety of the
civilian population.

Having mentioned the African force, I would like
to offer my condolences to the Government of Senegal
on the loss of five soldiers who were working for peace
in Darfur.

We have taken note of the recent exchanges that
took place in Riyadh between the Secretary-General
and President Al-Bashir. We are awaiting confirmation
over the next few days of the signals that were sent. We
expect the Sudanese Government to implement the
commitments made at Addis Ababa in December. It
seems to us that the Security Council cannot wait much
longer, since it is the fate of the people of Darfur and
the stability of the region that are at stake.

Regarding the consequences of the crisis for
neighbouring countries, I would like now to turn to the
situation in Chad and in the Central African Republic.
Tens of thousands of people from the Central African
Republic and Chad have been displaced over the past few
months, and the Under-Secretary-General emphasized the
urgent need to provide humanitarian assistance. Like the
Central African Republic, Chad requires our support as
quickly as possible if it is to meet its considerable needs.

In the Central African Republic, the humanitarian
situation is particularly difficult throughout the north
of the country. There have been new, large-scale
displacements and acts of abuse against civilians,
which are particularly disturbing. In this regard, I take
note of the analysis presented to us by Mr. Holmes, as
well as the responses that he suggested.

With regard to the north-east, the continued
insecurity is closely linked to instability in the border
region of Chad and the Sudan. We welcome the recent
announcement regarding the establishment of an
OCHA humanitarian coordination office in the north of
the country. My country believes that the deployment
of a United Nations force to the eastern border, which
is desired by President Bozize and which we discussed
recently, is absolutely necessary.
I also support Mr. Holmes' analysis regarding
Chad. I believe that the international community too
long underestimated the seriousness of the crisis that
has affected the country because of the situation in
Darfur. The violence has already resulted in the
displacement of 120,000 people in the eastern part of
the country, in addition to the 230,000 refugees.
Despite the lack of resources and the constraints on the
civilian population, Chad has agreed to make a
significant effort by receiving those 230,000 refugees
on its territory. However, as we know, the situation is
fragile. Humanitarian organizations are having, with
limited means, to deal with an increasing number of
displaced persons, and, insecurity is spreading,
including in the area of the camps.

I noted that Mr. Holmes stated that the
humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the country
has further worsened since the Security Council
mission. I understand that Mr. Holmes believes that the
Chadian army, which is having to deal with attacks by
rebel forces, is unable to guarantee security for the
region. I believe that it will be important for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations mission - the
principles for which were established when the Foreign
Minister of Chad, Mr. Allam-Mi Ahmat came to talk
with the Security Council - to be deployed rapidly to
N'Djamena, and that we receive a report on the
situation so that we can take any necessary decisions.

