Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation is one of the
sponsors of the draft resolution on the extension for six
months of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). It is important in that it
reaffirms the dedication of the international community to
a political settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia on the
basis of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Georgia and of ensuring the rights of the multinational
people of that country.

We should like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy and the Head of the
Mission of UNOMIG for their efforts to promote a
settlement to the conflict. We also pay tribute to the
personnel of the Mission for their difficult but very
necessary work.

Russia is vitally interested in seeing Georgia, which
is friendly to us, as a stable, democratic and flourishing
country. To this end, it is imperative that there be a
speedy settlement of the conflict and the elimination of its
consequences. As a facilitator of the negotiating process
under the aegis of the United Nations, Russia is carrying
out intensive work with the Government of Georgia and
with the Abkhaz side aimed at moving forward the peace
process, first and foremost with respect to the
fundamental principles for future comprehensive
agreements.

We are holding active consultations with the Abkhaz
leaders, combined with measures to exert strong pressure
on the Abkhaz side, in accordance with the decisions of
the Council of Heads of State of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) of 19 January 1996, in order to

 

give greater flexibility and a constructive nature to the
position of Sukhumi.

Another round of contacts with the Abkhaz side is
currently taking place in Moscow. We are also working
closely with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Georgia, Ambassador Edouard Brunner, He is awaited in
Moscow next week for important consultations. We are
counting on the fact that he will also hold substantive talks
with the representatives of the sides.

A new and positive factor is the trend toward direct
Georgian-Abkhaz dialogue, which some time ago was, in
principle, impossible. We welcome and support the
initiative of the Special Envoy on the organization, with the
assistance of Russia, of a Georgian-Abkhaz meeting, and
will do everything possible to promote its success.

We have solid grounds for considering that these
efforts are having the required effect on the Abkhaz side.
In the Abkhaz leadership, there is increasingly a mood
favouring of the search for compromise agreements towards
a settlement. At the same time, in the light of the gulf
between the sides, there will remain a need for this growing
positive inclination to be transformed into concrete, forward
steps on the part of the Abkhaz side.

Another subject of growing concern to us is the
ongoing deadlock in the question of the organized return of
refugees. We expect that a firm demand of the Security
Council on this issue will ultimately enjoy a positive
reception in Sukhumi.

We are extremely concerned by the deterioration of
security conditions in the Gali region of Abkhazia, Georgia,
as a result of the increased threat from mines. The
indiscriminate laying of mines has already caused casualties
and is seriously hampering the implementation by the CIS
peace-keepers and the United Nations military observers of
their mandates. Urgent and effective measures must be
taken to eliminate the widespread danger of mines. We
reaffirm Russia's readiness to assist the United Nations in
achieving that objective and hope that the United Nations
Secretariat will respond concretely to our proposals.

