Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
Council meeting of Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
are grateful to him for his assessment of the current
situation in the country. We join in the congratulations
to Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for
2010 and 2011.

Our thanks go to Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing today and for his report to the Security
Council on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(see S/2009/588*). However, we cannot agree with the
fundamental tone of the report. The leitmotif of that
document is the ongoing tension in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the inability of the Bosnian
authorities to independently resolve their country's
issues. In our view, this one-sided and unbalanced
assessment does not accord with reality and is cause
for concern.

The report of the High Representative, with its
assertions of allegedly growing friction among Bosnian
parties and of increasing potential for conflict, is at
odds with the conclusions set out in the reports that the
Council regularly receives from European Union
forces. For years, they have been saying that the
situation in Bosnia is stable and that the prognosis is
favourable. This confirms our opinion that the political
debate in that country does not exceed the
constitutional framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnian leaders are not undertaking anti-Dayton
actions.

In order to establish a more balanced picture of
the processes under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we draw the Council's attention to the second report
prepared for the Council by the Government of
Republika Srpska on the situation in the country, which
sets out arguments refuting the emotional conclusions
regarding the inability of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
function without the Office of the High Representative.

Unfortunately, we must observe that the Office
itself has become an institution for destabilization in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The unjustified and hasty use
of Bonn powers is inevitably leading to heightened
tension in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As members know,
Russia has long called for an end to this obsolete
mechanism.

Throughout Bosnia and in the entities,
democratically elected bodies are fianctioning.
Interference in their work, including micromanagement,
does not serve to strengthen the statehood of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. To the contrary, it destroys it; it
undermines intra-Bosnian dialogue and it devalues the
country's democratic institutions. The use of Bonn
powers appears even stranger against the background
of the election of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council.

The mandate of the High Representative relates
solely to the implementation of the Dayton Agreement
and to items established by the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council. The work of the Office
of the High Representative should focus on prompt
implementation of outstanding issues from the five
objectives and two conditions approved by the Steering
Board - the 5+2 formula. We believe that agreement
on parameters for settling problems of State property
and military property is entirely possible, even before
the end of this year. That would open the door to
setting specific deadlines for the conversion of the
Office of the High Representative to a European Union
special representative mission and facilitate a
qualitatively new phase in the Bosnian settlement
process.
We agree with Steering Board partners that a
European perspective for Bosnia and Herzegovina is of
key significance. That is another reason why it is
essential to close the Office of the High

Representative. According to Brussels, its presence
makes it impossible to consider the question of
European Union candidate status for Bosnia. Linking
this theme with constitutional reform in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which as members know is the essence of
the Butmir initiative, will only lead the Bosnia
settlement process into an impasse. Sharp
disagreements and the reaction of the Bosnian parties
to the Butmir ideas show that a precondition for
constitutional change is the creation of conditions for
constructive dialogue in Bosnia and Herzegovina itself.
A review of Dayton will be possible only on the basis
of consensus between both entities and all three
constituent peoples; this must be achieved voluntarily,
without arm-twisting or the imposition from outside of
ready-made models. In that regard, we view attempts to
frame the movement of Bosnia and Herzegovina into
the European Union in terms of the Bosnian's adoption
of the so-called Butmir package as unacceptable.

