Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): On behalf of the Nigerian
delegation, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to the Lebanese presidency for convening
today's debate.

Somalia faces daunting challenges, and we
welcome the opportunity to discuss them
comprehensively. Let me take this opportunity to
welcome His Excellency Prime Minister Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali and to thank him for his very insightful
statement. I also want to thank Ambassador Boubacar
Diarra, Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the Commission of the African Union for Somalia, for
his very perceptive remarks.

I want to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mahiga for his comprehensive
statement and, indeed, his tireless efforts to achieve
peace and security in Somalia. We greatly appreciate
his persistent and enduring engagement with Somalia's
stakeholders in an effort to optimize the transitional
period.

Nigeria is encouraged by the priorities that Prime
Minister Abdiweli Mohamed Ali has succinctly
outlined to move Somalia beyond its security, political
and socio-economic challenges. Our support for the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG), its institutions
and African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in
their efforts to rebuild Somalia remains unflinching.

Although recent territorial gains and the ousting
of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu have undoubtedly
enhanced security around the capital city and
facilitated the delivery of aid, security remains a
daunting challenge in Somalia. Effective and sustained
measures are required to underpin recent gains and
incrementally extend the TFG's authority throughout
the country. We believe that those challenges must
compel the Council to revise its Somalia strategy by
fast-tracking support both for the TFG and its
institutions as well as AMISOM.

Nigeria shares the Secretary-General's
assessment that AMISOM'S continued presence in
Somalia remains invaluable to the TFG as it seeks to
discharge its responsibilities. We believe that the full
deployment of the 3,000 troops authorized by the
Council, increasing AMISOM's force strength to
12,000, will significantly enhance its capabilities and
effectiveness. Indeed, augmenting AMISOM's
capabilities with force enablers and expanding its
support package should be central to the new Somalia
strategy. Adequate provisions should be made for the
self-sustenance of the troops as well as the
reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment.

Nigeria welcomes the ongoing support provided
by bilateral partners to the Trust Fund for AMISOM
and encourages partners to provide caveat-free support.

In our view, the 18 August African Union
technical workshop outlined critical next steps for
AMISOM. Establishing a dedicated formed police unit
to buttress law and order in Mogadishu, as well as an
additional battalion of 300 to protect United Nations
personnel, is critical to prevent the overextension of its
military resources and capabilities.

Cognizant of the importance of building and
strengthening Somalia's internal security forces,
Nigeria welcomes the prospect of the adoption of a
national security and stabilization plan by 19 October
under the political road map. We welcome the road
map's declaration of a comprehensive legislative and
security response to the ongoing threat of piracy.
Nigeria is encouraged that the consultative meeting
held in Mogadishu from 4 to 6 September delineated a
concrete set of objectives to reinforce the political
process, including the Transitional Federal Institutions.
Nigeria has unequivocally stressed that national
ownership over Somalia's political trajectory remains
critical for ensuring the sustainability of the peace
process.

The efforts to adopt a draft constitution and
create a credible and stable parliament by next July are
significant first steps in developing an enduring and
legitimate structure. It bears reiterating that unity and
coherence within the TFG and its institutions will go a
long way in consolidating recent gains and expediting
the implementation of both the Kampala Accord and
the post-transition road map for Somalia.

Like other delegations, Nigeria is deeply
concerned by the unabated humanitarian crisis in the
Horn of Africa, including Somalia. We are all aware
that more than 12.5 million people are affected by the
worst drought in the region in 60 years. It is troubling
that this natural disaster may be worsened by the
deliberate obstruction of humanitarian efforts by
insurgents. Indeed, as many as 750,000 lives may be at
deadly risk. The denial of the right to food undermines
the right to health, thus ultimately placing at risk the
most fundamental of all human rights, namely, the right
to life. We call on all parties to guarantee unfettered
access to humanitarian agencies as they strive to
deliver vitally needed aid.

The current crisis is vast in scope and requires the
collective resources of the international community to
stem the rapidly rising cost in human life. We call on
all Member States to contribute to the consolidated
Somalia fund. For its part, Nigeria has contributed
$2 million to the fund.

The coming months will provide the TF G with a
renewed opportunity to forge permanent governmental

l 1-49644

structures and build enduring peace and security. The
goals enumerated in the road map are a vital first step.
In the face of the difficulties posed by the transition
period, insecurity and the humanitarian crisis,
delivering on these goals will require not only the
comprehensive efforts of the Somali authorities but
also the full support of the international community. As
the Secretary-General aptly stated, we must capitalize
on recent developments and seize the opportunities
created by the Kampala Accord, the political road map
and the force withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu.

