Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her fourteenth report and for
her briefing this morning. I would also like to reaffirm
France's support for the Prosecutor, as well as for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as a whole, in
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), which
referred the situation in Libya to the ICC. Through that
resolution, the Council sought to demonstrate its trust
in the jurisdiction of the ICC by assigning it a mission
of the highest importance, namely, to ensure that those
responsible for the most serious crimes affecting the
international community do not go unpunished, as
stated in the Preamble of the Rome Statute.

We are pleased to note the ongoing efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) to conduct its
investigations in the context of the generally difficult
and insecure situation in Libya. Given the scale of the
challenges facing the Court there, the support of the
Security Council for the Court's action, as well as the
efforts of the United Nations and of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, are essential. We welcome
the personal mobilization of the Secretary-General
to that effect and the invaluable contribution of his
Special Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salame', to the
fight against impunity in Libya. We assure them of our
full support in their difficult task.

As we seek to build on the various initiatives and
the meeting at La Celle Saint-Cloud under the auspices
of President Macron last summer, all efforts must
now be geared towards supporting United Nations
mediation with a view to reaching a consensus on
the revision of the Skhirat Agreement. The French
presidency of the Security Council also endorsed the
road map of the Special Representative in a statement
on 10 October (S/PRST/2017/l9), and welcomed the
first discussions between the House of Representatives
and the Council of State in late September, under the
auspices of the Special Representative. Held in Tunis,
those negotiations were constructive, and the next steps
of the mediation should enable us to finalize work on
the revision of the agreement.

In the context of the mediation efforts led by
Mr. Ghassan Salame, it is important to provide concrete
support to the Libyan authorities, particularly in the
areas ofjustice and in restoring the rule oflaw. Beyond
those general observations on the situation in Libya, I
would like to make three more specific remarks.

First of all, I wish to recall that the ongoing
investigations by the OTP require the full cooperation
of all stakeholders. France is of the View that the
cooperation of Libyan authorities, States parties to
the Rome Statute and non-party States - especially
members of the Council - with the Court is crucial in
order for it to carry out its work in total security and
pursuant to the mandate entrusted to it by the Rome
Statute and by the Council, as seen in paragraph 16 of
the report.

It is essential to strengthen collaboration between
all States involved - whether they are parties to the
Rome Statute or not - in order to rapidly provide
the necessary support to the OTP so that it is able to
discharge its mission. In that regard, the cooperation
of the Tunisian, Dutch, Italian and British authorities
deserves special mention.

With regard to the sections of the report that
address ongoing investigations, France takes note ofthe
arrest warrant ordered by the Court against Mahmoud
Mustafa Busayf al-Werfalli on 15 August. We urge the
Libyan National Army, as the Prosecutor has done, to
surrender Mr. Al-Werfalli to the Libyan authorities as
soon as possible so that he can be handed over to the
ICC, pursuant to their obligations to cooperate with the
Court under resolution 1970 (2011). That is an important
step in the fight against impunity and towards impartial
justice in Libya. France also wishes to reiterate its call
for cooperation with the ICC in order to ensure that Saif
al-Islam Gaddafi and Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled are
handed over to the Court without further delay.

Finally, with regard to the projections outlined in
the report of the Office of the Prosecutor, we take note
of the OTP's commitment to continue to make Libya a
priority during 2018 and, ifrequired, to order new arrest
warrants. We also welcome the OTP's desire to conduct
investigations into the disturbing situation of crimes
linked to smuggling and the trafficking of persons in
Libya, which constitutes a direct threat to stability in
the country, as Mr. Ghassan Salame highlighted in
the Council in August (see S/PV.2032). France shares
that concern and is committed to act together with our
partners to counter smuggling networks and disrupt
their economic model in Libya and throughout the
region within the framework of the joint statement
of 28 August entitled "Addressing the Challenge of
Migration and Asylum".

The current situation in Libya once again
points to the fact that impunity feeds insecurity and
instability. That reality obliges us therefore to respond
to the challenges facing us in Libya; they can only be
addressed through effective cooperation with the ICC
and the support ofthe Security Council. France remains
ready to mobilize its efforts to that end.

