Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Italy on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish Italy every success.

I would also like to thank Mr. Filippo Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his comprehensive briefing to the Council. I also like
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation
for the tireless efforts that he is exerting to improve the
lives of millions of refugees around the world.

Forced displacement has become a global
phenomenon. Millions of people move every year,
fleeing armed conflict, oppression, violence, terrorism,
extreme poverty, food insecurity or the negative impact
of climate change, natural disasters or other factors.
Anyone following this situation today, in particular as
it relates to the Middle East and Africa - to which
Egypt belongs - can easily deduce that armed
conflicts, oppression and violence, including terrorism,
are among the main reasons that have led to increased
flows of refugees throughout the world during the past
few years. In the current year alone, more than 2 million
refugees left their homes because of protracted crises.

The severe humanitarian crisis in Myanmar has led
to the displacement of more than 600,000 Muslims, who
are fleeing the systemic violence practiced against them.
The Syrian crisis also remains the largest humanitarian
crisis in terms ofthe resulting displacement of civilians.
In the same vein, we cannot forget the protracted,
decades-long suffering of millions of Palestinians who
are still waiting for a just settlement that fulfils their
legitimate aspirations for a better life.

Egypt believes it is necessary to adopt a comprehensive
approach in addressing the root causes of displacement.
That would include measures in the economic, political,
cultural, humanitarian and other spheres. We must
emphasize the development dimension and must open
up new channels for accepting refugees. Security
solutions and the closing of borders will not serve any
interest, and they violate the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees.

The greatest positive contribution from the United
Nations is in the area of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and conflict prevention, and in seeking lasting
political solutions through preventative diplomacy. In
that connection, the Security Council must work to
prevent renewed conflicts and to fulfil its duties in
the area of civilian protection and armed conflicts.
Attention should be given to vulnerable segments of the
population, such as women and children. The Council
must adopt long-term strategies to build peace in
affected countries. One of the main duties of the High
Commissioner for Refugees in post-conflict situations
is to contribute to efforts aimed at the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees, in coordination with
the relevant States.

In conclusion, we would like to point out that,
based on its firm belief in the importance ofjoint work
and international cooperation to address the root causes
of crises, Egypt is shouldering the burdens of hosting
large numbers of refugees of varous nationalities.
Many of them enjoy equal status with Egyptians and
are enjoying access to education, health, housing,
commodities and subsidies. We welcome all ongoing
efforts to develop the global compact on refugees in a
manner that contributes to sharing the responsibilities
and developing a unified vision and a strong position to
provide a dignified life to refugees and to respect their
rights and their human dignity.

