Mr. Dogan (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing today, as well
as for his report (S/2019/843, enclosure). I also thank
Ms. Selma Korjenic' for her valuable contribution to
today's meeting.

Croatia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU). I
would like to take this opportunity to make some
remarks in my national capacity.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is for Croatia not only a
neighbouring State with which we share our longest
border but also a friendly State where Croats of Bosnia
and Herzegovina are one of the three constituent peoples.

The political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
since the October 2018 elections has been dominated
by unsuccessful government formation on a state level
as well as entity level. This increases the risk of legal
insecurity and also contributes to additional political
and institutional instability, thus seriously imperilling
much-needed reforms. Regrettably, that means that
a year has been lost for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
EU integration path, a process in which the country
was already lagging behind its neighbours in the
Western Balkans. Bosnia and Herzegovina should, as
a priority and without further delay, proceed with the
formation of a Council of Ministers and other State and
Federation governing bodies.

A spirit of consensus, dialogue and compromise
should finally prevail over the infighting with a zero-
sum based logic. This complex process requires political
vision oriented towards the future of the country for the
benefit ofits peoples and citizens. The current situation,
as well as the rhetoric by some of the politicians, is
counterproductive. It is holding the country back,
and political leaders must finally acknowledge their
responsibility. They owe it to their country, its peoples
and citizens. They need our wholehearted support in
that endeavour.

Croatia remains the staunchest supporter of the
European path of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We truly
believe that progress in European and Euro-Atlantic
integration is the only fruitful and possible path for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That path guarantees security,
stability and economic prosperity for all. We see no
viable alternative for Bosnia and Herzegovina or other
countries in the region.

Croatia strongly supports Bosnia and Herzegovina's
ambition to accelerate progress on its European path.
We must be aware that for Bosnia and Herzegovina
progress in European integration is also a way of
achieving full State functionality. Of course, it will be
necessary to carry out a series of reforms along that
path in order to build a truly functional State, with
structures of Government and competencies enabling
a more efficient decision-making process and its
implementation, especially in the context of the ability
to adopt and implement the acquis communautaire.

In that context, the Republic of Croatia has been
providing technical and expert assistance to Bosnia
and Herzegovina on an ongoing basis. Croatia has also
supported the submission of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
application for membership to the European Union.
In that regard, Croatia is looking forward to the
next step - the granting of candidate status for
EU membership.

Our commitment to the European path of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the whole Western Balkans region
is visible through the priorities of the forthcoming
Croatian presidency of the Council of the European
Union during the first half of 2020. We will strive
to keep the enlargement of the European Union as a
key topic on the European agenda. In that regard, The
EU-Western Balkans summit in May 2020, in Zagreb,
will take place exactly 20 years after the first Zagreb
summit, which opened the European perspective to the
Western Balkans region.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a historically
multinationalcountrywithalong-standingconstitutional
concept of the equality of its three peoples, which
has been a part of its constitutions since 1963. The
Republic of Croatia was the first country to recognize
the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and has
always been the strongest and most sincere advocate
of its sovereignty as a State of three equal constituent
peoples and all its citizens. The full equality of three
constituent peoples and all Bosnia and Herzegovina
citizens should undoubtedly remain the basis of the
institutional set-up of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it is
an issue of the highest importance for the future of the
country. Croatia, as a neighbouring State and guarantor
of the implementation of the Dayton Agreement, will
certainly continue to insist on proceeding on that basis.

The principle of legitimate political representation
is an important element that contributes to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's internal political stability. We therefore
consider it crucial for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
embark, without delay, upon a comprehensive reform
of the election law in order to ensure legitimate
representation in institutions at all levels. This is
becoming an even more pressing issue with local
elections taking place next year.

In that context, it is necessary to find relevant
legislative solutions that adequately address this
issue. Those solutions should aim at preventing the
imposition of the election of political representatives
of one constituent people by others at all levels of
Government. That should be done in accordance with
the judgments of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the Ljubie case and in the case of
the city of Mostar. It is of the utmost importance that all
political parties and actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina
reach agreement on the issue based on the principles of
inclusiveness and in a spirit of dialogue and consensus
in the State Parliament.

In addition to those structural problems, Bosnia
and Herzegovina faces a new challenge. The migration
wave on the Western Balkans route has increased
significantly in 2019 and the EU's longest external
land border is under significant pressure from
illegal migration.
