Mr. Vieira: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Since my most recent briefing to the Security
Council, on 16 May (see S/PV.8261), I have made a trip
to Guinea-Bissau and Portugal, from 24 to 27 July, in
my capacity as Chair of the configuration. That mission
was undertaken to obtain first-hand accounts on the
implementation of all the provisions of the Conakry
Agreement and, most important, the organization ofthe
legislative elections.
During my visit to Bissau, I consulted extensively
with a broad range of stakeholders, including the
President of the Republic, the Speaker of the National
Assembly, the Prime Minister - Mr. Aristides
Gomes - the President of the Supreme Court, several
ministers and members ofall politicalparties represented
in the National Assembly, as well as some parties not
represented in Parliament. I also held meetings with the
President of the National Electoral Commission and
with representatives of the international community
and of the United Nations. In addition, I took part in
meetings with civil society representatives of Guinea-
Bissau.

In Lisbon, on 27 July, I met with the Director-
General of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), Ms. Georgina de Mello, when we
discussed the role of the Community in supporting
Guinea-Bissau and in helping to find a solution to the
political situation.

My mission affirmed that there has been tangible
progress in the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement and in the process of return to normal
political life, as compared to the same period last year,
when I first Visited the country. There is a renewed sense
of optimism with regard to a definitive solution to the
protracted crisis, and the upcoming elections are seen
as a window of opportunity to that end. The Conakry
Agreement remains a fundamental point of reference
for most political actors; all the stakeholders consulted
stressed the need to expedite its implementation.

Among the achievements that I witnessed, allow
me to underline the following important developments
that took place in the past months: the appointment of
a consensual Prime Minister and the formation of an
inclusive Government; the approval of a Government
programme and of the national budget; and the
reopening of the National Assembly.

With respect to the electoral process, during my
visit the Government of Guinea-Bissau reaffirmed its
intention to hold legislative elections on 18 November.
All members of the national authorities whom I met
manifested their support for respecting that established
date. The holding of elections is also considered by
political actors a crucial exercise for the country to
return to stability. The election builds on the positive
political developments in the past months and the
opening of space for political dialogue, as well as the
provisions of the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau. Many
of my interlocutors also stated that any postponement
of the election would prolong the crisis and would be
frustrating for the population, the political actors and
the international community.

Let me also state that I heard no support for
deferring the November election in favour of joint
presidential and parliamentary elections in 2019. The
President of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Mr. Jose
Mario Vaz, received me for a meeting and expressed his
full support for my mission in Bissau. On that occasion,
he outlined to me his three current priorities for the
country: first, the holding of legislative elections on
18 November; secondly, the reform of the security
sector, including the establishment of a pension
fund for the military; and, thirdly, combating drug
trafficking and organized crime - a point that was
recently included in the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) by the Security Council.

During my Visit, I reaffirmed to all my
interlocutors that I have indeed noticed progress in
the political situation of the country. I also underlined
the importance of holding elections on 18 November
as a conclusion to the transition towards stability in
accordance with national solutions and in full respect
of the Constitution.

It is important to mention that, while stakeholders
stressed the importance of holding legislative elections
on the established date, there remain significant
financial, logistical and coordination challenges for
that to happen. In terms of election preparations, I held
substantive discussions with the Minister of Territorial
Administration and with senior representatives of the
Technical Office for Electoral Processes Support and
of the National Electoral Commission, who reported
advances in the preparation for the elections but were
concerned about their slow progress. In that regard, it
was noted that some progress had been made on electoral
cartography and the preparations for the election budget,
although funds were slow to materialize. There remain
important technical challenges to address, particularly
on the voter registration update, awareness-raising and
compliance with the legal electoral process.

Although there is general appreciation of the
United Nations and United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) support to the electoral process, I
was made aware of several areas where differences in
approach exist that need to be resolved urgently. Allow
me to highlight four important challenges that were
mentioned during my visit: first, managing the limited
time available to organize the November elections in line
with the Constitution; secondly, the process of updating
the voter-registration list in such little time - the
process was scheduled to start on 23 August and should
last for one month - thirdly, the lack of proper
coordination between and among Government entities
and UNDP on election-preparation logistics, especially
the procurement and sourcing of sufficient voter-
registration kits and the conduct of the voter-registration
exercise itself- for example, I was informed that the
Government has started its own bidding process for
the registration kits, in parallel with the UNDP efforts,
and that the Government has sought bilateral assistance
to obtain the election kits from international partners;
and, fourthly, the financial questions. The budget for
the elections was assessed by UNDP at $7.7 million,
of which the Government of Guinea-Bissau contributed
$2 million. Additional contributions have reduced the
funding gap to $1.2 million. As mentioned earlier today
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jose Viegas Filho, that gap may have been closed
following pledges by several international partners.
However, I was informed in Bissau that none of the
contributions pledged are likely to be disbursed before
September, which means that there is an urgent need to
cover the costs of the voter-registration operation, if it
is to start now.

On 23 August, Prime Minister Gomes held a
ceremony in Guinea-Bissau to launch the update of
the voter-registration list. However, according to my
information, the country has so far received all of the
equipment necessary to conduct the process. Allow
me to add that the President of the Supreme Court
informed me that, although the organization of the
November elections in the compressed period should be
done by political agreement, there is a risk that, if such
consensus is lost, the legitimacy of the whole process
could be called into question. The situation could also
worsen if the current Government were to be dismissed.
I must stress that, ultimately, the organization of the
elections is contingent upon the willingness of key
political actors to engage in mutual cooperation.

In my meeting with Prime Minister Gomes, whom
I would like to thank for welcoming me and supporting
my visit, he highlighted the importance of avoiding
the recurring situation witnessed in Guinea-Bissau.
As mentioned by many other interlocutors, generally
peaceful elections are followed by political problems.
The Prime Minister expressed his strong commitment
to facilitating a stability pact. I was informed that the
Government already has a draft framework document
that could form the basis for a comprehensive pact. Some
of my interlocutors also underscored the importance of
enabling civil society and other actors to submit their
contributions to the pact.

With regard to reconciliation, the organizing
commission for a national conference presented me with
its report - "In the Name ofPeace" - with the findings
and recommendations of consultations conducted with
more than 3,000 Bissau-Guineans on the causes of
conflict and instability in the country. Representatives
of the Women's Council stated that their organization
had evolved from the former women's facilitation
group and was currently engaged in monitoring the
preparations for the upcoming legislative elections
and advocating the adoption of a gender quota law.
Following my Visit, we received positive news that,
on 2 August, the National Assembly passed a gender
parity, or quotas law, mandating a minimum of 36 per
cent women candidates in the legislative and local
Government elections.

The military continues to maintain its distance
from the political crisis and to respect constitutional
order, while the police force continues their efforts
to maintain public order and respect human rights.
Those are commitments we should encourage to be
maintained. Stakeholders acknowledged the key role
that the Econopmic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB)
continues to play in that context and urged ECOMIB
and UNIOGBIS to continue providing support during
the electoral cycles. There is also support for the need
to reform the defence and security sectors and for
continued UNIOGBIS and international community
assistance to monitor and provide technical assistance
in the post-election period.

Before concluding, allow me to make some
comments on the importance of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). Over the years, the PBF has assumed a strategic
position in Guinea-Bissau. Currently, UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team are implementing PBF
projects with a combined budget of $7 million, which
are mutually reinforcing to political engagement. In that
regard, allow me to underline that two important civil
society initiatives, whose representatives I met with
in Bissau - the Women's Council and the organizing
commission for the national conference - are both
beneficiaries of the PBF.

I convened a meeting of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration on 13 August to present my report to
the PBC, at which we also received updates from a
number of briefers, including Mr. Jose Viegas Filho,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNIOGBIS. On that occasion, Ambassador
Tijjani Muhammad-Bande of Nigeria, in his capacity
as Chairperson of ECOWAS, also made some remarks
about its most recent summit, held in Lome on
31 July. Ambassador Jose' Luis Fialho Rocha of Cabo
Verde, as pro tempore President of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, informed us about the
recent decisions taken during the CPLP summit held
in Santa Maria, Cabo Verde, last July. He underlined
that the Heads of State and Government expressed their
support for the ongoing electoral process in Guinea-
Bissau and the holding of legislative elections on
18 November, as well as their readiness to contribute
materially to its realization. They also called for the
solidarity of the international community to ensure
the timely implementation of the contributions already
announced. On that occasion, we also briefly discussed
the visit of the mission of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union to Guinea-Bissau on
27 and 28 July, under the chairmanship of Togo.

Following the discussions that took place on
13 August, I would like to make the following
recommendations. I welcome the visit to Guinea-Bissau
by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
I would also like to take note of the final communique
of the fifty-third ordinary session of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government, held in
Lome on 31 July, and take note of its conclusions and
recommendations, especially its urging of respect for
the date of 18 November for the holding of legislative
elections. I also take note of the decision to lift the
sanctions imposed by ECOWAS on certain political
actors in Guinea-Bissau. I take note of the decisions
regarding the country that were approved by the CPLP
summit in Santa Maria. I would like to welcome the
approval of the gender quota law and the discussions on
an inclusive stability pact.

The Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC will
continue to focus on the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement and the preparations for the November
elections. We will work with all international partners
to that end. ECOMIB and UNIOGBIS have an
important role to play in these crucial Guinea-Bissau
electoral cycles. We will continue to work closely with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Filho
to ensure that the upcoming legislative elections are
held according to the constitutional framework and
in a credible and fair manner. It is necessary to once
again reiterate the importance of holding the upcoming
elections on the date set, as a conclusion to the transition
towards stability. In that regard, we will continue
to be active in mobilizing the resources required
for the elections to take place as scheduled. We will
also support the United Nations and the international
community, in consultation with the Government,
in considering ways to strengthen State institutions,
especially the justice system. I would like to reaffirm
that Guinea-Bissau remains an important example of a
sustaining peace approach that offers useful lessons on
global partnerships for peacebuilding.

Finally, allow me to inform members of the Council
that tomorrow I will host a high-level meeting of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration with Prime Minister
Aristides Gomes, upon his request. That will be an
opportunity for the Prime Minister to have a direct and
interactive dialogue with members of the PBC.

