Mr. Prodi: I am truly grateful for the opportunity
to take the floor before the Security Council as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel.

As the Secretary-General just said, the Sahel
region is facing a complex and mulifaceted crisis. It is
a crisis that may spread if not tackled in time. When
I was asked by the Secretary-General to assume the
responsibility of being his Special Envoy for the Sahel,
I was both honoured and frightened: honoured by the
trust, and frightened by the challenge.

This is a challenge that we can win only if we are
united, working for the same purpose. Our purpose
is to organize a worldwide platform aimed at putting
in action an efficient network of humanitarian aid
and a common strategy for the development of the
Sahel. However, nothing can be done in that respect
without restoring the unity of Mali in a peaceful Sahel,
immediately starting a process that will allow for
transparent and free democratic elections as soon as
possible. It is clear to every one of us that in order to
achieve that difficult but indispensable goal, we need
different ideas but common action against any form of
terrorism or illegal behaviour.

After two months of my mandate, I see that there
is now a common will to achieve those goals and
that all of us share the belief in the need to avoid the
spread of terrorism, now probably the most dangerous
prospect facing the world community. This unity is not
a common situation. We have to exploit it.

We are here in order to translate this common shared
View into common action. This is possible because
we can count on the strong cooperation of all within
the United Nations, all the members of the Security
Council, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the European Union and all the
main actors of world politics.

The mandate established by the Secretary-General
was very clear when he summed up to me the scope
of my mission, which was to coordinate the efforts
of the many who already work very well along four
lines, which are complex and different but closely
interconnected: peace and security, political stability,
humanitarian aid, and long-term development. He
asked me to prepare an integrated strategy whereby
the international community could work effectively
together in helping the countries of the Sahel achieve
those goals.

It must be clear that this integrated strategy cannot
be an occasion to only write an elegant paper. It is a set of
actions tailored to face dynamically evolving problems
and aimed at bringing urgent relief in humanitarian
tragedies, generating new trust among the people of the
Sahel and attracting international attention with a view
to raising financial and political support.

Key to the strategy is close cooperation among all
those who are facing the Sahel challenge, wherever
they come from. This is why, in the first weeks of my
mandate, I had extensive meetings with the leaders
of the countries and the African institutions most
involved in this process, in Bamako, Addis Ababa,
Cairo, Algeria and Morocco, and then in the European
Union, the United States, France, the United Kingdom,
Germany and Italy. Then I called for a meeting in Rome
at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations - which is so kindly and effectively hosting
and supporting our activities - with all the mediators,
special envoys and senior United Nations officials
working on the Sahel. The purpose was to share our
views on the evolving situation in the Sahel and to
deepen the means by which the special envoys and
mediators could best coordinate their work. The result
has been extremely positive, and both coordination and
integration are perceived not as an option but as a must.

After the Rome meeting, I feel that we are truly a
large, strong international cooperation team. Next week
I will travel to the region for the third time since my
appointment. Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Djinnit and I will travel together to meet key
actors to discuss security, political, humanitarian and
development issues facing the Governments of the
region.

Clearly, our interlocutors cannot be only politicians.
We have before us the whole of society, and we shall
therefore open a dialogue with all its components:
intellectuals, religious people, women, businessmen,
representatives of tribes. We must listen and talk
to all of them. The challenges faced by the Sahelian
communities include environmental degradation, youth
unemployment, water management, weak institutions,
human trafficking, organized crime and terrorism.
Those are just some of the immediate issues we must
address.

To be operational and effective in those fields,
substantial resources are needed. That is another
difficult challenge, but I have been struck by the
voluntary offer of quite a few countries to move forward
quickly in order to meet the needs stemming from the
Sahel emergencies. There are never enough resources
in this field, and I am now trying to bring on board the
highest number of countries, international institutions
and private donors possible. It was widely accepted that
the first and most important focus would be the people
in need, particularly those affected by the crisis and in
dire need of assistance.

A meeting of all countries and institutions available
to support an urgent humanitarian aid action will be
organized very soon, following the Rome meeting, in
order to mobilize extraordinary support for responding
to the crisis. A multi-donor trust fund specific to the
Sahel is also, in my opinion, an urgent necessity.

Concerning long-term development, I intend to rely
heavily on people who have invested a considerable
amount of time and brainpower studying the region and
the challenges faced by its people. To that end, we have
received generous offers from the best specialists in the
world, from Brussels to Washington, including from
the top American, European and Chinese universities
and research institutions. We will do our best to take
advantage of their offers of support. We must not
reinvent what has already been studied and analysed. Of
course, all such efforts would also involve Governments,
civil societies, regional partners, non-governmental
organizations and financial institutions. Long-term
peace can be sustained only through development.

I intend to exert all possible efforts to mobilize
what is needed. I envisage resource mobilization to
take place in two phases. In the immediate and short
term, resources would be required to strengthen the
ongoing efforts and current mechanisms to alleviate
the immediate sufferings of the people. The second
phase would involve resources required to bring about
some fundamental and structural improvements in
the region to drive it towards long-term recovery and
development. I will count on grants, loans, direct
investments from multilateral institutions - the World
Bank, the African Development Bank and so on - and
national funds from the Gulfto China. In both phases, I
will rely heavily on the support of the Security Council
and the international community as a whole.

The resources we mobilize will never eliminate
the need for good governance. We must therefore also
place the onus on the shoulders of the Governments of
the region and help them to take these matters in their
own hands. For that reason, the African Union Special
Envoy for the Sahel and Mali, President Pierre Buyoya,
and I plan to hold in the near future a meeting of all
Sahelian countries in order to talk with them about
what they need from a strategy on the Sahel. All of that
can be implemented only if, in the future, there is a
common view among Malian leaders.

We have to make every effort to identify and support
one, and only one, decision-making centre inside Mali.
That is a vital point, even if it is not easy to achieve.
Strong leadership is needed in order to negotiate with
the north. We need strong leadership in Mali.

As a second step, we must help the opening
of a political dialogue with acceptable - I repeat,
acceptable - interlocutors in the north. For that
purpose, we must act as important and indispensable
facilitators, leaving to the Malians full responsibility
for the process. Dealing with the entire Sahel, we
shall also facilitate cooperation between Mali and its
neighbouring countries.

It is of course our duty to work to put an end to any
act of violence. As can easily be understood, the whole
long-term Sahel agenda can be implemented only if
we achieve the two main goals of the agenda: political
union and the democratic evolution of the country.

Regarding military action, we must prepare it
with the necessary instruments and speed; otherwise
we are not credible even in our efforts to achieve
peace. But we must make every effort to reach our
goals - unity, democracy, humanitarian assistance
and development - through peaceful means and
negotiation. An extended military action always brings
as consequences not only a humanitarian tragedy but
enormous financial costs and an extended period of
economic crisis. As far as timing is concerned, I have
simply taken note from all the experts I have met
that many months are needed to gather the strength
requested for a credible full-range action.

As for elections, they must take place as soon as
possible, and we should start the necessary technical
preparation for them immediately. My point, drawn
from my many previous experiences, particularly within
the European Union, is that we must prepare them well,
guarantee a free and transparent campaign and simply
avoid having an election in a divided country being
interpreted as sealing the division. In any event, if we
want to reach the goal of a united and peaceful country,
we have to understand that the tensions between south
and north are not a problem of today but are decades
old.

A platform of decentralization is therefore
needed - a platform that, while preserving the unity
of Mali, would make possible a credible change in
the relations between north and south. How much
decentralization is needed will be decided by the direct
Malian negotiators. I would emphasize that only the
strong engagement of the international community can
guarantee a positive outcome of that effort.

The situation in Mali presents a challenge that can
potentially affect the entire region. Our efforts must
ensure that what has happened in Mali does not spread
to the entire Sahel. Accordingly, I would like to echo
the views of the Secretary-General that any military
effort in Mali must be undertaken after careful analysis
and thorough preparation and that those efforts should
be part of an agreed political process that tackles the
roots of the conflict.

While the road ahead looks full ofmajor challenges,
I remain optimistic that, with the right tools and
support in resources and organization, those challenges
can soon be overcome. A failure should carry dramatic
consequences not just for the region but for the world
at large. The people of the Sahel have many hopes and
aspirations. I firmly believe that we must help them to
realize those hopes and aspirations, for their sake and
for the sake of their future generations.

