Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate your country on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council and to thank you for convening
today's open debate to underscore the need to enhance
the cooperation between the Council and regional
entities and highlight that sustaining peace requires
collective responsibility.

My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered shortly by the observer of the European
Union. Allow me to make a few additional remarks.

We should like to encourage the Security Council
to continue identifying ways of enhancing partnerships
with various stakeholders and multilateral institutions
as well as regional and subregional organizations, with
greater emphasis on conflict prevention and the concept
of sustaining peace. We should also like to stress that
successful implementation of the current reform of the
United Nations, together with such further initiatives
as the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, are critical to
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to react
to future challenges, including in terms of mediation,
prevention and sustaining peace. Besides having
close proximity to conflicts, regional and subregional
organizations have the local networks, knowledge and
expertise that allow them to play a leading role in the
area of peace and security, including in mediation and
settlement of disputes.

Slovakia will chair the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) next year. As the
Chairperson-in-Office for 2019, my country will work
to build bridges in support of multilateralism, promote
conflict prevention and focus on addressing the needs
of people on the ground. Over the years, the scope of
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
has broadened and deepened on a range of matters.
We are ready to build on this enhanced collaboration
between the two organizations, based on the principles
of complementarity, subsidiarity and synergy.

Security sector reform plays a critical role in
preventing conflict and sustaining peace. We are
encouraged to see that the place of security sector reform
in the sustaining peace agenda has been strengthened,
based on the constructive discussions Member States
have had on peacebuilding and sustaining peace this
year. We are of the View that a strong focus on security
sector reform and sustaining peace must continue in
the work of the United Nations, including that of the

Security Council.

Broad frameworks that outline the principles and
approaches to support for security sector reform have
been put in place by the African Union, the European
Union and the OSCE. Accordingly, I would like to
draw the Council's attention to the mapping study
on enhancing multilateral support for security sector
reform undertaken by the Geneva Centre for the
Democratic Control of Armed Forces at the request of
the United Nations. The study presents the findings
on normative frameworks, institutional capacities
and operational practices of these three organizations
in support of security sector reform processes led
by individual States themselves. The report will be
presented at next week's meeting of the Group of Friends
of Security Sector Reform. Existing partnerships
would benefit from improvement and, where needed,
new partnerships should be developed with a view to
strengthening the impact of support for international
security sector reform on the ground. I would also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the outcome of the
second Africa Forum on Security Sector Reform, held on
22 to 24 October at the African Union Headquarters in
Addis Ababa, on the topic of promoting the continent's
security, justice and development agenda.

In conclusion, multilateralism has been broadly
recognized as the only way to address the problems
facing humankind. The work of regional organizations
in the area of peace and security is anchored in
multilateralism and is in the interest of all stakeholders
and Member States.

