Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): First, allow me,
on behalf of the African Union, to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting, which
gives our organization the opportunity to brief the
Council once again on what the African Union is
observing on the ground. It will also allow us to
explain the challenges that we face in supporting the
implementation of the peace process. In addition, this
meeting clearly demonstrates the Security Council's
commitment to remain fully seized of the situation in
Somalia.

We welcome the statement made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and hail the pivotal role
that his country is playing in the region, as well as the
role played by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), acting in the region on behalf of
the African Union.

We also welcome the briefing provided by
Ambassador Mahiga, whom the African Group
received yesterday. His statement to the Group and the
discussions with his team fully convinced the Group
that his efforts need the support not only of the Group
he visited yesterday, but of the entire international
community, so that results can be seen on the ground.
We know his commitment to the continent, and we
have known him as a colleague in New York. We think
that one could not find a better person - one who
knows not only the issues, but also the Organization -
for this position on Somalia. But Mr. Mahiga is only
one part of our driving force, and without our driving
force, that part could not function.

Since May, when Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union Commission, described the situation in Somalia
to the Security Council (see S/PV.6313), we have seen
a number of positive and less positive developments on
the ground that have had an impact on the peace
process. I will speak briefly about those developments
before turning my attention to the way in which the
African Union has approached the problems and
challenges associated with them.

On the political front, as other delegations have
said, the process of adopting a new constitution drafted
by the Independent Federal Constitution Commission
continues despite the tensions caused by differences
among leaders of the transitional federal institutions.
The Special Representative of the African Union for
Somalia, Ambassador Boubacar Diarra, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and the IGAD Facilitator for Somalia Peace and
Reconciliation are talking with the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) with a view to reaching greater
harmony and cohesion among the transitional federal
institutions to help adopt more positive measures likely
to facilitate achieving the tasks foreseen for the
transitional period, which will end on 20 August 2011.

Security remains volatile. The Al-Shabaab and
Hizbul Islam groups continue to carry out
indiscriminate attacks against the positions of the TF G
and the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM)
in Mogadishu and the surrounding areas, causing many
civilian casualties. However, AMISOM. remains firmly
entrenched in all strategic points, including Villa
Somalia, the airport, the port and Kilometre 4.
Recently, it has gained ground and slightly widened its
zone of influence by deploying its forces at new
strategic points in the Bondere and Abdiaziz districts of
Mogadishu.

As other delegations have underscored, the
humanitarian situation too continues to deteriorate in
Mogadishu and in other parts of Somalia, while
fighting among the various armed groups continues.
Thousands of civilians are directly affected by the
violence, which is increasingly causing casualties and
displaced persons, who urgently need humanitarian
assistance. The humanitarian agencies have extremely
limited access owing to the widespread insecurity,
intimidation, harassment and attacks perpetrated by
armed groups, in particular Al-Shabaab.

Against that very complex background, I would
like to report that the situation in Somalia has received
the highest political attention both in the region and on
the continent. As the delegations who spoke before me
have emphasized, the Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, held in Kampala, at
its closure reaffirmed its full support for Somalia's
Transitional Federal Government and resolutely
condemned the attacks and other acts of violence
perpetrated by Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups
against the TFG, the Somali population and AMISOM,
as well as the attacks in Kampala, Uganda, on 11 July.
Moreover, the Conference endorsed the decisions
contained in the Communique of the fifteenth
Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, held in Addis Ababa on 5 July 2010,
aimed at enabling AMISOM. to achieve the authorized

10-5364]
level of its personnel of 8,100 men. And this morning,
we heard that reviewing this figure upwards is being
considered.

In implementing the mandate conferred on it by
the Conference of Heads of State, the Commission has
begun to plan new deployment phases for AMISOM.
That process, including drawing up new strategic
directives and a concept of operations for AMISOM,
has necessitated consultations with partners, including
the United Nations, and will soon be completed. The
results of that process will be submitted to the Council
once they have been endorsed by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

As we finalize the planning of new deployment
phases for AMISOM, allow me to draw attention to a
number of challenges that we are already facing today.

Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of
16 January 2009 authorized a "logistical support
package to AMISOM, including equipment and
services" (para. 10). The operational aspects of that
logistical support package provided to AMISOM, as
noted in a letter from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/804),
will be funded through regular contributions from
States Members of the United Nations. Other United
Nations support measures for AMISOM, including
reimbursement for the contingents' logistical
arrangements, come from the special United Nations
Trust Fund for AMISOM.

Member States are making generous
contributions to the Fund and we thank them for that.
At the same time, we need to find a solution to a
number of conditions imposed by donors banning the
use of funds in certain critical areas. With some rare
exceptions, these restrictions, as some delegations have
noted, have largely curbed expenditures in the military
components of AMISOM. AMISOM. continues to be
subject to significant financial restrictions that prevent
it from being operationally effective, which could
discourage new troop contributors.

It is therefore vital that AMISOM. financing be
not only sufficient but also predictable and sustainable,
and that cannot be guaranteed unless the regular budget
is used to cover all key operational elements of
AMISOM, including military equipment and
implements of war deployed by troop-contributing
countries in the highly precarious security environment
of Somalia.
Obviously, the situation in Somalia poses a threat
to international peace and security. Unrestrained piracy
and the bomb attacks of 11 July, mentioned by many
delegations, show the extent to which insecurity in
Somalia has a profound impact beyond its borders. A
firm response from the international community is
necessary. The commitments made by the African
Union to re-establish peace and security in Somalia
need international support. I therefore urge the Council
to consider authorizing all possible cooperation and
collaboration between AMISOM. and United Nations
operations under way in the region in order to deliver
personnel and air and maritime logistical support for
AMISOM.

Let me now speak briefly about the problem of
civilian casualties. The humanitarian community is
expressing growing concern over the high number of
casualties resulting from the fighting in Mogadishu
between insurgents and Government forces. Some
organizations and media have repeatedly accused
AMISOM. of blindly looting civilian zones in
Mogadishu in reaction to attacks from Al-Shabaab
insurgents in those neighbourhoods. These accusations
are launched by the Al-Shabaab propaganda machine.
In that regard, AMISOM. is working closely with its
partners, including the United Nations Support Office
for AMISOM, to develop an active communication
strategy targeted to counter this manoeuvre. Moreover,
AMISOM. and the United Nations country team agree
in principle on the establishment of a working group to
share information on the situation of civilian casualties
and to adopt practical measures to deal with the
different concerns.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the African
Union's determination to assume its fair share of the
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, working closely with the Council, Member
States and all our international partners in seeking and
implementing our common goal - a Somalia that is
stable and at peace. However, we must emphasize that
AMISOM. needs sufficient, predictable and lasting
resources, as I have indicated. Without sufficient and
predictable resources, AMISOM. will not be able to
guarantee the security conditions necessary to allow
the Transitional Federal Government to complete its
transitional tasks, including the development of Somali
security forces and the establishment of conditions
conducive to stability and development in Somalia.
Finally, I commend the statement made by the
representative of Somalia. I would especially like to
welcome the partnership to be developed among the
African Union, the United Nations and IGAD. In the
meantime, we will have to give substance to these
partnerships. We clearly heard Mr. Mahiga when he
talked about the attacks that took place during his trip
to Somalia in the company of the representatives of
IGAD and the African Union. Clearly, we are united
through thick and thin. But we also have to give
substance to these partnerships, and that substance will
come only from firm action from the Council, from all
States Members of the United Nations and from all
partners working for Somalia - and above all with the
help of Somalia itself.

