Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin my statement by expressing Jordan's
strong condemnation of the terrorist attacks that took
place in Mali today, and by extending our condolences
to the families of the victims.

Allow me to express my thanks and appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive
briefing and tireless efforts in peacekeeping. This
discussion is taking place at an important time.
The Secretary-General's report on the future of
peacekeeping operations (S/2015/682) and the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446) have acquired a high degree of
importance in view of the exacerbating conflicts
around the world. Those conflicts have changed in
nature over the years and have spread to the extent
that now they threaten areas that used to be safe. They
are not confined geographically and have developed
faster than the ability of the United Nations and the
international community to deal with them.

What we seek now is not only to limit those conflicts
and alleviate their efects, but also to deal with their root
causes and prevent them from erupting in the first place.
Jordan appreciates the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the High-level Independent Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations, welcomes their reports and agrees with
most of the recommendations contained therein. They
have looked at the future of peacekeeping operations
from a new and vital perspective. I would like to focus
on the four most important recommendations in the
reports, which we deem to be of the utmost priority for
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

The first of these is the promotion of mediation,
prevention and support of political processes.
Peacekeeping operations are not an alternative to
national political settlements but rather pave the way
for the establishment of a conducive environment for
a peaceful settlement among the conflicting parties
in a manner that takes the interests of everyone into
consideration and bridges the differences between them.
Such a settlement cannot be achieved unless it reflects
the true will of the parties to the conflict. Therefore,
mediation can play a major part. The Security Council's
role in that regard is extremely important owing to its
political leverage and its mandate to support political
processes in many different ways, including through
mediation and communication with the parties to the
conflict. We believe that we could establish a mediation
panel composed of experts and consultants that have
wide-ranging relations with the parties to the conflict,
or with the local communities in the host countries, and
that such a panel should be one of the elements taken
into consideration in the design of future peacekeeping
operations.

The advisability of sequenced mandates is the
second important recommendation in the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Panel. This recommendation
should be given consideration in the context not only of
new peacekeeping operations but ofcurrent ones as well.
Developments on the ground should serve as the compass
by which the Security Council determines the type of
response that is suited to the particular requirements
of each conflict. We believe that sequenced mandates
will help the Security Council to save time and effort
in dealing with emerging conflicts and preventing their
eruption in the first place, particularly in the case of the
two most dangerous phenomena: violent extremism and
terrorism, and diseases such as Ebola.

Sequenced mandates can also play an important
role in identifying ways and means of providing
protection to civilians, such as increasing the police or
military component, or of assisting political processes
that require further support or further participation by
women. The second phase of any sequenced mandate
should include exit strategies that would avoid leaving
a security vacuum in the host country. We therefore
support the idea that peacekeeping operations should
be designed in such a way as to be commensurate with
the threats they face.

To reach the necessary level of preparedness,
peacekeepers must be adequately trained and equipped,
particularly when they are required to deal with cross-
border conflicts that exposes them to extremely
dangerous and potentially explosive situations. We
believe that the Secretariat and the Security Council
should later on determine the steps to be followed in this
regard, such as increasing the number of specialized
consultants in peacekeeping operations who could
provide analyses and recommendations to the Security
Council to help in the formulation of future mandates.

Thirdly, deepening cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, particularly the European
Union, the African Union and the League of Arab
States, is also extremely important for bridging
divisions among nations and furthering international
and regional responses to the conflicts in the Middle
East and Africa that have been deteriorating over the
past few years. We encourage the Security Council to
promote and expand its cooperation with the League of
Arab States in dealing with crises in the Middle East.

Fourthly, with respect to accountability for human
rights violations resulting from violence or sexual
exploitation, we should not allow a few individuals to
disgrace peacekeeping operations. We should make
sure that necessary and firm measures are adopted so
that violations can be investigated and perpetrators
brought to justice.

Lastly, we stress the importance of coordination
and cooperation between the Security Council, all
relevant United Nations entities and the troop- and
police-contributing countries. This would make for
better-prepared peacekeeping operations and the
enhanced prioritization of their tasks. Countries with
broad experience would be particularly helpful in this
exercise, which would further the implementation of
the recommendations of both the Secretary-General
and the High-level Independent Panel.

Jordan takes pride in its participation in
peacekeeping operations, which proceeds from its moral
and humanitarian commitment to the United Nations,
the prevention of conflicts and their settlement. We rank
first among police-contributors and have contributed
1,580 officers so far. We salute all those who work in
peacekeeping operations and appreciate their sacrifice
in extremely difficult and dangerous conditions. They
have shown the highest level of professionalism,
dedication and courage in the interests of international
peace and security.

