Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Let me start
by conveying South Africa's condolences to the
Government and the people of France, who this past
Friday experienced the cruelty of terrorism.
We would like to thank you, Sir, for the concept
note (S/2015/845, annex) circulated on security,
development and the root causes of conflict. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

South Africa associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We wish to make several
additional remarks in our national capacity.

South Africa fully supports the assertion in the
2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development to the
effect that sustainable development cannot be realized
without peace and security, and peace and security
will be at risk without sustainable development. In that
regard, peace and security will continue to elude us
if we do not address the nexus between security and
development. By and large, today's conflicts have their
origins in disputes related to economic development
issues, including socioeconomic marginalization; the
disproportionate and unequal distribution of resources,
wealth and power within societies; the lack of
participatory democratic processes; corruption; and the
illegal exploitation of mineral resources, which fuels
those conflicts. For sustainable peace and stability
to be established, it is essential to promote economic
development and good governance, and to build strong
State institutions that act to mediate disagreements
and disputes within a given country in order to avoid
violent conflict.

While it is important for the Security Council to
take into account and consideration the developmental
and socioeconomic causes of conflict, the Council
should not in any way encroach upon the mandate
of other principal United Nations bodies, such as
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as the Peace Building Commission,
which are entrusted with that mandate. It is unfortunate
that the Council encroaches upon the mandate of other
bodies while neglecting its own mandate as set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
the Council remains ineffective, failing to adequately
address key peace and security matters in places such
as Palestine, Syria and Western Sahara.

South Africa is of the firm view that it is vital to
integrate developmental aspects in international efforts
in the areas of conflict prevention, resolution and
management, including post-conflict peacebuilding.
In that regard, we welcome the work of other members
of the international community, including the World
Bank as a critical partner in our collective conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts. In all such efforts,
the national context, policy space and specific needs
of the host country must be respected and protected.
Nationally owned interventions and development
strategies must be supported in addressing rising
levels of unemployment, poverty reduction and gender
inequality. In addition to working closely with the
national authorities of the State, greater collaboration
and coordination with regional and continental bodies
will be a fundamental prerequisite for greater synergy
and strategic coherence in our approaches. There is
a need to draw on strong partnerships between the
United Nations and regional bodies, not only in terms
of their comparative advantage in addressing conflicts
and responding to them, but in promoting regional
efforts geared towards greater regional development
and prosperity. This is underpinned by the realization
that instability and underdevelopment in one country
have an impact on an entire region, and in turn on
global stability, as they create sanctuaries in which
transnational crime and terrorism can thrive.

The stability of States is increasingly being
challenged by their lack of capacity to meet the
aspirations of their populations. In an increasingly
unequal world, the redistributive capacity of the State
must be strengthened. Inclusiveness in governance
also needs to be addressed, because a more inclusive
governance model is more likely to prevent recourse to
armed struggle to further political interests. A healthy
civil society that promotes dialogue and provides a
voice to those who feel marginalized will go a long way
towards providing non-violent forums for the peaceful
resolution of political disputes. National reconciliation
efforts also need to be put in place in order to address
the collective wounds and the recourse to vengeful
sentiments that can fuel relapses into conflict. South
Africa has experienced the healing effects of bodies
such as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
and we wish to encourage countries that are emerging
from conflict to investigate the possible use of such
restorative mechanisms.

The causes of conflict repeat themselves and are
never fully addressed when countries emerge from
conflict. Therefore, global attention should remain in
place even after violent conflicts have been resolved.
During that time, consolidating the dividends of peace
needs to be the foremost consideration, with a robust
emphasis on stimulating economic development. A
happy and prosperous society is a peaceful society.
That needs to set the tone for preventive action and
sustainable peace.

We live in a world characterized by greater
inter-connectivity and mutual dependence. It is of
paramount importance to attend speedily to violent
conflicts, which often emanate from areas of the world
that are not geographically proximate.

