Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I shall speak first in my capacity as Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

Dozens of resolutions have been adopted, clearly
reflecting the will of the majority. Recent examples
include the Council's own resolution 1322 (2000) and
General Assembly resolution ES-10/7. The Arab
summit held in Egypt on 21 and 22 October 2000
expressed itself on this matter, and on 19 October the
Commission on Human Rights adopted its resolutions
S-5/1 on the subject.

There was no alternative but to resume the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly,
which adopted its resolution ES-10/7 on 20 October.
Inter alia, the Assembly condemned the excessive use
of force by the Israeli forces and called upon the
members of the Security Council to follow the situation
closely, including the implementation of resolution
1322 (2000). Furthermore, the Economic and Social
Council voted today to endorse the 9 October decision
of the Commission on Human Rights.

The Secretary-General too has played and
continues to play a very important role in the search for
a solution to the crisis. The Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People hails
his efforts and urges that they continue.

Yet the use of force has increased rather than
declining. In recent days, Israeli occupation forces
have stepped up their activities against the Palestinian
population, launching massive air, sea and land attacks.
Serious violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, continue.

In earlier Council debates on this item, many
delegations spoke of the shocking images seen by all of
the murder of the child Mohammed Al-Durra. Since
then, many other children and other innocent civilians
have died. In the two months of violence that resulted
from the provocative visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 28
September, there have been more than 270 deaths and
7,000 casualties, the vast majority of them Palestinians.

Had Israel implemented the many Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on the
question of Palestine, we would not now be witnessing
the current critical situation in the occupied territories.
At the private meeting of the Security Council held on
10 November, the President of the Palestinian
Authority described in detail the deteriorating situation
on the ground and clearly set out the reasons why a
protection force of observers needed to be deployed
immediately.

Israeli practices and policies denying the
legitimate needs and aspirations of the Palestinian
people will never be compatible with a legitimate
peace process based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). There can be no just and lasting peace in the
Middle East until the Palestinian people exercise their
legitimate right to establish an independent State with
its capital in East Jerusalem, until all the occupied
Arab territories are returned, and until Israel withdraws
from the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and the Syrian
Golan, to the lines of 4 June 1967. There will be no
lasting peace until provocations in southern Lebanon
cease, until Arab prisoners and detainees are released
from Israeli jails, and until Israeli settlements are
removed in conformity with resolution 465 (1980).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Republic of Cuba.

We hail the President of the Security Council for
the month of October, the representative of Namibia,
for the effective manner in which he guided the
important work of the Council during his presidency.

It is interesting to note how some Council
members - so eager to promote the notion of carrying
out "humanitarian intervention" with or without
Security Council authorization whenever they decide
that there is a worrying human rights situation to be
remedied - have lost all their enthusiasm in this case
and are manoeuvring to stop the Security Council and
the General Assembly from using their powers under
the Charter. There could be no better illustration of the
interests that so-called humanitarian interventions
really serve.

Everybody knows that a different standard applies
to Israel. This is a typical case of what happens when
the United States, a permanent member of the Security
Council and Israel's ally, seeks to further its national
interests by making arbitrary use of its powers and
prerogatives. Hypocrisy and double standards reign,
protected by the obsolete and anti-democratic privilege
of the veto.

Cuba supports the position of Council members
that are also members of the Non-Aligned Movement
and of other members of the Security Council that have
been making sincere efforts to ensure that the Council
shoulder its responsibilities. Cuba calls upon the
Security Council to act without further delay, in a way
commensurate with the situation and with its lofty
responsibilities. The Council should immediately set up
an observer force to protect Palestinian civilians. It
should demand that Israel halt its acts of force and
implement the many Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on the question of the Middle
East.

That is the only path leading to a just and lasting
peace.

