The President: I thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and for the kind words he addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

I would like to begin with these words: HIV/AIDS
is not someone else's problem. It is my problem; it is
your problem. By allowing it to spread, we face the
danger that our youth will not reach adulthood. Their
education will be wasted, the economy will shrink, there
will be a large number of sick people whom the health
system will not be able to maintain.

These are not my words. They were not uttered in
the United States or the United Nations. They were
spoken by my friend President Thabo Mbeki of South
Africa as he declared South Africa's partnership against
AIDS more than a year ago. The same words should be
spoken out not only in South Africa, not only in Africa,
but all across the earth. In Africa the scale of the crisis
may be greater, the infrastructure weaker and the people
poorer, but the threat is real for every people and every
nation, everywhere on Earth.

No border can keep AIDS out. It cuts across all the
lines that divide us. We owe ourselves and each other the
utmost commitment to act against AIDS on a global
scale, and especially where the scourge is greatest. AIDS
is a global aggressor that must be defeated.

As we enter this new millennium, Africa has entered
the first frontier of momentous progress. Over the past
decade a rising wave of African nations has moved from
dictatorship to democracy, embraced economic reform,
opened markets, privatized enterprises, stabilized
currency. More than half the nations of Africa now elect
their own leaders - nearly four times the number 10
years ago. Economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa has
tripled, creating prospects for a higher quality of life
across the continent.

Tragically, this historic progress is imperiled just as
it is taking hold - imperiled by the spread of AIDS,
which now grips 20 million Africans. Fourteen million
have already died, one quarter of them children. Each day
in Africa 11,000 more men, women and children become
HIV-positive, more than half of them under the age of 25.

 

For the nations of sub-Saharan Africa, AIDS is not
just a humanitarian crisis. It is a security crisis, because it
threatens not only individual citizens but the institutions
that define and defend the character of a society. This
disease weakens workforces and saps economic strength.
AIDS strikes at teachers and denies education to their
students. It strikes at the military and subverts the forces of
order and peacekeeping.

The United States is profoundly moved by the toll
AIDS is now taking in Africa. At the same time, we know
that our own country has not achieved as much as we
should or must in our own battle against AIDS. I am
pleased that our Surgeon General, Dr. David Satcher, is
here with me today. His recent report tells us that we have
not overcome the ignorance and indifference that lead to
infection. We must continue to study the success of others
while we seek to share with others whatever progress we
have made.

As Vice-President, I have journeyed four times to sub-
Saharan Africa. I asked Dr. Satcher to accompany me on
one such trip. I have taken along top health officials, AIDS
specialists, corporate leaders and physicians. We have spent
long hours with African leaders, heard their ideas and
discussed their difficulties with the fateful crisis of AIDS.
It is inspiring to see so many in Africa - not only leaders
but health-care workers and community workers, mothers
and fathers and countless ordinary citizens - fighting to
save the lives of the people they love.

Ten years ago, Uganda was suffering the world's
highest infection rate. Today, because the whole nation has
mobilized to end stigma, urge prevention and change
behaviour, Uganda is now recording dramatic drops in the
infection rate. Uganda, which used to be proof of the
problem, is now powerful proof that we can turn the tide
against AIDS.

We know that the first line of defence against this
disease is prevention, and prevention depends on breaking
down the barriers against discussing the extent and risks of
AIDS. That is one purpose of this historic Security Council
meeting. Today, in sight of all the world, we are putting the
AIDS crisis at the top of the world's security agenda. We
must talk about AIDS not in whispers, not in private
meetings alone, in tones of secrecy and shame. We must
face the threat as we are facing it right here, in one of the
great forums of this earth, openly and boldly, with urgency
and compassion. Until we end the stigma of AIDS, we will
never end the disease of AIDS. Let us begin by resolving
to end the stigma associated with AIDS.

We also must do much more to provide basic care
and treatment to the growing number of people who,
thank God, are living instead of dying with HIV and
AIDS. This requires affordable medicine, but also more
than medicine. It requires that we train doctors, nurses
and home-care workers, that we develop clinics and
community-based organizations to deliver care to those
who need it.

Today fewer than 5 per cent of those living with
AIDS in Africa have access to even basic care. We know
we can prolong life, reduce suffering and allow mothers
with AIDS to live longer with their children if we offer
treatment for opportunistic infections such as tuberculosis
and malaria.

Our ultimate goal, our best hope, is to prevent AIDS
by vaccination, and we are committed to the maximum
possible research. But we need to do more to harness the
talent and the power of the private sector.

In September, in his speech to the General
Assembly, President Clinton said it was wrong that only
2 per cent of all biomedical research was directed to the
major killer diseases in the developing world. He pledged
America to a new effort to speed the development and
delivery of vaccines for AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and
other illnesses that disproportionately afflict the poorest
nations. This three-part strategy of prevention, treatment
and research is the right fight, and the United States has
contributed more than $1 billion to wage it worldwide,
more than half of that for sub-Saharan Africa. But we
must do more.

Last year I announced the largest ever increase in
the United States commitment to international AIDS
programmes: $100 million to fight AIDS in Africa, India,
Eastern Europe and other areas. Today I announce
America's decision to step up the battle. The budget the
Clinton-Gore Administration will send to our Congress
next month will include an additional increase of another
$100 million, for a total of $325 million, to fund our
worldwide fight against AIDS. This new funding will
include efforts to reduce the stigma and prevent the
spread of AIDS, to reduce mother-to-child transmission,
to support home and community-based care for people
with AIDS, to provide care for children orphaned by
AIDS and to strengthen health infrastructures to prevent
and treat AIDS.

I would also like to announce here this morning that
the budget we will send to our Congress next month will

 

include $50 million for the United States contribution to the
vaccine fund of the Global Alliance for Vaccines and
Immunizations. This contribution, in fulfilment of the
promise President Clinton made to the General Assembly,
will help fund the research, purchase and distribution of
life-saving vaccines in developing nations.

I am also announcing today an initiative for an
expanded public-private partnership in the battle against
AIDS. Indeed, in the coming months I will convene a
meeting of United States business leaders active in Africa
to develop a set of voluntary principles for corporate
conduct to make the workplace an effective place for the
education and prevention of AIDS. Let us also set this goal.
Through public and private efforts, in partnership with
partner nations, we will attack the cycle of infection at one
critical point, its most heartbreaking point: the moment of
mother-to-child transmission.
In addition, I announce that our budget request for
next year will for the first time ever contain specific
funding for the United States military to work with the
armed forces of other nations to combat AIDS. Inside our
own country, our armed forces have acted effectively to
prevent the spread of AIDS in the military. Secretary of
Defense Cohen is ready to share our experience with our
military counterparts in Africa. He will visit the United
Nations during this historic month.

We are also committed to helping poor countries gain
access to affordable medicines, including those for
HIV/AIDS. Last month the President announced a new
approach to ensure that we take public health crises into
account when applying United States trade policy. We will
cooperate with our trading partners to ensure that United
States trade policies do not hinder their efforts to respond
to health crises.

But to win the ongoing global battle against AIDS, we
must also fight the poverty that speeds its spread. In June
in Cologne, we joined with our G-7 partners in the Cologne
debt initiative, a landmark commitment to faster and deeper
debt relief for the heavily indebted poor countries. We will
continue to engage our G-7 partners to bring greater
resources to this effort. Today I challenge the world's
wealthier, healthier nations to match America's increasing
commitment to a worldwide crusade against AIDS.

But more money is not enough. We must also make
sure that more money has more impact. Next July the
global community will gather in Durban, South Africa, for
the thirteenth International AIDS Conference. There are
many inspiring efforts to fight AIDS all around the world.
But right now they mostly amount to many isolated
efforts and not a single focused assault. We must knit
together the separate initiatives by local, national, regional
and global organizations to take maximum advantage of
their synergy and successes. We will work with the
organizers of the Durban Conference to advance this
essential objective. It is essential because how we spend
the money and how effectively we target it, not just how
much we spend, will determine how many lives we save.

AIDS is one of the most devastating threats ever to
confront the world community. Many have called the
battle against it a sacred crusade. The United Nations was
created to stop wars. Now we must wage and win a great
and peaceful war of our time - the war against AIDS.
Let all, here and around the world, who are willing to
enlist in this cause hear and heed and take heart from the
words of an African poet, Mongane Wally Serote:

"Remember the passion of our hearts, the
blinding ache and pain when we heard the hysterical
sobs of our little children crying against fate. We
heard these. We knew them. We absorbed them. But
we surged forward, knowing that life is a promise
and that that promise is us."

That promise is us. We here in this room,
representing the billions of people of the world, must
become the promise of hope and change. We must
become the promise of life itself. We have the
knowledge, the compassion and the means to make a
difference. We must acknowledge our moral duty and
accept our great and grave responsibility to succeed. We
must make the promise and keep the promise to prevail
against this disease so that when the story of AIDS is told
to future generations, it will be a tale not just of human
tragedy, but a tale of human triumph. And the moral of
that story will be the capacity of the human spirit to
summon us in common cause to defeat a common foe and
secure the health and hopes of so many of our fellow
human beings.

May God bless all who have suffered from this
disease and are suffering from it. May God bless the
united effort of our United Nations to end it soon and for
ever.

I resume my functions as President of the Council,
and I am pleased that in this first meeting of the
millennium we are joined by one of the world's leaders in

 

the battle against poverty, the President of the World Bank,
James Wolfensohn, I give him the floor.

