Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): At the outset,
let me join all who spoke before me in thanking you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
combating the financing of terrorism.

Malaysia sees this meeting as timely amid our
grave concern at the escalation in terror incidents in
recent weeks, which has resulted in the loss of innocent
lives and injury to many people, including Malaysians.
Malaysia condemns in the strongest terms the senseless
acts of terror carried out against innocent civilians
and believes that those responsible must be brought
to justice.

There is an upwardtrend in the financing ofterrorism
in Malaysia owing to the fact that Da'esh and foreign
terrorist fighters have adapted and decentralized. In
Malaysia we have learned that this type of funding's
primary sources come through legitimate means,
including self-funding from legitimate income, savings
accounts, social-security withdrawals, financial support
from family members and donations from the public.
Self-funding is the most common way of raising funds
for travel to conflict zones or conducting operations
there. Cash is also moved physically across borders for

terrorism-financing activities within our region and
for foreign fighters travelling to or from conflict zones
by taking advantage of Malaysia's porous borders.
Malaysian foreign terrorist fighters based overseas
who want to return to Malaysia are also exploiting
that vulnerability of our borders in order to re-enter
the country illegally and undetected. We are seeing an
increase in the use of bank accounts to receive donations
from sympathizers, move money from fundraisers to
leaders of terrorist organizations and withdraw funds
when terrorists are in conflict zones. In addition to the
financial institutions concerned, remittance operators
and hawala brokers are also reported to be preferred
channels for moving funds abroad.

However, while the risks of terrorism and terrorist
financing are rising, they are being adequately contained
by the relevant authorities. Malaysia emphasizes a
number of strategic areas - a comprehensive regulatory
framework, targeted preventive measures, focused
enforcement action, public-private partnerships and
domestic and international cooperation. We have
established a comprehensive legal and regulatory
framework that encompasses legislation such as our
penal code and laws on the prevention of crime, on
special measures against terrorism in foreign countries
and on money-laundering, terrorism financing and
proceeds of unlawful activities. That legislation has
been put in place and amended to expand enforcement
agencies' investigative scope and power.

Malaysia's financial institutions continue to
implement measures, including reporting suspicious
transactions, to prevent their institutions from being
used as a conduit by terrorists. In order to facilitate
financial institutions' ability to detect and disrupt
terrorism activities at an early stage, the Financial
Intelligence Unit issues red flags, typologies, weekly
news bulletins and regular updates on terrorism-related
resolutions and trends. A public-private sector platform
was established in 2017 between the Royal Malaysia
Police's financial intelligence unit and select financial
institutions, to enable a targeted approach involving
the submission of higher quality and operationally
focused suspicious transaction reports related to
terrorist financing, resulting in a surge in high-quality
suspicious transaction reports.

Malaysia also enjoys a robust framework for
national coordination and cooperation at both the
policy and operational levels through our national
coordination committee to counter money-laundering.
With regard to action plans for terrorist financing,
the focus includes integrating financial and terrorism
investigations and prosecuting terrorist financing in
parallel with terrorist offences. Concerning regional
and international engagement, Malaysia remains
committed to the agenda on anti-money-laundering
and combating terrorist financing led by the Financial
Action Task Force, the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering and the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units. Malaysia has an effective regulatory
system and directly implements targeted financial
sanctions against United Nations-designated persons
and entities. We maintain our domestic designation
of individuals and entities pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) and conduct effective oversight of both the
financial and non-financial sectors.

Malaysiajoins other Member States in our common
endeavour to enhance the work of the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and other United Nations entities and
support their important initiatives. Malaysia believes
that it is important to realize that combating terrorist
financing requires the commitment and determination
of all countries.
