Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (Spoke in Russian): We have been discussing the situation in
Ukraine since February 2014. At that time, there was
an agreement between the President and the opposition.
If that agreement had been implemented, Kyiv would
have implemented constitutional reform by the end
of last year and we would have observed a gradual
normalization of and democratic development in
Ukraine. Instead, a different logic has been in place,
supported by people who want to see their political
preferences for the future of Ukraine and its entire
population prevail. This is the root of a tragic situation
that has gone on for too long. We need to put an end to
it. That is why the Minsk agreements exist.

We wish to express our gratitude to Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman, and the Deputy
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Mr. Alexander Hug, for their
briefings. We share the great concern at the resurgence
of military activity in Donbas. We need to take measures
to stabilize the situation. In this regard, we welcome the
efforts of the OSCE and the Joint Centre for Control
and Coordination.

The package of measures for implementing the
Minsk agreements adopted on 12 February gives a
concise and clear road map for settling the Ukrainian
crisis. The Security Council unanimously supported
the document in resolution 2202 (2015), assuming its
part of political responsibility for settling the situation
in Ukraine. Therefore, here in the Security Council, we
need to deal with the causes of the ongoing escalation.

Almost four months have gone by since 12 February,
yet what has been done to implement the package of
measures? Pursuant to paragraph 4, on the first day after
the withdrawal of heavy weapons, a dialogue should
have begun on the modalities for conducting local
elections in line with Ukrainian legislation and laws
on the special status of Donbas, which were adopted
back in the autumn of 2014. The Supreme Council of
Ukraine - the Verkhovna Rada - was required only
to adopt a law on this territory with respect to its special
status. Instead, however, the Ukrainian parliament has
introduced amendments that were not agreed to by
Donetsk and Luhansk and which were not acceptable
to them, and the territory itself was declared to be
occupied, which completely subverted the agreements
reached in Minsk. The amendments simply overlooked
the adoption of the special status and did not provide
for local elections.

Kyiv has begun to toughen its rhetoric, saying that
elections could only take place once the south-east of
Ukraine was under its full control. Over all this time,
Kyiv has refused to have direct dialogue with the
representatives of Dombas, despite provisions for such
dialogue in paragraphs 4, 9, 11 and 12 ofthe package of
measures. This is one of the obvious reasons why it has
been so difficult to start negotiations in the Trilateral
Contact Group and its subgroups.

In violation of paragraph 5 of the package of
measures, Kyiv has also not adopted the amnesty law
which would prohibit any punishment for persons
involved in the activities taking place in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions. Moreover, the Ukrainian leadership
has repeatedly stated publicly that it does not intend to
comply with that provision.

One of the central elements in the implementation
package is instituting constitutional reforms by the end of
the year. The parameters of those reforms were outlined
in Minsk with the active participation of the leaders of
the Normandy quartet. Paragraph 11 states in black
and white that decentralization must be implemented
while taking into account the particularities of specific
districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, as agreed
on with the representatives of those districts. The
package includes provisions on the right to linguistic
self-determination, the creation of people's militias
by decision of local councils, the expansion of local
Governments' powers to appoint chief prosecutors and
judges, and the conclusion of agreements with Kyiv in
various areas, as well as the implementation of cross-
border cooperation with Russia.

Kyiv finally established a constitutional commission
on 3 March that included foreign experts but not
a single representative of Donetsk and Luhansk,
whose proposals for constitutional reform were
simply ignored. Kyiv's refusal to comply with the
humanitarian and socioeconomic provisions of the
package of measures presents the population of Donbas
with serious challenges. The noose of the economic
blockade around Donetsk and Luhansk is being drawn
tighter and tighter. The Kyiv officials do not hide the
fact that those restrictive measures are purely punitive,
saying that the people of the Donetsk and Luhansk
People's Republics are being punished for their support
of the volunteers. People have been cut off from social
benefits and access to food and medicines is difficult,
since commercial transport is not being allowed
through. Kyiv has not reacted to the remonstrations of
international humanitarian and human-rights workers
regarding the fact that it is children and the elderly, the
most vulnerable, who suffer.

Thanks to humanitarian assistance from Russia,
the people of Donbas are surviving in a literal sense.
We have already sent 28 convoys with more than 36,000
tons ofhumanitarian deliveries in food, daily necessities
and medicines. The Ukrainian border guards and
customs officers finally began recently to participate
in monitoring them, something we have invited them
to do from the start. It is encouraging that Switzerland
recently contributed by sending a significant delivery
of reagents for purifying drinking water. But the basic
problem of difficult access for humanitarian assistance
remains, thanks to Kyiv's bureaucratic obstacles. In
addition to all this, the response to appeals for financing
is at only 21 per cent.

The Ukrainian Government has also been unable or
unwilling to bring all the punitive battalions under its
control, in accordance with paragraph 10 of the Minsk
agreement. They continue to wreak havoc. For example,
during the truce the Aydar troops in the Luhansk region
switched to extorting and abusing civilians, including
the elderly, trying to cross the line of contact on foot in
order to get cash or buy food. After the Minsk agreement
was reached on 12 February, a fair amount was done
to implement important provisions on removing heavy
weaponry, yet attacks on civilian towns and villages
east of the boundary line nonetheless continued almost
daily, terrorizing the local population.

I will cite just a few examples. On 28 May, three
people, including an ll-year-old girl and her father, died
in shelling in Horlivka, and many of the town's residents
were injured. On 3 June, a massive bombardment of
Donetsk killed at least six civilians died and wounded
more than 90, besides which there was firing from
the town of Marinka, as has been mentioned today,
which appears to have provoked the latest escalation
of military action. On 4 June, when Telmanovo was
attacked by Ukrainian forces, shells hit a playground,
killing a year-old infant.

Accusations have been levelled at the militias,
but we can only ask ourselves why all we hear in
statements from Kyiv is about military casualties,
while there are reports from Donetsk and Luhansk of
the death of civilians and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure - hospitals, schools, kindergartens and
houses. In that regard, we ask that the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission not simply focus on the violations
of the ceasefire agreement and on determining who
violated it, but also describe clearly what the targets
of those attacks were and whether their victims were
civilians or military units firing on residential areas.
We must have a clear picture of what is happening in
Donbas and who is committing violations notjust ofthe
Minsk agreement but also of the norms of international
humanitarian law.

Against that background, it is surprising to see
the indifference of our Western partners, who are
usually so fond of pontificating about humanitarian
issues. Furthermore, there is no end to the shipments
of military supplies, including armoured vehicles,
along with the hundreds of instructors sent to train the
Ukrainian forces. There have been numerous reports
of sightings near Donbas of foreign mercenaries
and private military companies. Is that not a direct
encouragement to a resumption of hostilities, not
to mention a clear violation of paragraph 10, which
provides for the withdrawal of foreign armed forces,
military equipment and mercenaries from Ukrainian
territory?

For all practical purposes, it is no secret that Kyiv
has used the Minsk truce to rebuild and regroup its
forces, which is why the latest outbreak of hostilities,
while seriously worrying, is hardly surprising. However,
we should not ignore the fact that it occurred after a
series of very positive meetings between the Trilateral
Contact Group and its working groups, most recently in
Minsk on 2 June. And although they have yet to reach a
final agreement, there has been progress on every issue
under discussion, including on such complex subjects
as the demilitarization of Shirokino and including
mortars with a calibre under 100 millimetres on the list
of excluded weapons.

Definite progress has been made on the question
of starting direct consultations between Kyiv and
Luhansk and Donetsk on preparing for the holding
of local elections. That raises the suspicion that it is
precisely this positive news that is linked to the armed
provocations being conducted against cities in Donbas.
Perhaps Kyiv, particularly the so-called war party,
has understood that it cannot continue to sabotage
the implementation package forever. Even the capitals
that are most loyal to Kyiv have begun to betray signs
of irritation, saying that the Kyiv authorities have
overstepped the bounds of decency in violating or
simply ignoring the Minsk agreement. And military
action is the most reliable diversionary manoeuvre,
since one can blame anything on the war.

This is a critical moment. If we continue to allow
Kyiv to drag its feet in taking what are absolutely
essential political steps regarding Donbas, the situation
may again spiral out of control, with unpredictable
consequences. We urge the members of the Council
with influence over the Kyiv authorities to make every
effort to ensure that this does not occur.

