Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We, too, would like to
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Ms. Kane, for her briefing.

Since Slovakia fully aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union, I will limit my statement to the following
remarks.

We are deeply concerned about the recent
escalating tensions and the upsurge in violence in Gaza
as well as the widespread deterioration in the security
situation in the Middle East. We therefore call on all
parties to exercise the utmost restraint and to do
everything possible to calm the situation and to prevent
its further dangerous escalation, which could only lead
to suffering and the loss of lives.

We urge the Palestinian Authority to undertake all
necessary measures and to make every effort to find
and release the kidnapped Israeli soldier and prevent
further military and terrorist attacks on Israel,
notably the launching of rockets against Israeli
population centres. We support the leadership of
President Mahmoud Abbas and his efforts to achieve
that goal, and we hope that the Palestinian Government
will cooperate towards that end.

We also strongly condemn the recent killing of
the young Israeli civilian who had been kidnapped. In
that regard, we call on the Palestinian Authority to take
immediate measures to put an end to acts of terrorist
violence and to adhere to the three principles set out by
the Quartet.

With respect to Israel, although we believe it has
the right of self-defence against terrorism and its
perpetrators, and although we understand its anxiety
over the well-being of its kidnapped soldier and its
desire for his quick and safe release, we stress that
Israel's measures and responses must be always
proportionate and that everything possible must be
done to avoid any loss of innocent life as well as the
destruction of civilian infrastructure and to prevent any
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation. We
also call on Israel to exercise the utmost restraint with
regard to flights over Syrian territory.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support
for a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
Middle East conflict based on all relevant Security
Council resolutions and on negotiations between the
two sides. We urge both sides to return to a
constructive dialogue and to take concrete actions
aimed at building and strengthening mutual confidence
and trust.

In conclusion, I should like to stress once again
that there can be no military solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute. The only way to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the conflict is
through peaceful negotiations leading to a two-State
solution, in accordance with the road map.
