Mr. Yiga: Thank you very much, Madam President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
on issues that touch on United Nations policing in the
field. May I also thank the Council for supporting South
Sudan since 15 December 2013, when hell broke loose
and we began to experience what we are going through
today. I hope that my statement will be able to bring out
the issues that require the Council's attention in order
to sort out peacekeeping in today's world.

The performance of United Nations police has
clearly emerged as a critical issue for the success of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Police officers
are commonly seen in post-conflict settings, which are
dominated by military actors and continuing abuses of
civilian populations, as the bridge between transitional
or new Governments and civilians, as the return to law,
order andjustice is a much desired peace dividend. The
investment in the rebuilding of police institutions will
always be critical to effecting and maintaining true
public order, management and peace in conflict-torn
and fragile nations. We must endeavour to strengthen
that role in our peacekeeping operations and provide
the United Nations with police officers who are capable
within that arena. To achieve that, the following issues
must be addressed.

First, police-contributing countries must take a
closer look at selection, guidance, training and skills
selection before deployment to make sure that the needs
of peacekeeping operations are met. Secondly, we
must maintain host nation police and United Nations
police relationships without compromising the United
Nations principles of impartiality and while acting
within the requirements of the due diligence policy
with regard to human rights. Thirdly, partnerships with
regional organizations must be enhanced in setting
host nation police standards and developing mission
strategies. Lastly, Member States need to ensure that
police components are adequately equipped to do their
work and that policing and police-related activities are
firmly embedded in Security Council discussions, both
thematic and country specific.

Let me relate what is happening in South Sudan to
justify the statement I have just made. In South Sudan,
the following stand out as both immediate and long-
term policing challenges that will require the Council's
attention.

For the past 50 years, true policing has never been
genuinely offered to the South Sudanese people. United
Nations police are therefore taking on the mantle to
ensure that for the first time good policing - true
policing - is provided to the people of South Sudan.
Policing had largely been done by combatants and
former combatants, whose ethos and experience were
often those of a soldier in battle.

South Sudan is largely a pastoralist and nomadic
society. The policing models require special skills,
policies and equipment to enable United Nations
police to do their work effectively. While the
policies - for example, the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping - will
help harmonize the policing practices that United
Nations police personnel come with, the appropriate
equipment will greatly facilitate their ability to face
the daunting challenges of executing their work. For
example, we are policing a rebel community under the
conditions of a very high proliferation of arms, very
high illiteracy, high poverty levels, disease and extreme
levels of criminality: murder, rape, defilement and all
the big categories of crime. United Nations police are
in the middle of that kind of situation, and the Council's
support is going to be very crucial to make them
perform this role.

The events of 15 December last year ushered in a
crisis that has left over 100,000 internally displaced
persons stranded and taking shelter within Mission
sites. United Nations police require special training
and orientation, skills and equipment to cope with the
challenges of policing those sites, as mandated by the
Security Council.

The contribution of peacekeeping operations to the
building of policing institutions is limited in time. It
must be premised on clear benchmarks - for example,
improving basic law, order and security, which is a key
peace dividend, and laying the foundations on which
other partners will capitalize to continue with the
process of police development, which will help define
good exit strategies for peacekeeping operations.

Let me conclude by restating the strategic objective
of all peace processes, that is, bringing soldiers back
to the barracks and police officers to the streets. That
alone illustrates the need for the Council's unreserved
attention and support. In terms of equipment, we are
looking for basic equipment. We need mobile police
units that can be set up within five minutes in a situation
such as the protection of civilians. That is the kind of
equipment I am talking about. Even meals ready to eat
would be of great help for our police officers. Ifa police
officer wants something to eat, he can eat because it is
readily available.

