I, too, would like to thank the Special Representative, Mr. David Shearer; Mr. Mark Lowcock; and Ms. Nyachangkuoth Rambang Tai for their insightful briefings. I would like to emphasize three points in particular: the indispensable furtherance of an inclusive peace process, the continual increase in intercommunal violence and the response that must imperatively be given to humanitarian needs in South Sudan. France calls on the Transitional Government to continue its efforts decisively to implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The agreement on the allocation of gubernatorial and state positions of 17 June and the appointment of almost all of them are important steps forward. Those steps must be followed by the appointment of the governor of the Upper Nile and by the constitution of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly. France recalls that the full participation of women and youth must, in this regard, be effective and significant. Concrete progress must be made as well on the other chapters of the transition, particularly on the reform of the security sector and the fight against impunity, through the establishment of a hybrid court, but also on full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all citizens. Without justice and good governance, there can be no lasting peace. Furthermore, the continued fighting between signatory and non-signatory groups to the peace agreement, in violation of their commitment to respect the ceasefire, represents a grave threat to the peace process. Secondly, the increase in intercommunal violence, particularly in Jonglei, is an issue of major concern. The vicious circle of violence and impunity fuels human rights violations, in particular those targeting women and children. The increase in sexual and gender-based violence is unacceptable and must be met with a firm legislative and judiciary response. We welcome the adoption last February of the action plan on children affected by armed conflict and call for its full implementation. France calls furthermore on the authorities of South Sudan to observe a moratorium on the application of the death penalty with a view to its definitive abolition. In the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, France underlines the necessity for all actors in South Sudan to fully implement the ceasefire demanded by the Council in its resolution 2532 (2020). In that context, the efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) remain vital to ensure the protection of civilians located not only in protection sites but also outside of them. I would recall that UNMISS must be able to move freely in order to be able to implement its mandate. The full respect of the Status of Forces Agreement provisions must, in this regard, be ensured. As Mr. Lowcock recalled, the humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains dramatic and is only worsening. More than 1.6 million people have been forced to flee within their own country, and nearly 2.2 million have taken refuge in neighbouring countries. Hunger affects 6 million people in South Sudan. It is therefore urgent that all parties facilitate, in accordance with international humanitarian law, the swift, safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance. Moreover, the murders of humanitarian workers in Jonglei, Central Equatoria and Lakes are intolerable and must be investigated in order to fight relentlessly against impunity for such acts. I commend the responsiveness of UNMISS, which announced the establishment of temporary bases in the county of Lobonok in response to renewed armed attacks against civilians and humanitarian convoys. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, must be an absolute priority. Finally, I would like to recall the full support of France for all UNMISS personnel as well as for the humanitarian and medical actors present in South Sudan. Their courage and determination contribute, day after day, to peace.
