Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We join other delegations in welcoming
Ms. Carla Del Ponte and thank her for her briefing.

Russia supports the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and we call
for the appropriate punishment of those who have
committed war crimes in the course of conflicts in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia and of those who have
committed serious violations of humanitarian law in the
territory of Rwanda.

We believe that the work of the Rwanda Tribunal is
a substantial factor in the maintenance of peace and calm
in that country and in neighbouring regions. Sentences
handed down by the court are very important politically,
and they also make a real contribution to the development
of international criminal law. Russia supports the efforts
to deal with the organizational, financial and human
resource problems experienced by the Rwanda Tribunal,
so as to enable it to rapidly discharge the mandate
conferred upon it by the Security Council and play its
part in eliminating the culture of impunity.

 

We believe that the establishment of another Trial
Chamber will mean that the international community can
expect the Tribunal to act more swiftly in order to establish
a proper balance in its work and catch up, so to speak, with
the Yugoslavia Tribunal. We believe that considerable work
remains to be done to enhance the effectiveness of the
Rwanda Tribunal. In order to ensure the normal functioning
of that International Tribunal, we must continue to improve
its procedures, methods of work and structures, and deal
with the inadequate supply of qualified jurists and
administrative staff. We hope that the Prosecutor's
forthcoming Visit to Rwanda will help to achieve those
objectives.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, we firmly believe that its activities
must strictly comply with the mandate given it by the
Security Council and with the Statute of the Tribunal, the
Peace Agreement for Bosnia and the relevant decisions of
the Security Council. We support the demands made on all
States to comply with international commitments to
cooperate with that Tribunal. However, all problems
relating thereto must be resolved through direct cooperation
between the parties and the Tribunal, as set forth in
Security Council resolutions and in the Statute of the
Tribunal.

Indictees should not be detained without the consent
of the State in whose territory they are found, nor should it
result from the undue coercion of those States. We are
categorically opposed to sealed indictments. That practice
has occurred in connection with the Stabilization Force in
Bosnia; it goes beyond the mandate of such forces. The
practice should be brought to an end. Furthermore, we
believe that the practice should not take place with regard
to Kosovo and the Kosovo Force.

We have serious doubts about the propriety of the so-
called sealed lists of indictees. Such practices are contrary
to the Statute of the Tribunal and to its rules of procedure.
The authorities of the States concerned and the indictees
themselves are thereby deprived of the opportunity to
demonstrate that they are willing to cooperate with the
Tribunal. Every action taken to detain a person accused of
war crimes must be considered primarily from the point of
View of how it might affect international efforts to stabilize
the situation in the region and move the peace process
forward. We must not allow the work of the Tribunal to be
politicized; it must be governed by the letter of the law.

Unfortunately, in the recent work of the Tribunal there
have been serious instances in which this principle has been
allowed to slide. Examples include the indictment of the
leader of Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
and the arrest in Vienna, under a sealed indictment, of the
chief of staff of the army of the Republika Srpska, Mr.
Talic, who was participating in a seminar in Vienna at the
invitation of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Such decisions destabilize the
situation in Bosnia, Yugoslavia and, indeed, the entire
region, and are an additional hindrance to moving the
Bosnia and Kosovo settlement process forward.

As for the activities of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in Kosovo, they must
be objective and strictly in accordance with the decisions
of the Security Council, including resolution 1244 (1999),
and with the Statute of the Tribunal. The International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia must
actively investigate the scale of the atrocities committed
by Kosovar Albanian extremists against Serbs and other
non-Albanian peoples in Kosovo throughout the Kosovo
crrsrs.

So far, we have noted that the Tribunal has clearly
not been able to achieve objectivity, as to date it has
focused primarily on investigating crimes committed
against Albanians. We believe that this situation should be
corrected properly and rapidly, because otherwise there
will be grounds for accusing the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia of double standards,
which would certainly not enhance the effectiveness of
the Tribunal's work. We expect Ms. Del Ponte to take
due account of these matters of principle, and we wish
her every success in her work.
