Mr. Nqakula: I too would like to record my
appreciation and the appreciation of the African Union
and the Regional Initiative for the very constructive
observations and remarks that have been made by
members of the Council, and also to express
appreciation for the suggestions, as well as for the
promises of support to our facilitation efforts.

We appreciate the fact that there is an all-round
understanding by all of us of the need to complete this
process and thereby lay a foundation for conditions of
peace to prevail in Burundi. I once more wish to
indicate our desire to ensure that, in the first instance,
the facilitation process between the PALIPEHUTU-
FNL and the Government of Burundi continues and is
successful in its efforts. Secondly, we shall do
whatever is necessary to help the Government of
Burundi to overcome the various political challenges
that it faces, by respectfully submitting to it whatever
suggestions we may have as facilitators. This we shall
do on the authority granted us through the negotiations
process when, as we were defining the political
principles of engagement, it was first indicated that
we - as the Regional Initiative and the African Union
and, of course, through the facilitation - would
continue to be guarantors of the process for the search
for peace in Burundi until that had been achieved.

What that means to us is that our function will
obviously not end with the finalization of the
facilitation process. That accords with the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement. We would like to
be part and parcel of any effort, particularly the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission, that is designed to
ensure that the country as a whole continues in a
position where, in the end, programmes will be in place
for the development of Burundi. In other words, the
people of Burundi will be able to enjoy the fruits of the
democracy that they helped to usher into their country.

There are several things, therefore, that we will
do. When considerations are made with respect to the
way forward, we urge that we continue to be invited to
participate in any discussions to enable us to share our
own experiences with regard to the work we have been
able to do in Burundi.

We appreciate the fact that all have assured us
that the Security Council will also do whatever is
necessary to support our Initiative. Here, I want, once
again, to call upon the nations of the world to help us
finalize that programme, to help us deal with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
as the President of the Council has said, and to help us
deal with the political situation inside the country in
order for us to create the necessary atmosphere for
political engagement there on a level political playing
fields. We will do our part, as I have already indicated,
on the basis of the role that we were given. We will not
only negotiate peace on the basis of the defined
Ceasefire Agreement, but will also act on the basis of
advice and guidance from the political principles that
were negotiated and signed on 18 June 2006 by the two
parties. At that time it was indicated the kind of role
we would continue to play with respect to the
consolidation of peace in Burundi.

We also wish to make a strong call for continued
assistance in applying pressure to the leadership of the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL, not to define themselves as out of
this process, but to take their rightful position to lead
the process towards its finalization. It is therefore our
plea to all the nations of the world that they must speak
with one voice on this issue. If we did that, there would
be no recourse for the PALIPEHUTU-FNL leadership.
That might, therefore, put pressure on the peace
process, which can still easily be derailed.

Let me return once again to an issue that worries
us greatly. As I indicated in my initial statement, when
we went to the camps where the people who have left
their bases are, we found many children. It is our plea
that the international community assist us in dealing
with the issue of those children. For our part, we will
do whatever is necessary to ensure that a process under
the aegis of the Security Council is indeed begun, so
that we can deal with that question. In addition, some
people who have left their bases are ill, and we have
not been able to attend to all their medical
requirements. Sooner rather than later, the international
community should come in, so that it can assist with
that problem as well.

But we will leave this Chamber confident that the
nations of the world are going to assist us in finalizing
what is essentially only an initial step towards the
rebuilding of Burundi. In future, we shall rely a great
deal on the Peacebuilding Commission, as the nations
of the world define a process that must take Burundi
away from a past that has seen many of that country's
16

nationals massacred, to a position where everyone in
Burundi will derive the much needed benefits from the
political settlement that is beginning to develop. We
ourselves, who respect democracy and are particularly
keen to help countries emerging from conflict, will also
take up cudgels on behalf of those who want to build
peace in Burundi.

