Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
acceding countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the
Slovak Republic and Slovenia; the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey; and the countries of the
European Free Trade Association, members of the
European Economic Area - Iceland and Norway -
declare that they align themselves with this statement.

The European Union unequivocally condemns all
acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
irrespective of their motivation, form and
manifestation. The European Union believes that the
fight against terrorism requires a global response and
national preparedness in order to prevent and suppress
terrorist acts. We believe, however, that efforts to
combat this scourge must respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms, humanitarian law, as well as the
rule of law.

The European Union and its member States
recognize the central role of the United Nations in the
fight against terrorism and have been strongly
supporting the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
The European Union wishes to reiterate its appreciation
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee for its continued
hard work and dedication in achieving universal and
full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
enhancing the counter-terrorist capacities of Member
States.

We also would like to pay tribute to the Chairman
of the CTC, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for the excellent
work he has done. Under his guidance and advice, the
Committee has found its way to successfully deal with
the many challenges it faced and to chart a sure course
for the future. At the same time, we extend to his
successor, Ambassador Arias of Spain, our best wishes
for an accomplished turn at the helm of the Committee.

The European Union and its member States have
displayed a sincere interest in all endeavours
undertaken by the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
pursuing the fulfilment of its mandate. We would
particularly like to underline the Security Council
ministerial meeting on combating terrorism of 20
January 2003, and resolution 1456 (2003) calling on all
States to take urgent action to prevent and suppress all
active and passive support for terrorism. That
resolution also underlines the importance of technical
and other assistance to States in order to improve their
capacity to prevent and fight terrorism. In this respect,
it calls on all States to assist each other and invites the
CTC to step up its efforts to facilitate the provision of
such assistance by developing targets and priorities for
global action.

Resolution 1456 (2003) stresses the need for
closer cooperation between the CTC and regional and
subregional organizations in the fight against terrorism.
The European Union welcomed the convening of the
special meeting of the CTC with international, regional
and subregional organizations on 6 March this year. At
that meeting, the EU submitted a third report,
contained in document S/AC.40/2003/SM.1/2, detailing
the wide range of legislative and political measures
taken in the areas covered by resolution 1373 (2001).
The report also indicated that signature and ratification
of the 12 United Nations counter-terrorism conventions
is a matter of high priority for the EU member States,
which are committed to ratification through the
adoption of Council Common Position 2001/930/CFSP
of 27 December 2001.

The fight against the financing of terrorism
continues to be a priority for the European Union. A
number of recommendations have been adopted in
order to enhance the efforts of the European Union in
this field. In particular, the European Union has
strengthened its internal procedures so as to prevent
terrorist groups from obtaining or deviating funds that
are directed towards charitable purposes.

Furthermore, the EU attaches great importance to
international and regional cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. It has signed bilateral agreements
and developed cooperation mechanisms with third
countries. Anti-terrorism clauses are being included in
many EU agreements with third countries. The EU
actively supports and participates in the counter-
terrorism activities carried out in the Council of
Europe, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and various United Nations bodies, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In
addition, the EU has taken various steps to provide
technical assistance to third countries in their efforts to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). New projects have
been developed, specifically designed to help selected
countries to fulfil their obligations under the resolution.

Moreover, the European Union has adopted
measures in the field of police and judicial cooperation
in order to combat terrorism. The Framework Decision
on combating terrorism will provide member States
with a common definition of terrorist acts and terrorist
groups. Likewise, the European Arrest Warrant
provides for simplified surrender procedures between
judicial authorities of member States, based upon the
principle of mutual recognition ofjudicial decisions.

The European Union believes that possible links
between terrorism and organized crime and drug
trafficking merit close attention. An EU Council
Decision has been adopted recently to counter these
problems by placing specific emphasis on simultaneous
investigation. A joint Commission-EU Council civil
protection programme has been established to improve
cooperation in the European Union for preventing and
limiting the consequences of chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear terrorist threats.

The European Union also recognizes the role of
the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the Centre for
International Crime Prevention in strengthening the
capabilities of the United Nations in the prevention of
terrorism and in offering advice on the implementation
of both the pertinent Security Council resolutions and
the United Nations legal instruments against terrorism.

In addition, in order to reduce the risk posed
should certain terrorist groups gain access to weapons
of mass destruction, radioactive materials and means of
delivery, the European Union has taken concrete
measures in the field of strengthening the relevant
multilateral instruments on disarmament, arms control
and proliferation; improving export controls;
strengthening disarmament cooperation; and enhancing
political dialogue with third states.

Finally, the European Union is fully committed to
actively and closely cooperating with the United
Nations towards the common goal of combating
terrorism.

