Saint Vincent and the Grenadines extends its gratitude to Mr. Valentin Inzko for his briefing and his most recent report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2020/345, annex). We recognize his enduring commitment to his mandate and to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the objectives and conditions established by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council. We also thank Ms. Irena Hasie¢ for her informative briefing, and welcome all representatives to this meeting. We begin by expressing our concern over the coronavirus disease pandemic, which has already had a crippling effect on the world. In this regard, we acknowledge the preparedness of the political and institutional leaders to cooperate and coordinate their response to this crisis, as stated in the High Representative's report. We urge all parties to refrain from any divisive rhetoric that may hamper the response and have an adverse impact on the political environment. The novel coronavirus pandemic is a collective action problem that requires the unity and cohesion of all parties. As it relates to the Peace Agreement, we continue to encourage collaboration among the parties in accordance with international law, and emphasize the need for diplomacy. We further underscore the need for constructive dialogue among communities within Bosnia and Herzegovina. In order to achieve long-term peace and reconciliation among all persons of all communities, it is important that there be inclusive national ownership over the political and peace processes. Regrettably, the High Representative notes in his report that there has been no serious commitment to implementing the objectives and conditions of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council. We hope that the parties can break that deadlock. Finally, we call for greater representation of women, whose role in society can be neither dismissed nor diminished. The women and peace and security agenda must be brought to the forefront, and to that end we emphasize the need for gender justice in all spheres.
