Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): I welcome this
opportunity to speak in this debate. Since September
2000 the world has watched the violent degradation of
the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians with
disbelief and consternation and growing horror. One
thousand are dead and thousands more scarred and
maimed for life. Bitterness, suspicion and hostility are
widespread, where once the prospect of peace
permitted a cautious optimism and confidence in the
future.

The peace process set in motion at Madrid
10 years ago is now feared by some to be dead. It is
certainly in failing health, and we need to exercise our
best efforts to revive it. The immediate cessation of all
acts of violence, provocation and destruction is
essential. We have seen and we deplore the logic of
violence that gradually undermines the proponents of
peace, moderation and good will and fortifies the
advocates of extremism.

After 15 months of a cycle of armed intifada,
terrorism and violent repression, the space for
moderation has been drastically and dangerously
reduced. To bring an end to the violence, the first step
is to condemn terrorism and its practitioners loudly and
unequivocally. As my Foreign Minister, John Manley,
said on Thursday, Canada fully supports Israel's right
to security and understands Israel's need to defend
itself against terrorist attacks.

By their criminal acts, indiscriminate violence
and suicide bombings, the terrorists have undermined
confidence that peace and security are possible, and
they have done nothing to persuade others to support
their cause. Quite the reverse; they have undermined
the proponents of the peace process. Members of the
Palestinian Authority know this to be true. They and all
Palestinians must now do all in their power to end the
violence and dismantle the terrorist networks. In so
doing, they will enhance - not diminish - their
legitimacy.

At the same time, the use of force and the
absence of political engagement also undermine
confidence in the search for peace and reinforce
extremist views. Pursuit of known terrorists is entirely
justifiable. However, the excessive use of force and the
targeting of infrastructure as a quid pro quo for
terrorism are taking a heavy toll not only in innocent
unarmed bystanders, but also in the qualities of reason,
moderation and good will, which the pursuit of peace
needs now more urgently than ever.

We call upon the two sides to start immediately
on the speedy implementation of the recommendations
of the Mitchell report. Both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority accepted this report when it appeared last
May. In doing so, they recognized that the report
provided a road map for setting the peace process back
on course. This is as true now in December as it was in
May because the required elements of a stable peace
settlement are the same as they have always been.

Continued terrorist outrages and attacks on
civilians have further undermined confidence since the
Mitchell report appeared. The long-term objective
remains the same, and we, the members of the
international community, must do our utmost to help
persuade the Israeli Government and the Palestinian
Authority to resume discussion and cooperation. Peace
talks require partners. As Prime Minister Chretien said
on Thursday, Canada will continue to deal with the
Palestinian Authority as the legitimate representative of
the Palestinian people.

A monitoring mechanism agreed to by both sides
could assist in building the confidence necessary to
bring the parties back to negotiations and ultimately to
a peace settlement. The international community
recognizes the right of Israelis to live in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders.

The international community recognizes a need
for the establishment of a viable Palestinian State,
which can be brought about through those negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis, which we all agree
here tonight must be resumed without delay. The
international community ardently desires the
realization of both of these objectives and supports the
efforts of the United Nations and others to help restart
the peace process. Canada now, as in the past, is
willing and able to support efforts to resolve this
conflict.

