Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to first warmly congratulate you personally, President,
on the People's Republic of China's organization of this
high-level open debate. This is not a mere formality;
Spain welcomes the fact that the Chinese presidency of
the Council has afforded us all an opportunity to speak
on an essential issue that lies at the heart of our work.
We are called on to reflect together on pertinence of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the light of 75 years of experience, which
projects, like any human endeavour, both light and
shadow.

I would also like to express our gratitude for the
concept note before us (S/2015/87, annex), which is clear,
positive and courageous. It constitutes a motivating
guide for spreading our wings and abandoning the
difficulties of daily life, and gives us the perspective
necessary to turn a vital and indispensable common
goal into a reality - that of shared prosperity in a
safe and peaceful world. Your invitation is neither a
theoretical nor an academic exercise, which would be
inappropriate in this organ. It is about reaffirming the
commitment of each one of us to the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations with a
view to creating an atmosphere conducive to this year's
commemoration of its seventieth anniversary.

The simple and direct questioning of the concept
note deserves a clear answer. Spain is firmly committed
to the purposes and principles of the San Francisco
Charter. We consider them to be as valid today as they
were in 1945. The principles are the bases on which the
ongoing action required to realize the purposes is built,
because the purposes are not goals that, once achieved,
have been overcome. Instead, they require a sustained
effort to which we are all called to contribute. The
purposes are a daily challenge.

The purposes and principles should be read in
conjunction with the Preamble of the Charter, which,
with its catalog of inspiring values that guide the
actions of the United Nations, constitutes a sort of
ethical heaven. The triangle composed of the Preamble,
purposes and principles is an indivisible whole that
has not aged over time, as would a daguerreotype, but
instead has gained in resolution and validity.

The founders of the United Nations, with their
first-hand experience of the ravages of war, declared
themselves determined to preserve succeeding
generations from that scourge. To that end, they
charted a programme - a code of conduct that requires
constant reaffirmation. The seventieth anniversary of
the Organization is an ideal opportunity for all Member
States to renew the vows proclaimed in the Preamble
of the Charter and to express our commitment to its
purposes and principles. Spain encourages us all
to solemnly commemorate this occasion through a
universal declaration that reaffirms the validity of this
essential core of the Charter: the Preamble, purposes
and principles.

Although the foundation of the United Nations
edifice is solid, as is the land on which the United
Nations is built, the world in the second decade of the
twenty-first century has little do with that which arose
from the ashes of the Second World War. We live in
a much more mobile, complex and uncertain scenario
than that which prevailed after the last World War
times. The United Nations system has evolved from its
origins in order to meet the challenges of a constantly
changing world. It is also up to us now, one of the
future generations to which the founders referred, to
update the instruments that strengthen the roots, values
and purposes based on Article 2 of the Charter in
contemporary international society.

The 70 years that have passed were far from an
upward and straight path. It is true that humankind
has not been subjected to a new world war, with the
consequent threat to the survival of the planet. However,
the fact remains that local or regional conflicts have
erupted incessantly and more frequently. Far from
being satisfied, we must admit that, far more often
than we would like, our efforts have been frustrated.
We have not been able to prevent foretold conflict. We
have not always been able to facilitate or impose the
cessation of hostilities in instances where two parties
in conflict have resorted to the use of arms. We have
failed to consolidate fragile truces, and fires have
been rekindled from the ashes of violence, engulfing
countries and entire regions.

We must improve our performance in conflict
prevention, and the Organization has plenty of means
at its disposal to do so. The General Assembly,
Security Council and Secretariat can undoubtedly
establish guidelines for joint action that, respectful
of the principles of the Charter, can more effectively
serve the purpose of maintaining peace. Spain firmly
believes in the need to strengthen the instruments of
conflict prevention. The promotion of intercultural
and interreligious dialogue through the Alliance of
Civilizations and the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue; the development of mediation mechanisms,
such as that we are promoting in the Mediterranean
with Morocco, assisted by other friendly countries such
as Slovenia and Jordan; and the western Mediterranean
water strategy we are leading with Algeria are
multifaceted samples of our active participation in the
field of conflict prevention and mediation. The common
denominator of these initiatives is a determined effort
to create effective channels and mechanisms for
cooperation, understanding and tolerance, and to stop
fanaticism and violence.

The maintenance ofpeace must be based on a system
of relations among States and organizations based on
legally binding rights and obligations, whose ultimate
goal is the rule oflaw. There is no peace without respect
for the law. The United Nations system has been able
to gradually channel the yearnings and aspirations of
the members of the international community, including
smaller States. These wishes and aspirations are
increasingly being reflected in a legal system that is
evolving towards the realization of the rule of law at
the global level, based around the cornerstone of the
Charter of the United Nations as its cornerstone and
with full respect for the equality among the Members
of the Organization. This equality derives from the
principle of sovereignty, whose legitimacy rests, in
the words of Kofi Annan, in a conception of a States
as "instruments at the service of their people, and not
vice versa", and in an interpretation of sovereignty
that is faithful to the original meaning of the word,
which evokes a superior, not absolute, power. Since the
adoption of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, United Nations Members have made progress
in integrating human rights as an essential element that
informs and strengthens the exercise of sovereignty.

The San Francisco Charter established the
International Court of Justice and, decades later, the
Rome Statute heralded the creation of the International
Criminal Court. Other good news along the path of
these seven decades include the institutions created and
multilateral agreements signed in the field of human
rights and in international humanitarian law; the gradual
rise in conventional instruments of disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control; the development
and codification of international law enhancing lawful
security; and the progressive eradication of impunity
for mass atrocities and crimes against humanity.

We can go farther still. A certain amount of utopia
is necessary to make the world move forward. In this
spirit, we would like to highlight that the use of the veto
is one of the most significant obstacles to the practical
realization of the purpose of maintaining international
peace and security entrusted by the Charter primarily to
the Security Council. We are aware that the veto is part
of the constituent agreement that lies at the origin of the
San Francisco Charter. However, rigidly preserving an
arrangement that, as experience has shown, badly needs
updating does not resolve the underlying problem - the
lack of legitimacy of vetoes of draft resolutions seeking
to remedy large-scale killings and open spaces for just
and lasting peace solutions.

Given this belief, we support the French initiative
proposing a code of conduct whereby the five permanent
members of the Council would commit to refrain from
using the veto in cases where the commission mass
atrocities has been proven. We view that proposal, which
has also been supported today by New Zealand and
which has the advantage of not requiring amendment
to the Charter, to be a substantive way of advancing
towards the goal of eliminating a privilege whose
abuse harms the system and weakens its authority. In
that regard, I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union, in particular with regard to what it has to say
about the importance of respect by all members of the
United Nations of the principle of territorial integrity,
an idea which is taken up in the concept note issued by
the presidency.

In conclusion, 2015 can and must be an historic year
in the life of the Organization. The new development
agenda, the climate conference and the review of
peacekeeping operations are milestones that demand
responsibility and courage. In this context, the adoption
of a universal declaration renewing the commitment
of its Members to the values, purposes and principles
of the San Francisco Charter on the occasion of the
seventieth anniversary of its entry into force would
serve to breathe new life into a body that has aged
significantly and that needs to drink again from the
fountain that gave it reason for being.

If the twenty-first century is to be better for
humankind than the twentieth, it will depend on
the wisdom and will we can muster. We want and
need to build, on the basis of the solid foundations
of the Charter, a future that is more democratic and
better protects human rights under a more robust and
effective international legal order. This is an arduous
and inspiring task, which we owe it to our children and
future generations to achieve. Spain can be counted
upon in this endeavour.

