Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
welcome the Colombian Foreign Minister, Mr. Trujillo
Garcia, to today's meeting.

Atpresent, the overall situation in Colombia is stable.
The peace process has produced an early harvest. Crop
substitution and rural development have made progress.
At the same time, the full implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace continues to face challenges,
which requires the ongoing tireless efforts by the
Colombian parties and the international community.

Colombia experienced a long civil war. The
implementation of the peace agreement in a
comprehensive manner touches on numerous issues,
including politics, security, development and social
integration. It is therefore a system-wide project. China
hopes that all parties in Colombia will give priority to
the peace process, further broaden consensus, continue
to promote the full implementation of the peace
agreement, strengthen inclusive political dialogue
and accelerate socioeconomic reconstruction so as to
ultimately realize peace and development.

We have taken note of the recently emerged
divergent views held by certain Colombian parties
on the legislation on the mechanism known as the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We hope that the parties
concerned will step up dialogue and consultation to
facilitate the appropriate resolution of this issue.

China commends the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, and the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for
their work. We hope that the Mission will continue to
perform its duties as mandated, help the Colombian
parties enhance communication and build mutual trust
and push them to create synergies to jointly move the
peace process forward.

Together with other members of the Security
Council, China stands ready to make its contribution
to furthering the Colombian peace process and the
early realization of comprehensive peace, stability and
development in Colombia.

