Mr. Peleg (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on' your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I would also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, for the very able manner
in which he conducted the affairs of the Council.

Jerusalem has been the capital of the State of Israel
since its rebirth in 1948 and the seat of Jewish
Government since King David established it as the centre
of Jewish national life some 3,000 years ago. Jerusalem's
centrality to Judaism transcends geographical boundaries.
Three times a day, Jews at prayer around the world turn
to face Jerusalem. For 3,000 years, the thoughts, hopes
and prayers of the entire Jewish people have been focused
on Jerusalem. Indeed, the Bible mentions the name
Jerusalem 657 times.

Jerusalem is a city comprising many different
religious groups and has been a source of inspiration for
Christians and Muslims around the world.

I am a native of Jerusalem. I am of the generation
that remembers the divided Jerusalem that existed prior to
1967. .I remember the walls, and I remember the barbed
wire that divided my home city. Since 1967, I am proud
to say, Jerusalem has been reunited; it is an open city
where freedom of worship is extended to all faiths.

Jerusalem today is Israel's largest city, home to
578,000 residents. Of these, 411,900, or 71.2 per cent, are
Jewish and 166,900, or 28.2 per cent, are non-Jewish.
Since 1984, Jerusalem's population has grown 30 per
cent, and estimates show that by the year 2000,
Jerusalem's population will be greater than 650,000.

Jerusalem is a vibrant, vital city where 01d sits
astride new and the modern and traditional worlds
converge. Jerusalem, like any other modern city, has
specific needs, such as development and modernization,
and municipal services must be extended to all its
citizens.'

On 26 February this year, the Government of Israel
unanimously approved construction in Her Homa and in
Security Council 37451h meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

10 predominantly Arab neighbourhoods throughout
Jerusalem. The new neighbourhood of Har Home will
eventually consist of 6,500 housing units, 2,500 of which
will be built during the first stage of construction. The
neighbourhood will be located in an unpopulated area in
southern Jerusalem, within the city's municipal boundaries.
Seventy-five per cent of the land necessary for the Bar
Homa project is owned by individual Jews.

This project is an essential part of a comprehensive
municipal plan to construct 20,000 new housing units for
the city's Jewish residents and 8,500 for the city's Arab
residents -- a ratio comparable to that of the Jewish and
Arab populations in the city. Concurrent with the
constructionof Har Home, infrastructure work designed to
construct 3,000 housing units in 10 predominantly Arab
neighbourhoods in the city will begin. This construction
will take place in Beit Safafa, Arav a~Swakharra, Jebel
Mukhbar, Silwan, Ras al-Amud, Abu Tor, A-Tor, Asaviya,
Aswani and A-Sheikh.

The purpose of this comprehensive project is to
alleviate the shortage of housing for both Jewish and Arab
residents of Jerusalem. Allow me to quote the Prime
Minister of Israel, Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, who said,

"We are as committed to the Arab residents of
Jerusalem as we are to providing for the Jewish
residents. They, too, need housing and we will build,
adapting the building plans to the needs of both
populations."

Regrettably, some speakers fail to differentiate
between the issue of Jerusalem and its neighbourhoods and
the issue of settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Both of these issues are to be negotiated
separately ~- I repeat, separately -- within the context of
the permanent status negotiations.

The coming years will be crucial ones for the Arab-
Israeli peace process. During this time, it is upon the
international community to exhibit restraint, understanding
and trust in the determination of Israel and its neighbours
to advance the peace process. Moreover, the international
community must avoid damaging the sensitive negotiations
by predetermining and prejudging their outcome.

I regret that once again the Security Council sees fit
to discuss issues of contention between Israel and the
Palestinians. The very appeal by the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to the Security Council is inconsistent
with its explicit agreement to settle all issues under dispute

through negotiations. This commitment is outlined by
PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat in his letter to the late
Prime Minister of Israel, Yitzhak Rabin, dated 9
September 1993. The Chairman wrote that

"the PLO commits itself to the Middle East peace
process and to a peaceful resolution of the conflict
between the two sides and declares that all
outstanding issues relating to the permanent status
will be resolved'through negotiations."

This commitment is reiterated in both the
Declaration of Principles of 13 September 1993 and the
Interim Agreement of 28 September 1995, which refer
issues under dispute to the appropriate mechanisms of
coordination, cooperation and conciliation between the
parties without the involvement of outside parties.

Israel and the Palestinians are currently making
progress in the process of negotiation and reconciliation.
The peace process, based on the principle of reciprocity,
has thus far succeeded in establishing a new modus
vivendi between our two peoples. The most recent
expression of this peace process was the Hebron protocol
and the establishment of timetables for the resumption of
negotiation of the permanent status and the further
redeployment of Israel's defence forces in the West Bank.

In the agreement between the two sides, Israel and
the Palestinians agreed that the Palestinian autonomy
authorities have no powers or responsibility in Jerusalem.
Accordingly, their offices and institutions are to be
located only in those areas in which the Palestinian
autonomy enjoys territorial authority -- namely, outside
Jerusalem. It was explicitly agreed that the authority of
the Palestinian autonomy would extend over the West
Bank and Gaza, to the exclusion of those issues to be,
discussed in the permanent status negotiations, including
Jerusalem.

In agreeing that the issue of Jerusalem is to be part
of the "permanent status negotiations, the parties
recognized Jerusalem as a separate issue which does not
constitute a part of the agreed arrangement for
redeployment and transfer of authorities in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. Life'in Jerusalem, and all this entails,
continues, with the status of the city remaining unchanged
so long as no decision to the contrary is taken in the
permanent status negotiations. .

Therefore, the approval of building plans within
Jerusalem, or the implementation of any construction
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

work, does not constitute a change in the status of
Jerusalem; neither does it create a situation which can
adversely affect or influence the permanent status
negotiations. In any event, the existing agreements do not
accord the Palestinians any standing with regard to any
actions taken in Jerusalem, and Israel is under no obligation
to coordinate such actions with them or to consult with
them. -

Jerusalem is currently in the midst of an
unprecedented surge of planning. and development,
addressing the needs of all the city's residents. The
Government of Israel is committed to the continued
development and growth of Jerusalem for the benefit of all
of its residents. '

It is written in'the Book of Zechariah,

"Thus saith the Lord: I am returned unto Zion and
will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem There shall yet
old men and old women dwell in the streets of
Jerusalem And the streets of the city shall be full of
boys and girls playing in the streets thereof." (The Holy Bible, Zechariah 8:3-5)

Let us turn this prophecy into a reality.

