I thank you for this opportunity to present the Secretary-General's latest report on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region (S/2020/272). At the outset, at a time when our world is going through an extraordinary public health crisis, allow me to express my solidarity and offer my condolences to the Governments and the peoples of the Great Lakes countries, as well as to those elsewhere in the world, for the many victims of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The pandemic has not spared the Great Lakes region, where the number of contaminations is growing, albeit at a moderate rate compared to other regions in the world. To date, according to the World Health Organization, more than 4,766 cases and nearly 131 deaths have been reported in the region. While the capacity to contain the pandemic differs among the Member States in the region, approaches to limiting its spread are similar, including restrictions of movement, quarantine measures, social distancing, curfews, suspension of international flights and the closing of borders, except for the movement of cargo. At this stage, the measures seem to have enabled the region to curb the progression of the pandemic. However, on the economic front, the negative repercussions of the public health crisis are already significant. There has been an almost complete cessation of activities in critical sectors, such as air transport, tourism, agriculture and petroleum and other extractive industries. In the long term, the preventive measures, combined with the reallocation of resources to address the health crisis, are likely to weaken the already fragile economies, with possible implications for the peace, security and development of the region. I would like to congratulate the countries and institutions of the region on their diligence in taking actions to contain the pandemic, including measures to stimulate the economy, targeting vulnerable populations and the private sector alike. While encouraging, those measures should be bolstered. The countries of the region, some of which are emerging from decades of conflict, will need the steadfast and resolute support of the international community in order to deal with and recover, in a sustainable manner, from the pandemic and its consequences. I would like to express my utmost gratitude to the Secretary-General for his foresight, leadership and unwavering mobilization of the international community to foster greater solidarity in the fight against the pandemic, including through the alleviation of debt. I would like to welcome the decision of the Group of 20 to institute a debt moratorium until the end of this year, which should greatly relieve low-income African countries and thus help them, I hope, to strengthen their health infrastructure. I also thank the partners and donors who have already announced significant donations for the African continent. Like elsewhere, the pandemic has forced the countries of the region to redirect their priorities. That has affected the implementation of the Framework, resulting in the postponement of two major events, namely, the second Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference initially scheduled in Kigali, Rwanda, from 18 to 20 March; and the tenth Summit of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, which was to be held in Kinshasa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from 27 to 29 March. Despite these postponements, I continue to work with the signatory countries and the guarantor institutions of the Framework - namely, the African Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), as well as the Southern African Development Community - to maintain focus on the delivery of the events and to make further progress in the implementation of the Framework. In that regard, I would like to follow up on my first address to the Council in October 2019 (see S/PV.8630), which I delivered with a note of optimism. This optimism remains, given events that have occurred over the past year with positive implications for the region. They include efforts to stabilize the governing coalition following the peaceful political transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, progress achieved to normalize relations between Uganda and Rwanda thanks to the good offices of Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the formation of a unity Government in South Sudan and the diplomatic settlement by the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia of their border dispute. I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to Presidents Lourengo, Tshilombo Tshisekedi, Kagame and Museveni for their exemplary efforts to defuse tensions between countries of the region, in line with their commitments under the Framework. I strongly encourage them to sustain those joint efforts and would like to reassure them of my readiness to support them. Progress has also been made in the fight against armed groups operating in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the initiative of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there have been efforts to increase coordination and the exchange of information among the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda in order to optimize military operations against armed groups. In support of those regional efforts, in cooperation with the other guarantors of the Framework, I facilitated discussions among the heads of the intelligence services of Burundi, Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Tanzania. Those discussions enabled the countries concerned to identify non-military measures, including the proposal to establish a contact and coordination group, to complement the ongoing military operations against armed groups. That and other recommendations will be submitted for approval to the Heads of State of the region at the next summit of the Framework's Regional Oversight Mechanism. In the meantime, I would like to request the Council's support for such efforts to enable those countries to secure the necessary technical and financial assistance to implement the measures to be adopted by the Heads of State of the region. There has also been progress in the area of regional integration. On 3 December 2019, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Tanzania signed an agreement to build a railway linking the three countries so as to boost trade in the region. The next Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference, which my Office is organizing together with the ICGRL and the Government of Rwanda, under the leadership of President Paul Kagame, will also be an opportunity to promote such initiatives, as it will be held under the theme "Cross-border investment and trade as catalysts for regional integration". The conference will also be a good opportunity to promote the region's enormous economic potential through responsible investment, which should benefit the countries and peoples of the Great Lakes region. Despite that progress, there are still challenges, the greatest of which clearly remains the activities of armed groups, including the illicit exploitation of natural resources, undermining trust among the countries of the region. The resulting insecurity caused by armed groups, especially in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where civilians continue to pay a high price, is one of the main causes of the humanitarian crisis in the region. 3/30 4/30 [urge all armed groups to immediately cease their acts of violence and atrocities against civilians, not to hamper humanitarian access and to resolutely engage in the existing disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement programmes. I would like to reiterate that their crimes will not go unpunished. Ultimately, justice will be done. In that regard, I welcome the legal proceedings brought against the leaders of armed groups in recent years at both regional and international levels. Furthermore, I call on the Governments of the region to heed the appeal launched by the Secretary-General on 23 March for a global ceasefire in their ongoing efforts for peace and stability in the Great Lakes region. We must also continue to closely follow elections in the region, which have sometimes led to unrest in the past. I strongly hope that the upcoming elections, particularly in Burundi and the Central African Republic, will be an opportunity to strengthen democratic gains and stability in the two countries. I encourage all actors to ensure peaceful, inclusive and credible electoral processes. With regard to Burundi, I am pleased to inform the Council that, in collaboration with women leaders and civil society organizations of the region, my Office conducted an awareness-raising and outreach visit to Bujumbura in March, during which there were constructive discussions with the authorities and other stakeholders on promoting the greater participation of women in the electoral process. The Great Lakes region is currently facing challenges exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and the continuing Ebola epidemic. We must therefore redouble our efforts to support the States and peoples of the region to overcome the two public health crises and to consolidate the progress made so far in implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The fight against the pandemic could provide an opportunity to build greater solidarity and to strengthen regional cooperation. For my part, in collaboration with the guarantors of the Framework and international partners, I will focus on the following priorities in the upcoming months. The first priority is mobilizing the international community in helping the countries of the region to address the COVID-19 pandemic, which is hampering the implementation of the Framework and could have implications for the peace and security of the region. Secondly, we must support the ongoing facilitation processes and, where possible, foster new commitments to improving relations among the countries of the region, including through the greater involvement of women and young people. Thirdly, we must encourage regional security cooperation by promoting a comprehensive approach, with military and non-military measures, in combating armed groups. Fourthly, I will engage in regional and international discussions on the illicit exploitation and trade of natural resources by focusing on addressing barriers to the sustainable and transparent exploitation of such resources. Lastly, I will continue the necessary discussions on the convening of the next summit of the Framework's Regional Oversight Mechanism and of the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference. I know that I can count on the unity and support of the Security Council to assist me in implementing this road map in the coming months in support of the Great Lakes region, in accordance with my mandate.
