Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, for his briefing,
and I highly commend him on the efforts he has made
since assuming his duties in promoting the political
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Like previous
colleagues, we welcome and thank the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers, Mr. Terzie, for his statement.

China takes pleasure in seeing that, since the
Dayton Peace Accord was signed 11 years ago, with
the joint efforts of all parties concerned with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and with the help of the international
community, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made positive
efforts and achieved notable results in many areas,
such as constitutional reform, institution-building,
economic recovery, improvement of the judiciary
system, police reform, national conciliation and the
return of refugees.

The general election was successfully held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in October 2006. Furthermore,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has initiated the accession
process with the European Union (EU). Since assuming
its responsibility for security nearly two years ago, the
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made major contributions to the security, stability and
political processes in the country. China recognizes this
contribution, and we are happy to see the gradual
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into European
society.

It was not easy to achieve today's results in the
political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
hope that all parties concerned will doubly treasure this
reality. We hope that, with the assistance of the EU and
the international community, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to make progress in major areas, so as to
establish a more mature political system and truly
realize the harmonious coexistence and common
development of all nationalities, with the support of the
Office of the High Representative, to carry out close
consultations with the authorities of Bosnia and

Herzegovina and the United Nations Secretariat in
seeking to settle historically inherited issues, in
particular the issue of police and decertification.

China stands ready to join the international
community and continues making its own efforts to
help Bosnia and Herzegovina realize long-term
development and stability.

