Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
at the outset, Sir, to thank the Pakistan presidency for
having convened this meeting. We are honoured to
have you presiding over our debate.

This is an opportunity for us to discuss in the
Security Council a topic of ongoing importance and
relevance: the role of the Council in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. I wish to welcome and thank for
their participation the eminent personalities who have
joined us today.

Two weeks ago, under the Mexican presidency,
we had an opportunity to share our views on the role of
the Organization in post-conflict situations. Today we
are looking at the other side of the coin: the peaceful
settlement of disputes, in other words, principles and
mechanisms designed to counter or prevent recourse to
force.

One of the most cherished principles of the San
Francisco Conference, later enshrined in the Charter, is
the obligation of the Members to settle their disputes
by peaceful means, so as not to endanger international
peace and security or justice. This is one of the bases
of universal scope that underpin contemporary
international law. As a result, a State may not have
recourse to force, not even in the form of threats, to
resolve disputes in which its interests are affected, nor
is it permissible to fight to impose one's own solution
in a dispute.

It is true that the United Nations was crafted by
its founders, which included my country, as an
Organization primarily committed to maintaining and
restoring peace. This principle is in perfect harmony
with the key responsibility of the Security Council
under the Charter to promote and maintain
international peace and security.

Since the post-cold-war period, the international
community has seen a clear trend developing in the
Council to make greater and more effective use of the
mechanisms and means enshrined in the provisions of
Chapter VI of the Charter, with the help of the
Secretariat, the other organs of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies.

We have noted, also in harmony with that trend,
the crafting during that period of doctrines and
principles - based on the concept of preventive
diplomacy - aimed at enhancing collective
international action in this field. However, despite
these principles and standards and despite the efforts
made in recent years and the growing general
recognition of the importance of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the results we have obtained, as
we all know, are still far from satisfactory.

Mechanisms for the peaceful solution of disputes
set out in the Charter are often not respected and have
not been used as often or with the intensity and
effectiveness required. The practice of the Council
reveals that the maintenance or restoration of peace is
given pride of place over the resolution of disputes or
the prevention of conflicts. This is probably due partly
to the vicious circle resulting from the persistence of
many serious conflicts in various regions of the planet
that must be dealt with on an emergency basis.

The Security Council, as the organ charged with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has been entrusted, as
has already been said, with an important role in conflict
settlement. It has the power to investigate any disputes
or situation that might give rise to international
tensions or to a conflict. It can urge the parties, as
required, to resolve a dispute through the peaceful
means set out in Article 33 of the Charter. It may, at
any stage of a dispute that could endanger international
peace and security, once it has reviewed the means
already used, recommend suitable solutions or
arrangements. In doing so, the Security Council must
take due account of the general rule according to which
disputes of a legal nature should be referred by the
parties to the International Court of Justice. This is the
inescapable responsibility of Security Council and a
major political responsibility of its members.

The Council, in addition to promoting open
debate and discussions, should, on the basis of the
political will of its members, intensify the use of all
diplomatic means to resolve disputes, be it by
promoting direct negotiations, by urging parties to have
recourse to negotiations or to resume them, by offering
its good offices or by acting as a mediator.

Today, when it so generally asserted that the
Council should be reformed, it should be recalled that
the first reform should be the development of means
that enable us to discharge these responsibilities.

As we have heard this morning, this means
making use of the experience gained by the Council,
examining the roots and causes of conflicts and finding
remedies whenever possible, and dealing with disputes
an early stage, before they become a threat to
international peace and security.

Similarly, as international law requires, we have
to keep in mind the various procedures and methods for
the conflict prevention that are available to States
themselves, which have the primary responsibility for
the prevention of disputes. These include goodwill
missions, special envoys, observers, good offices,
mediation or conciliation, arbitration, adjudication, and
recourse to international organs or regional
arrangements, or any other method that is agreeable to
the parties to the dispute.

Along these lines, it is essential for the Council to
promote reliance on regional or subregional organs and
mechanisms to bring about the peaceful settlement of
local disputes. Our Latin American region has
experience in this field that is worthy of consideration.

The great North American George Kennan once
said:

"When we are full of uncertainty and unease
facing the often brutal development of history, it
is only by sticking to principles and believing
even more in them that we can be helped."

The principles that guide us and in which we will
continue to strongly believe appear in the many
resolutions and declarations adopted by this
Organization since its creation. Many of these have
been referred to this morning. These are the
instruments that are useful and relevant today when we
try to move towards a set of concrete proposals that
will genuinely improve the work of the Security
Council in this key field, which is of the greatest
relevance to the United Nations.

