Ms. O'Brien: Thank you for your welcome,
Mr. President, and for the opportunity to participate in
this debate. I am pleased to support your initiative to
bring this important issue to the Council for further
discussion. At the outset, I wish to acknowledge the
leadership that the Deputy Secretary-General has
shown on this matter.

My focus today will be on the rule of law at the
international level. Establishing respect for the concept
is essential, not just to establish or to maintain peace,
but also to enable sustained economic progress and
development. I hope to demonstrate how this legal
perspective has contributed to a trend towards an
international rule of law. In doing so, I will first refer
to those instances where the Organization reaches out
to the world and strives to contribute to the
establishment of an international rule of law. But I
would also like to draw attention to some less visible
aspects of the rule of law for the United Nations and,
more specifically, within the United Nations. In our
Organization, acting in conformity with legal
requirements is a constant and dynamic pattern that is
present in all our activities. In other words, respect for
the rule of law is, for the Organization, a goal to be
achieved every day.

We live in an age in which international law is no
longer the exclusive domain of international courts and
institutions. The links between the individual, the
10-42676
nation State and the international community are now
inextricably connected. International law issues are
increasingly being considered by national and regional
courts. This evolution goes even beyond national and
regional courts: international law has become part of
our everyday lives. Its basic principles contribute
essentially to the empowerment of each individual. The
personalization of international law, in which more and
more rights are vested directly in the individual, is now
a reality. Everyone should have access to the tools
enabling him or her to understand international law, to
invoke it and to contribute to its development.

An important aspect of the rule of law at the
international level refers to the codification of
international law and legal obligations, as well as to
the implementation of and compliance with these
obligations, whether they arise from treaties or
customary international law. This concept is rooted in
part in the multilateral conventional framework largely
developed under United Nations auspices. For the past
decade, the Secretary-General has been providing
special facilities for States to sign or ratify treaties of
which he is the depositary through an annual treaty
event held during the high-level segment of the
General Assembly. This event has proved a catalyst for
encouraging wider participation in the multilateral
treaty framework.

The concept of rule of law also translates into
initiatives to promote the application of international
law through technical assistance to Member States. We
have developed a significant number of training
initiatives and publications encompassing several
branches of international law. But more needs to be
done. This is particularly true in post-conflict
environments. Another practical way to make tangible
the concept of rule of law at the international level lies
in our ability to encourage the teaching, study,
dissemination and wider appreciation of international
law. The development of the United Nations
Audiovisual Library is an essential outreach tool of our
time, both for demystifying international law and for
making it more accessible, better understood and closer
to the individual.

I take this opportunity to highlight the work of a
less obvious, but very important, area of our
endeavours, that of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), which is the
core legal body within the United Nations system in
the field of international commercial law.
UNCITRAL's work on unifying and harmonizing
international commercial law has played an important
role in laying the basis for the orderly functioning of
an open economy. Effective commercial law plays a
supportive role in addressing root causes of many
international problems, such as migration caused by
impoverishment, inequality and internal conflicts, or
inequitable access to shared resources. Next week,
UNCITRAL will host a panel discussion, to be opened
by the Deputy Secretary-General, that will analyse the
impact of commercial law and commercial activities on
the rule of law. Such a thematic debate is rare in the
United Nations, where the traditional focus in the
context of the rule of law has been on human rights,
criminal law and international public law.

The Charter envisages a system of settling
disputes peacefully before intractable conflict
situations arise. The General Assembly, the Security
Council and the International Court of Justice all have
a responsibility to contribute to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. However, the fullest use has not always
been made of the organic link between these bodies
and the procedural means made available to them by
the Charter to coordinate and complement their
respective action.

In 2006, the then President of the Court recalled
both Article 33 of the Charter, under which the
Security Council may call on the parties to settle their
disputes by means that include judicial settlement, and
Article 36, paragraph 3, which provides that in making
recommendations for the settlement of disputes,

"the Security Council should also take into
consideration that legal disputes should as a
general rule be referred by the parties to the
International Court of Justice".

In doing so, she invited the Council to bring these
tools to life and to make them a central policy of the
Security Council. I take this opportunity to encourage
members of the Council to follow up on this
recommendation. I would also encourage those States
that have yet to deposit declarations accepting the
jurisdiction of the Court to do so, and to do so as
unconditionally as possible.

Another essential component of the rule of law at
the international level is, of course, the struggle to end
impunity for international crimes. International
criminal justice has recently emerged as a powerful,
resonant and effective voice in this new age of
accountability. The Council has amply emphasized the
importance it attaches to the responsibility of States to
comply with their obligations to end impunity and to
prosecute those responsible for the most serious
crimes.

Justice is a nation's choice. The primary role of
national jurisdictions in the prosecution of crimes has
been thrown into greater relief as international justice
has evolved and as the International Criminal Court in
particular has become operational. The principle of
complementarity is the bedrock of international
criminal justice.

International justice mechanisms, whether
permanent or ad hoc, are not intended to supplant
States where there are organized criminal justice
systems that are willing and able to ensure that there is
accountability for the crimes concerned. They are not
substitutes for national mechanisms. Thus we see that,
within the statutes of the international criminal courts
and tribunals, there is ample room for the exercise of
national jurisdiction.

Any discussion on the rule of law at the
international level should address the ongoing issue of
Security Council sanctions regimes. These regimes
perform a necessary role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In so doing, it is
critical that, as with any decision of the Council,
sanctions be adopted in accordance with international
law, consistent with the objectives enshrined in the
Charter.

Over the past years, the Council has put emphasis
on setting out and strengthening the international legal
framework and norms for addressing these issues.

The recent adoption of resolution 1904 (2009)
reflects the significant effort to address the rights of
due process and, in particular, that of an effective
review of decisions. The establishment of an Office of
the Ombudsperson is an important step by the Security
Council towards ensuring fair and clear procedures for
individuals and entities listed by the Committee. We
will follow with great interest how the interaction
between the Ombudsperson and the Committee on the
one hand, and between the Ombudsperson and the
petitioners, on the other, works in practice. Much may
depend on how the Ombudsperson's observations will
be dealt with by the Committee. It will also be
instructive to see what impact resolution 1904 (2009)
and its implementation will have on the jurisprudence

of national and regional courts seized with relevant
cases.

No discussion regarding rule of law and the
United Nations would be complete without addressing
the system for the internal administration of justice,
particularly since we are about to reach the first
anniversary of the new system.

For 60 years, the internal mechanism for
resolving employment disputes consisted of review by
a peer review body composed of staff members,
followed by a review by the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal. The new system called for by
the General Assembly in 2005 has introduced two tiers
of judicial review. This became operational on 1 July
2009. The Dispute Tribunal has issued over
200 judgments to date. By the end of this week, the
United Nations Appeals Tribunal will have already
convened two sessions this year and reviewed over 60
cases.

The reform of the United Nations internal system
of administration of justice was achieved in a
remarkably short period of time, demonstrating the
capacity of Member States, management and staff to
act swiftly and in a coordinated effort. The new system
stands as a milestone in strengthening the commitment
of the Organization to the rule of law, justice and
accountability.

The concept of the rule of law in the United
Nations embraces the most classic and fundamental
principles of the international legal order and allows us
to use these principles to face the most urgent and
contemporary concerns of the international community.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for this initiative,
which will no doubt assist the Security Council - and,
through it, the international community at large - in
discharging its special role of promoting and
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

