Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
begin by congratulating the Nigerian presidency of the
Council for convening this important meeting. Allow
me to also thank Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General
of the World Health Organization; Dr. David Nabarro,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Ebola;
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden on
behalf of the Chair of Peacebuilding Commission;
and especially Ambassador Te'te Antonio, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.

I would like to especially welcome the participation
of Dr. Mosoka Fallah, who spoke directly from Liberia,
a country that has been so heavily affected by the Ebola
epidemic. I thank him very much for sharing his direct
experience of the epidemic with the Council.

We acknowledge the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2177 (2014), which declared the
Ebola crisis to be an international threat to peace and
security, as that decision helped to highlight awareness
of the epidemic and to increase international assistance
to Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. We also commend,
and express our gratitude to, the Secretary-General for
his efforts to help generate impetus for donor events
that have helped raise much-needed funds to combat
Ebola in the West Africa subregion. We also extend our
gratitude to the Member States, financial institutions
and international and regional organizations that
supported this initiative and showed solidarity to the
affected peoples and communities.

Resolution 2177 (2014) calls for support to affected
countries in intensifying prevention and response
activities, as well as the dedication of adequate
capacity to prevent future outbreaks. Such measures,
combined with the efforts of the Secretary-General's
high-level panel on the global response to health crisis,
as well as the ongoing reforms at the World Health
Organization - which Dr. Chan has again outlined
here this morning, especially the recommendation
that it develop a global health emergency work
force - have the potential to safeguard against future
threats to international peace and security in the form
of epidemics.

We highlight the African Union Peace and Security
Council initiative to establish the African Union support
mission for the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, which
is a concrete example of how regional organizations
can play a central role in responding to crises in their
respective geographic areas. We also commend the
adoption by African Health Ministers of the statute of
the African Centre for Disease Control and Prevention,
at Malabo in July.
The daily progress in curtailing the spread of
the disease gives us hope that the Ebola outbreak is
coming to an end and the economies of the affected
countries will again be on the right track, so that the
bright prospects they had before the outbreak will
finally become a reality. From the thousands of lives
lost in 2014 and 2015, Ebola cases have fallen to an
encouragingly low level: two cases total in Guinea and
Sierra Leone, which brings us to a zero-case reality.

Although the Ebola outbreak is not the only threat
to peace and security on the agenda of the Council, it is
nevertheless a relevant study of best practices on how
lessons learned can be used in future. In particular, the
lessons learned from the international community's
collaborative efforts can be adapted to establish ever-
more innovative and flexible partnership arrangements
that draw on our respective strengths and help build
and consolidate peace and stability, not only in Africa
but in conflict areas around the world.

Another lesson learned from the Ebola outbreak is
that, similar to the more mainstream threats of terrorism
and violent extremism, contemporary challenges to
international peace and security require early and
timely intervention, cannot be contained within
borders, will proliferate if there is weak infrastructure,
require regional approaches and close collaboration
with civil society and will nullify any efforts that are
not inclusive, thus making it harder to find durable
solutions.

Thanks to the commitment of the international
community and determined leadership at the national,
subregional, regional and international levels, the Ebola
outbreak has been contained. That is a major success
that we can collectively celebrate and learn lessons
from. This meeting of the Security Council is another
important contribution and an opportunity for us to
take stock and remain vigilant to respond effectively,
and avoid, future outbreaks of disease that pose a threat
to human security at the international level.

