Mr. Konishi (Japan): Japan attaches great importance
to the positive role of the United Nations in restoring peace
and stability and in enhancing the protection of human
rights in Sierra Leone following the reinstatement of the
legitimate Government of President Kabbah in March. On
behalf of the Japanese delegation, I should like to express
my particular appreciation in this regard to Mr. Francis
Okelo, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. I wish
also to commend the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and its Military Observer Group
(ECOMOG) for their efforts to restore peace and security
in West Africa.

Having said that, I must also express the profound
concern of the Government of Japan at the continued
resistance by the remnants of the ousted junta and members
of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and the serious
Violations of international humanitarian law which they are
committing against the civilian population of Sierra Leone.
Reports of the violation of the human rights of children are
especially disturbing, particularly since the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, recently recommended
that Sierra Leone be the focus of a pilot project responding
to the needs of children.

It is important that soldiers relinquish their weapons
and be reintegrated into society. Indeed, the process of
disarmament and demobilization being pursued by the
Government of Sierra Leone towards that end is essential
not only for the restoration of peace and security but also
for the economic and social recovery and development of
Sierra Leone.

Japan's support for the draft resolution before us is
based on its understanding that the role of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) is
to monitor the disarmament and demobilization process on
behalf of the Sierra Leone Government and ECOMOG, as
well as to provide the necessary support for the
maintenance of peace and security in the region. We
believe that UNOMSIL, building upon the work of Special
Envoy Okelo and in coordination with ECOMOG, will
provide the most effective means of fostering the
normalization of the situation in that country. We would
also welcome the deployment of ECOMOG to monitor the
border area between Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Finally, let me say a word about the deplorable delay
in the delivery of humanitarian assistance in the face of
the increasing numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons, due to the deterioration of the security
situation in the country. Japan, for its part, has responded
to the flash appeal by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), contributing
as much as it can to help alleviate this situation. We
strongly hope that humanitarian relief activities can be
carried out effectively in the coming rainy season so that
a further deterioration of the situation can be avoided.

Japan also welcomes the Secretary-General's
initiative to convene a special conference on 30 July to
assist in the reconstruction and rehabilitation process in
Sierra Leone. Japan is ready to take an active part in that
conference.

The people of Sierra Leone have suffered severe
hardships for far too long. Japan sincerely hopes that their
suffering will be alleviated and that they can soon begin
to enjoy the fruits of peace and development.

