Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to Mr. Guehenno for his
comprehensive briefing.

The Russian Federation is deeply concerned by
developments in Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro. The
sudden outbreak of violence in March, caused by
extremists in that province, laid bare the deliberate
policy of ethnically cleansing the non-Albanian
population of Kosovo, particularly the Kosovo Serbs.

Russia has repeatedly warned against the danger
of such a development. Nevertheless, this alarming
trend, which has gained in urgency in recent years,
was, unfortunately, not adequately responded to by the
international presences in the province. Today, it has
become definitively clear that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
should have been more decisive from the very outset in
stopping the extremists among the Kosovo Albanians
from acting to establish a mono-ethnic society.

The main reasons for this situation are clear: the
failure to implement Security Council resolution 1244
(1999); the desire of a number of participants in the
Kosovo settlement to indulge in wishful thinking; and
the attempt to inculcate high democratic standards in
the province without taking the real situation into
account.

The current crisis requires the most serious
analysis of events and major adjustments to the future
strategy for a settlement. We cannot pretend that
nothing serious has happened. Promoting the process of
creating standards in Kosovo without addressing the
problems that have emerged as a result of the events of
17 to 20 March is unacceptable. We need above all a
thorough investigation into the incidents and to
prosecute the instigators of the pogroms, as well as all
those who aided and abetted them or facilitated through
their inaction, particularly since many of these people
are well known. It is important to establish tighter
control over the activities of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in the province and to
provide for the effective collection of illegal weapons,
large amounts of which remain in the hands of the
extremists.

We believe that, in the light of those events, all
the talk about a timetable for the final status of Kosovo
is highly inappropriate. Frankly, we were surprised
recently to hear statements about the need to accelerate
talks on the status of the province, which is being
virtually cast as a recipe for normalizing the situation
there. We are convinced that, on the contrary, this
approach would lead to further complications and
actually encourage new pogroms and ethnic cleansing.

We were genuinely puzzled to hear the statement
made on 9 April by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Holkeri, to the
effect that the Security Council had previously
endorsed the date for the consideration of the question
of the future status of Kosovo. Obviously, this is a
distorted interpretation of the contents of the Security
Council resolution on the review mechanism for
standards implementation in the province, as set forth
in the presidential statement of 12 December 2003.

As we have said before, the logic of a Kosovo
settlement in no way includes the hasty imposition of
the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan, as has
been done without prior submission of the Plan to the
Security Council, as required in the presidential
statement to which I referred. We are convinced that
the Plan requires thoroughgoing revision. There is a
substantial need to reinforce its provisions in the areas
of providing equal security, freedom of movement and
the rights and freedoms of ethnic minorities. Efforts
must be made to restore direct dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina.

At the same time, it is important to begin joint
consideration of options for a long-term normalization
of the situation in Kosovo. A key element of such work
should be the thorough consideration of the idea of
decentralizing the administration of the province in
order to provide solutions that take the interests of all
Kosovo communities into account and that, through the
necessary institutional guarantees, create - in deed
and not in words - conditions for their coexistence in
a multi-ethnic, democratic society.

Russia is providing assistance to the civilian
population of Kosovo that has been driven from its
homes, and we are prepared to engage in very close
cooperation with our partners in the Contact Group and
the Security Council, as well as with the European
Union, in order to put a swift end to the tragedy in the
Balkans and to move the situation towards the context
defined in Security Council decisions. It is most
important that joint efforts be made consistently and
comprehensively to implement resolution 1244 (1999),
which remains the sole legal basis for a Kosovo
settlement.

We hope in this regard that the most serious
conclusions will be drawn from what has occurred,
allowing us to avoid double standards and to focus the
attention of the international community on a just
settlement of the Kosovo problem, which is so crucial
for Europe.

