The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
March, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Joschka Fischer, Vice-Chancellor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany, for the leadership he
provided in presiding over important deliberations of
the Council during the preceding month.

I should also like to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council to His Excellency Mr. Gunter Pleuger,
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of February 2003. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Pleuger for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait

Note by the Secretary-General (S/2003/232)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (Spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hans Blix,
Executive Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Blix to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. ElBaradei to take a seat at the
Council table.

I welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/232, which contains a note by the
Secretary-General, transmitting the twelfth quarterly
report of the Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission.

I should also like to call the attention of members
of the Council to a letter dated 3 March 2003 from
Malaysia addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/2003/246.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

I give the floor to Mr. Hans Blix, Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission.


