Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, my delegation would like to thank you for
convening this public meeting, and we would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report to the
Council on the ways it could help resolve the matter of
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons. I
would also like to express our appreciation to the
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, for introducing the report to us.

Since 1999, in parallel with the preparatory
process for the Conference to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was held in July
2001, the Security Council has been engaged in taking
up the issue of proliferation of such arms, particularly
in the context of conflict situations that are on its
agenda.

The illicit manufacture of and trafficking in small
arms and light weapons is a multidimensional problem.
It encourages organized crime; it promotes a culture of
violence; it prolongs and worsens conflicts that take an
unacceptable number of civilian victims, primarily
women and children. Thus a comprehensive strategy is
needed to control and eradicate that situation.

It is necessary to join efforts in combating the
illicit trafficking in and production of small arms and
light weapons, and the producing and exporting
countries must recognize that they have a primary
responsibility. Mexico participates in all regional and
international efforts to eliminate the illicit trade in and
manufacture of small arms and light weapons.
Accordingly, my country is party to the Inter-American
Convention Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and
other Related Materials, adopted by the Organization
of American States in 1997. Mexico is also party to the
Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

In reviewing the progress made in implementing
the 12 recommendations mentioned in the presidential
statement of October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/30), the
Secretary-General describes various activities
undertaken in this area. He highlights the fact that the
Working Group has now started negotiating an
instrument to enable States to trace illicit small arms
and light weapons in a timely and reliable way. During
the Working Group's recent second session the
Mexican delegation reiterated its belief that a legally
binding instrument is needed, not simply to ensure that
it is effective as we move towards our goal, but also
because that would set a positive precedent for later
negotiations on other issues relating to small arms and
light weapons in the United Nations.

The Secretary-General also refers to the need to
redouble efforts to apply other recommendations, such as
increasing interaction in this area between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. We believe such
interaction to be essential in taking a comprehensive
approach to dealing with this phenomenon.

Mexico believes that we should focus more
closely on the issue of brokers. They are referred to in
passing in the Programme of Action, but their activities
must be subject to strict controls. The most recent
estimates show that brokers play a critical role in the
trade in small arms and light weapons. The lack of
attention paid to illegal actions by such individuals
derives to a large extent from gaps in national and
international regulation.

My country therefore believes that one
fundamental element in controlling the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons would be to negotiate a
legal instrument regulating the transfer of such arms.
The main manufacturers and exporters must be subject
to precise rules that would prevent the transfer of small
arms and light weapons that could be diverted onto the
illegal track or that could fall into the hands of criminal
gangs and those who violate international law. Such
provisions would have to be applied with no negative
impact on lawful transfers that enable countries to
exercise their legitimate right to self-defence, as set out
in Article 51 of the Charter.

One of the several measures that we consider
important is ensuring that all lawful arms transfers to be
accompanied by end-users certificates, in accordance with
the Secretary-General's recommendation 9.

Another matter of particular importance for my
country is the need to regulate the possession by
civilians of small arms and light weapons. Mexico
expressed this concern during the 2001 United Nations
Conference on the illicit trade in small arms. My
country believes that a discussion of this matter at the
international level would enable States to share their
experiences in effectively controlling civilian
ownership of weapons.

Mexico attaches great importance to the work of
the Security Council on this matter. We believe that it
should join with other United Nations organs and
relevant regional, subregional and international bodies
in working to implement the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

It is clear from the report of the Secretary-
General that the international community, in particular
the Security Council, has taken steps that demonstrate
its commitment to tackle this problem. But we still
need new instruments and strategies to enable us
effectively and completely to eradicate the illicit
manufacture of and traffic in small arms and light
weapons. We hope that this meeting will prompt the
undertaking of commitments that have been postponed
for too long.

