Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Francois
Lounceny Fall and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
their informative briefings that have contributed to
our meaningful discussion today. We also underscore
the President's excellent stewardship of the Security
Council this month.

Kazakhstan recognizes the importance of the
work of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) in preventive diplomacy and
mediation, as well as the support it provides to regional
and subregional organizations to achieve lasting peace
and stability.

We express our deep concern at the violence
perpetrated by armed groups in the Central African
Republic against civilians, peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers. We also strongly condemn the
increasing incitement of ethnic and religious hatred
and violence. We note the important role of the African
Union and the Economic Community ofCentral African
States (ECCAS) in promoting peace and reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. We fully support the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, which is an essential tool
in stabilizing the country. We highlight the regional
dimension of the conflict in the Central African Republic
and therefore believe that the further strengthening of
political and financial obligations on the part of regional
guarantors and international partners will increase the
effectiveness of this mechanism. Providing coordinated
support to the Central African Republic authorities
and its political process is important for any future
resolution of tensions.
The unrelenting atrocities committed by the
Lord's Resistance Army in the subregion and their
subsequent negative impact on the civilian population,
especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, remain the biggest
threat to the peace and security of the entire region.
We stress the importance of regional and international
support for the African Union Regional Task Force,
especially in the context of the security vacuum, which
has been exploited by the Lord's Resistance Army and
other armed groups in order to intensify their criminal
activities. We commend the decision of the African
Union Peace and Security Council to maintain the
African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative for
the Elimination of the Lord's Resistance Army, and we
also call on the African Union and international partners
to provide renewed support for this mechanism.

The security and humanitarian situation in the Lake
Chad basin deserves urgent attention. The terrorist
attacks and destabilizing activities of Boko Haram and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have caused
large-scale loss oflife and the displacement of civilians,
with a devastating humanitarian impact. In this regard,
we welcome the recent validation of the regional
strategy of the African Union and the Lake Chad
Basin Commission for the stabilization, recovery and
resilience of the areas of the Lake Chad basin that have
been affected by the actions of Boko Haram. In view of
the urgency of the situation, we encourage international
partners to speedily disburse their pledges.

The States of the region have encountered
unprecedented challenges in combating terrorism. We
must therefore support UNOCA's outreach to coordinate
the activities of regional organizations in the fight
against terrorism. The challenges posed by widespread
violent extremism and the continuing threats to cross-
border security and crime are exacerbated by the illicit
influx of small arms and light weapons throughout the
region. We welcome the outcomes ofthe first Conference
of the State Parties to the Central African Convention
for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components that can
be used for their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly,
including its decision to establish a secretariat with
a trust fund. This Convention contributes to Agenda
2063 of the African Union and the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative and creates a framework for Africa to
meet the Sustainable Development Goals. It is important
for countries that have yet to ratify the Convention to
do so at the earliest opportunity in order to boost its
implementation and facilitate resource mobilization.

Despite the existing problems in the region, we
note the commitment of countries and efforts aimed at
increasing subregional integration and ongoing reforms
to strengthen democratic governance by facilitating
the electoral process, in order to ensure peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections. Still, much work remains
to be done to implement confidence-building measures,
consolidate the gains achieved and make progress
towards the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union's strategies and
programmes, in particular Agenda 2063 and Silencing
the Guns by 2020, which should be carried out with the
support of the international community.

UNOCA is therefore playing a coordinating role
as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, thereby making an invaluable contribution. It
is important that the African Union, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and the United Nations continue
to work towards formulating and implementing a
well-coordinated regional strategy and finding the
root causes of the crisis, which are transnational and
transboundary. At the same time, to be effective and
streamlined, the United Nations must deliver as one,
with a strengthened security and development nexus for
more enduring political and socioeconomic stability,
together with a robust approach involving regional
collaboration and the engagement of influential
countries and leaders in the region.

Upon the completion ofits term as an elected member
of the Security Council for 2017-2018, Kazakhstan is
stepping down at the end of this month. We were deeply
committed to Africa, as we see its great potential as a
rising leader in the world's economy in this century.
We see its great promise, as well as its problems. Even
though this is the last meeting on UNOCA and the Lake
Chad basin during my delegation's term in the Council,
we will continue to address and support Africa in
overcoming the threats that it faces. We offer our
solidarity to help the region achieve the great objectives
it has set for itself. Kazakhstan will continue to work
through the General Assembly and other forums to
accomplish the vision of the African continent and
its people.
