Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you to New York,
Madam President, to preside over this open debate on
the issue of children and armed conflict. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro, Special Representative
Coomaraswamy, Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and
Executive Director Veneman of UNICEF for their
briefings. I should also like to thank former victim and
child soldier Grace Akallo for her moving statement.

The Security Council has defined six grave
violations against children by parties to armed conflict:
the recruitment and use of children in violation of
international law, the killing and maiming of children,
rape and other grave sexual violence, abductions,
attacks on schools and hospitals, and the denial of
humanitarian access to children. All six violations
against children should be accorded equal attention by
the Security Council. We support the various
endeavours of the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to promote the protection of children
in armed conflict. In that regard, I would like to stress
the following points.

First, it is the common task of all the relevant
organs of the United Nations to protect children in
armed conflict and to ensure that they return to normal
lives in the aftermath of conflict. Therefore, an
integrated approach and a joint response are needed
from the Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council, the Economic and Social
Council and other relevant entities. As far as the
Security Council is concerned, it should work from the
perspective of conflict settlement to protect children
from the harm of armed conflict by focusing on
conflict prevention and the elimination of the root
causes of armed conflict. In recent years, the escalation
of tension in some conflict areas has subjected local
children to severe hardship, whereas positive progress
in peace processes in other areas has brought hope for
the future of local children. That shows that the
Security Council should concentrate more on conflicts
themselves and focus its efforts on conflict prevention.

Secondly, in protecting children in armed
conflict, it is necessary to respect the Governments of
the countries concerned and encourage them to play a
major role. Resolution 1612 (2005) stresses that the
Government of the country concerned bears the
primary responsibility for protecting its own children.
In carrying out their work in protecting children,
parties concerned should cooperate fully with the
Governments of the countries concerned in a joint
effort to keep children from the harm of armed
conflict. The Security Council and its Working Group
should maintain frequent communication with the
Governments of the countries concerned, acknowledge
and support the positive measures they have adopted
and continuously strengthen mutual trust with them.

Thirdly, the Security Council should continue to
work to improve the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The monitoring and
reporting mechanism has now been established in all
the countries listed in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/158). Since the main task of
that mechanism is to collect information, it is
necessary, in its operation, to enhance communication
and cooperation with the Governments of the countries
concerned. The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict has done a great deal of work since its
inception, which is a source of satisfaction to us. We
hope that the Working Group will strengthen
cooperation with the Governments of the countries
concerned, address the relevant issues through
consultations and submit practical and viable
recommendations to the Security Council. The
Working Group is heavily burdened with a huge
workload. We therefore hope that it will set clear
priorities and improve its efficiency.

Efforts by the Security Council alone are far from
sufficient to address the question of children and armed
conflict. We welcome a more important role for
regional organizations in dealing with this question. In
addition, we encourage international institutions such
as UNICEF and the World Bank to play a greater role
in helping the countries concerned to prevent the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We also
welcome greater contributions from non-governmental
organizations.

China is concerned about the long-term effect of
armed conflict on children and deems it necessary to
take long-term measures to help children affected by
armed conflict to reintegrate into society and resume
normal lives. In post-conflict reconstruction, the
international community should make the return of
children to homes, schools and society a priority and
provide adequate financial guarantees for that purpose.

China attaches great importance to the protection
of the rights and interests of children. Having ratified
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, it has become a State party to the Protocol. We
call on countries that have not yet done so to join and
ratify the Protocol. It is our hope that, through our
common efforts, the situation of children in armed
conflict can be effectively improved and that all
children can look towards a better tomorrow.

