Mr. Kasuri (Pakistan): I should like to begin by
conveying condolences, on behalf of the Government
of Pakistan and on my own account, to the Government
and the people of the United States on the tragic loss of
the space shuttle Columbia and of the lives of the seven
astronauts.

Germany is presiding over the Security Council at
a critical moment for international peace and security.
Your stewardship of the Council at this historic
meeting, Mr. Foreign Minister, will not only elevate
our proceedings but also ensure that they will be
productive in moving us towards peace.

Allow me to join my colleagues in thanking
Secretary of State Colin Powell for his important
presentation to the Security Council. We welcome the
continuation of the United States initiative to work
through the United Nations in seeking the elimination
of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Paragraph 10
of resolution 1441 (2002) requests all Member States
to give full support to the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
the discharge of their mandates. We believe that the
information provided today by the United States is in
response to the provisions of resolution 1441 (2002).
Other States possessing such information should also
share it fully with the Council.

The extensive and effective presentation made by
Secretary Powell has provided the Council with
considerable additional information. It will add to the
knowledge base of Council members and, even more
important, to the effectiveness of UNMOVIC and the
IAEA in carrying out their mandate. This information
will enhance the ability of the inspectors to address
areas of concern and to pursue more specific lines of
action in the inspection process. We therefore believe
that this is a significant step forward in responding to
the challenge that the Council faces in securing the full
implementation of its resolutions regarding the
elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. We
hope that the concerns raised by Secretary Powell will
receive credible answers from Iraq in the inspections
process.

The Security Council has already held detailed
discussions on the reports of Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei, presented to the Council on 27 January.
We agree with Mr. Blix that Security Council
resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002)
impose a clear obligation on Iraq to declare its
weapons of mass destruction and to allow unhindered
verification that those weapons have been destroyed
and eliminated.

Following the last briefing to the Security
Council by Mr. ElBaradei and Mr. Blix, the head of
UNMOVIC, the majority of the Security Council was
of the view that full verification of the Iraqi declaration
would require more active cooperation from Iraq. We
share that view. In that regard, Mr. Blix has asked the
Iraqi Government to take three steps in the context of
his forthcoming visit to Baghdad: first, to allow free
and unrestricted aerial surveillance, including by
manned and unmanned reconnaissance vehicles;
secondly, to agree to private interviews of Iraqi
scientists, without the presence of minders; and,
thirdly, to adopt legislation prohibiting the acquisition
and local production of weapons of mass destruction.
Iraq should move swiftly towards meeting these
requirements, and should respond to the specific
concerns on substantive issues raised by Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei.

Resolution 1441 (2002) envisages that
UNMOVIC and the IAEA will submit reports to the
Council on Iraq's cooperation. The briefings by
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei to the Council on 27
January were not meant to be conclusive. We believe
that we should await their conclusions, positive or
negative. Under resolution 1441 (2002), what the
inspectors' report is to constitute is the essential basis
for the judgement that the Security Council is supposed
to make regarding Iraqi compliance.

The international community is justified in
seeking to bring about the earliest possible compliance
by Iraq with the Council's resolutions prescribing the
elimination of its weapons of mass destruction. At the
same time, as the primary organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council must bear in mind other imperatives.

The first imperative is to ameliorate the suffering
and ensure the welfare of the Iraqi people. They have
suffered too much for too long; they should not suffer
any more. The second is to preserve the unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq. Any erosion of Iraq's
integrity could have devastating effects on regional and
global peace and stability. The third is to preserve the
political and economic stability of the region, including
through the resolution of other outstanding issues and
conflicts in the area, including the dispute in South
Asia over J ammu and Kashmir.

In a statement issued this morning in Islamabad,
the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mir Zafarullah Khan
J amali, stated that

"The Muslim umma, from the shores of the
Atlantic to the Pacific, is deeply worried that war
may break out, and is worried about its
implications not only for the people of Iraq, but
for the future stability and polity of the Islamic
countries. At this time the need for inter-
civilizational harmony has never been greater".

The Prime Minister went on to say that

"A heavy burden has been placed on the
international community, particularly on Security
Council members and on Iraq, to take timely,
effective and adequate steps to surmount this
challenge to peace and stability. To avert a
disaster and tragedy for the Iraqi people, Pakistan
calls upon President Saddam Hussain to do his
utmost and to put the Iraqi people first. It is
imperative that President Saddam weigh all
options, to save the people of Iraq from death and
destruction on an unprecedented scale".

I would like to conclude by saying that at this
critical moment Pakistan wishes to reaffirm its
determination to act, within and outside the Council, on
the basis of the principles of the United Nations
Charter, which include the pacific resolution of
disputes, the full implementation of Security Council
resolutions, the promotion of the well-being of people
and the preservation of international peace and
stability.

