Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I, too, would
like to thank Special Representative Haile Menkerios
and President Benjamin Mkapa for their
comprehensive and useful briefings on the current
situation in the Sudan. I would also like to join others
in thanking the representatives of the African Union,
the Ambassador of the Sudan and the Minister from the
Government of Southern Sudan for sharing their
perspectives on the situation with us.

As other colleagues have mentioned, we have
witnessed events that have far-reaching significance, not
only for the people of the Sudan but also for the region
and, indeed, for the entire African continent. A very
large number of eligible voters - 97.58 per cent -
participated in the referendum, and an overwhelming
number of those voters - 98.83 per cent - raised their
voice in favour of separation. For the organization of a
fair and transparent referendum, our thanks are due to
the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and to the
international organizations involved, in particular the
United Nations - as well as, of course, the European
Union, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and others partnering the
Commission.

Most importantly, the leadership shown by
President Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva Kiir
is to be complemented, because without their political
will and cooperation the process could not have run as
smoothly and peacefully as it did. We are glad that
President Al-Bashir welcomed the results on 7 February
as the will of the Southern Sudanese people. We also
welcome First Vice-President Salva Kiir's statement that
the referendum was not the end of the road, and that he
will cooperate with Khartoum to build strong relations.

The conclusion of the referendum process is only
a milestone, albeit an important one, on the road to the
full implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) in the Sudan.

Enormous challenges lie ahead. A number of
issues remain to be resolved, including citizenship, the
status of Abyei, popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states, border delineation and
demarcation, the division of resources and security
arrangements. In this context, we are encouraged by
the meeting held in Khartoum on 27 January between
President Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva
Kiir, along with President Thabo Mbeki. Their
agreement to promote sustainable peace and stability
between the North and the South, to let the CPA
institutions continue their work until the end of the
interim period, to continue with the work of the
Technical Committee on Border Demarcation, and to
resolve the status of Abyei is most welcome.

The efforts of the Sudanese parties need to be
supported by the international community. We should
look beyond the referendum and assist the parties in
their nation-building exercise. Sustainable peace and
stability can be firmly established only when the
development needs of all of the people of the Sudan
are met. The fragility of the situation was demonstrated
once again during the past week. More than 50 people,
including a United Nations staff member, were killed
in clashes between Southern and Northern soldiers
from the joint integrated unit from Malakal in Upper
Nile state.

There are also several fault lines in Southern
Sudan. Indeed, even as we deliberate here today, we
have received news of the killing of a minister of the
Government of Southern Sudan. While this was
reportedly due to an issue between the personalities
concerned, it does point to the security challenges in
the region. We therefore believe that unless the
pending issues are resolved expeditiously and the
process of building governance and economic
development institutions is accelerated, conflicts along
those fault lines remain a real danger.

India has some 3,000 troops in the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and has contributed six
Mi-l7 helicopters. The Sudan is the largest recipient of
lines of credit from India, with projects totaling nearly
$1 billion. India is the second largest investor in the
Sudan. For capacity-building in civilian sectors, India
offers more than 150 slots every year under the Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme and
20 post-graduate and doctoral scholarships for student
from both North and South Sudan. In July last year, we
offered fellowships in Indian agricultural universities
for four PhD and six MSc courses to the Sudan under
the India-Africa Action Plan.

India stands ready to further enhance its
assistance to the Sudan, as may be required by the
Governments of the Sudan and Southern Sudan. We
urge the international community to increase its
support to the Sudan in the areas of debt relief,
economic investment and assistance so that Sudanese
leaders have material resources as well as public
support for dealing with and surmounting the
challenges they face.

Last but not least, the situation on the ground in
Darfur is not much better than the last time the Council
discussed the issue. While there has been some
encouraging news about the two rebel groups deciding
to send their teams to Doha, we have yet to see a
breakthrough. The Council should therefore reiterate
its demand that all armed groups agree to an immediate
ceasefire and participate in the Doha peace process
without delay or conditions so that the process may
reach its successful conclusion. We commend the
Government of Qatar for its sustained efforts in favour
of the success of the Doha peace process for
sustainable peace in Darfur, which includes all sections
of society. We welcome the efforts of the Government
of the Sudan to start a Darfur-based political process
that would build on the outcomes of the Doha peace
process. In this context, we commend the efforts of the
High-Level Implementation Panel led by President
Mbeki, and welcome the 31 January declaration of the
African Union on the complete normalization of
relations between the international community and the
Sudan.

