Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy associates itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union by the
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg.

We strongly support the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held in Bonn from 9 to 10
December 1997, which sets the stage for further progress
in the peace process in Bosnia. Since the last Peace
Implementation Conference in London, and thanks also to
the tireless efforts of the High Representative and his
office, it is fair to say that progress has been made.

To consolidate these achievements and make the
peace process irreversible, the international community
should take a careful look at the future. It is now up to
the parties to show renewed determination to respect the
conunitments they have freely entered into, and work
toward the full stabilization of the country and the region.
In this respect, we note that, thanks also to the action of
the High Representative, earlier this week the Bosnian
parliament adopted two of the three laws agreed upon in
Bonn. We also welcome the provisional entering into
effect of the law on citizenship.

In our view, improvements are needed in the
following areas.

First, the common institutions must function
properly. The elections held in Bosnia since 1996 have
favoured a trend toward a more pluralistic political
scenario. Consequently, the enhancement of political, civil
and media freedom, and the establishment of pluralism in
opinions and political parties must become priority
objectives. The ultimate goal should be political
stabilization through a continuing series of democratic
elections supervised by the international community.

In this context, respect for human rights and the rule
of law are the basis for all societies that intend to grow
towards prosperity and development. We trust that the
parties will commit themselves to protecting and
promoting these basic rights and be firmly committed to
ensuring respect for them in every sector of society.

Secondly, fostering good relations with and between
neighbouring countries is crucial to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement. But special relationships between
the entities and other countries should be in full
compliance with the Dayton Agreement. In this context,
I would like to recall Italy's assistance to the Bosnian
Presidency of the Central European Initiative in 1997,

 

which only a few weeks ago successfully organized this
year's summit in Sarajevo.

The maintenance of an international military presence
in Bosnia after the Stabilization Force (SFOR) mandate
expires in June 1998 is essential to ensuring security and
stability in Bosnia and the region. Italy therefore welcomes
the consensus that is emerging on this need. We are ready
to work with our partners on identifying the best possible
options. We believe that a presence led by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) continues to be
necessary and must have as broad a participation of
countries as possible. In this regard, we warmly welcome
the announcement made yesterday by President Clinton that
the United States will keep its troops in Bosnia. Let me
also stress that nobody, nobody can deny the extent of
Europe's current commitment, both in military and
economic terms. Italy, which is contributing many troops to
SFOR, will certainly continue to play its part, also in the
eventual multinational follow-up force.

My country is one of the major contributors of
emergency assistance and reconstruction aid to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We believe that an effective use of reconstruction
funds may prove crucial to fostering and consolidating
peace. Aid must be used as a catalyst to ensure genuine
reconciliation. Economic assistance should also be seen as
a way to encourage democratization in the whole region.
Conditionality does not mean penalizing or discriminating
against one or another party: it means encouraging everyone
to take a positive attitude towards the peace process. These
criteria should be applied to every aspect of the peace
process, such as respect for human rights - how
fundamental is respect for human rights, especially there -
the return of refugees, media restructuring, and the fight
against corruption.

Another essential aspect of the peace process is full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. It is our strong hope that the parties
will translate their commitments into effective and concrete
collaboration.
The Council is in the process of renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is playing a crucial role in stabilizing the country,
especially the restructuring of law enforcement institutions,
through the International Police Task Force (IPTF), to
which Italy already contributes personnel and to which it
intends to allocate additional funding. In the context of the
peacekeeping operation in Bosnia, the IPTF has the
essential function of reassuring the civilian population and
paving the way toward national reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence. We welcome the Secretary-
General's intention to expand the Force's areas of
operation to key public security issues, such as financial
crime, smuggling and corruption, and judicial reform. The
IPTF's activities are of a long-term nature. We share the
Secretary-General's assessment that this progress is still
fragile, and therefore the Mission's engagement in Bosnia
will be needed for a long period to come. In this regard,
we agree that future security arrangements should be
carefully considered since they impact on the IPTF's
ability to function effectively.

Italy fully supports the draft resolution before the
Council, which it co-sponsored.

To conclude, allow me to assure the Council that my
country will continue its commitment to contribute to
international efforts aimed at restoring peace, security and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region as a
whole.

