Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): We thank
the Angolan presidency for the opportunity to speak on
the important issue ofpreventing and resolving conflict
in the Great Lakes region. As Goal 16 ofthe Sustainable
Development Goals clearly indicates, peace and security
are indissociable from governance and development.
As the citizens of the Great Lakes region know, poor
governance, poverty, inequality, discrimination against
women and the inadequate management of natural
resources can all have destabilizing effects. Canada is
deeply concerned about the shrinking political space
and lack of respect for constitutional term limits in
certain countries in the region and elsewhere. As we see
today in Burundi, States that do not allow for open and
inclusive political dialogue, respect for human rights or
constitutional rule cannot sustain peace.

(spoke in English)

Canada also expects countries to ensure that
inevitable changes of leadership be timely, democratic
and peaceful. In the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo,
Canada is concerned about the social, economic and
political risks entailed if elections are not held as per
the Constitution of that country. Canada encourages
all actors to work together to overcome the political
impasse through a national consensus that reflects the
will of the Congolese people.

Regional organizations and the private sector
have a critical role to play in addressing the region's
challenges. Organizations such as the African Union,
the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region are important
partners in facilitating agreements, such as the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, to
resolve conflicts in the region. Socially responsible
private sector investment, particularly in the extractive
sector, can form the basis for inclusive growth that
benefits all citizens and communities and promotes
sustainable peace. It is also important to remember
that women and girls are often agents of stability and
resilience within their communities, as well as voices
for moderation and peace.

Canada is committed to addressing the intertwined
challenges facing the region. Through its development
assistance, Canada supports inclusive and accountable
governance, the empowerment of women and the
protection of their rights and sustainable growth.
Canada also champions the establishment and
safeguarding of responsible mineral supply chains to
prevent conflict and ensure that companies, countries
and communities can benefit from development of
the region's mineral wealth. Only by addressing these
challenges can the countries of the region prevent and
resolve conflict. Canada remains committed to working
with our partners to advance peace and prosperity for
the Great Lakes region.

