Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I would
also like to welcome to the Council Mr. Andronius
Azubalis, Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania. We agree

with the priority actions that he announced and we
congratulate him on his attention to further
strengthening the ties of cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE.

The 56 participating States of the OSCE have the
same goals in the areas of regional security, human and
economic development and respect for human rights.
The Astana Summit, held early in December 2010,
reaffirmed those common objectives and created new
avenues for cooperation.

The OSCE and the United Nations can be
complementary in many areas, as Mr. Azubalis has
said. Transborder threats, the fight against organized
crime, energy security, counter-terrorism, freedom of
expression and freedom of the media are all challenges
that are also engaging the United Nations. In addition,
the Secretary General of the OSCE will present the
OSCE's activities in the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee next week, as a concrete example
of exchange and cooperation on an issue of common
interest.

Our two organizations also have much to
exchange in order that their efforts in some regions are
integrated. The Lithuanian Foreign Minister just
mentioned Afghanistan, which is a neighbouring
country to several OSCE participating States, where
the organization is putting in place border-monitoring
operations. In the Balkans, the OSCE continues to
support the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo. Central Asia is also an important
area of operations for the OSCE, which has five
missions there. Its grasp of the local terrain has made it
able to effectively respond to the crisis that shook
Kyrgyzstan in June 2010, working with the United
Nations and the European Union. The Lithuanian
chairmanship would like to devote efforts to the fight
against transborder threats in Central Asia. We support
that regional initiative, which could be coordinated
with efforts by specialized international institutions.
We especially support strengthening cooperation with
the United Nations conflict prevention centre.

However, the OSCE and the United Nations have
seen some of their common efforts thwarted. For
example, the missions of both the OSCE and the
United Nations were forced to abandon Georgia after
the war in the summer of 2008, even though their
presence was bolstering stability. The situation in
Georgia remains a source of concern, especially in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as well as in the whole
Caucasus region. We therefore call upon all actors in
the region to refrain from any action that might
destabilize the current fragile equilibrium. We will
pursue our efforts in the Geneva discussions to work
towards a peaceful settlement of the Georgian dispute.

The situation in Belarus has also been a source of
particular concern for us since the presidential
elections in December. We have witnessed attacks on
freedom of the press and on basic principles of
democracy, with a number of opposition figures having
been arrested. The decision of the Belarusian
authorities to close the OSCE office in Minsk is
contrary to the values of the organization, to which
Belarus itself has agreed. Together we must therefore
call upon that State to respect human rights, and more
specifically civil and political rights.

The OSCE covers a vast area with shared values
that should be preserved and strengthened. It represents
a unique model of cooperation, based on the conviction
that the security of Europe goes hand in hand with the
promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. In that connection, we welcome the Lithuanian
chairmanship's commitment to promoting journalistic
pluralism, to stopping hate crimes and to promoting
human rights. Participating nations have undertaken
significant commitments, such as protecting the
territorial integrity of States, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and rejection of recourse to the threat or use
of force. We should all stand firm in those principles;
indeed they are fundamental principles of our own
Organization.

As an OSCE participant, we would like to see it
develop ties with other regional organizations and
international organizations, as well as with the
European Union (EU). Cooperation with the EU is
already very good and could be further strengthened.
Like the OSCE, the European Union is indeed present
in the Balkans, the Caucasus and Central Asia, where it
plays an important role. Hundreds of European judges,
police and other law enforcement officials have been
deployed to the region to strengthen local capacity. The
more interaction among different regional
organizations - each with different experience and
specific expertise - the more we can work together to
be of use to countries that will benefit from our
presence. We wish Lithuania a very successful
chairmanship of the OSCE and we hope that we can
continue to strengthen and deepen cooperation between
our two organizations.

