Mr. Kodama (Japan): Japan firmly believes that
the rule of law is the basic concept in the maintenance
of international peace and security, and that it plays a
pivotal role in preventing international disputes and
finding peaceful solutions to them. In that regard, Japan
continues to attach great importance to the role of the
international courts, such as the International Court of
Justice, the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea and the International Criminal Court (ICC).

The ICC in particular plays an important role in
the maintenance of international peace and security
through punishing and preventing the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a
whole. Since this year marks the tenth anniversary of
the entry into force of the Rome Statute, it is very timely
that we should review the achievements of the ICC over
the past 10 years and consider the future development of
the ICC. On this very day, my Government is hosting a
symposium in Tokyo on the ICC, with the participation
of the ICC Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, in
commemoration of its tenth anniversary.

Japan notes with appreciation that the ICC has
started its full activities, exemplified in its very first
judgment in the case of Thomas Lubanga in March this
year. On the other hand, one of the major challenges
the ICC has faced in its 10-year history is how to bring
justice to war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in the territory of a non-State party to the
Rome Statute. In that regard, the ICC experienced
the cases of Darfur and Libya,whose situations were
referred to the ICC by Security Council resolutions.
Japan appreciates those decisions of the Security
Council and its positive collaboration with the ICC.

Acts of violence and oppression against innocent
civilians and other serious violations of human rights
in Syria must not be tolerated in the context of the rule
of law. It is totally with reason that there is a call for a
referral of the situation in Syria to the ICC. However,
the essential problem lies in the regrettable fact that
the Security Council is divided in how to deal with the
grave problem of the current situation in Syria and has
failed to respond in an effective manner. Japan strongly
calls upon the members of the Council to recognize
their duty as members of an organ with the primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security.

The ICC is a body working to bring justice based
on the rule of law. But decisions made by the Security
Council, whose primary role is to maintain international
peace and security, are rather political in essence.
Therefore, if the Council refers a situation to the ICC,
it is not for purely legal reasons. Still, Japan believes
that the Security Council should give due consideration
to handing down justice not only from the viewpoint
of contributing to a peaceful solution on a particular
situation, but also as a deterrent of future crimes.

It is also important that the Security Council
continue to be duly engaged even after its referral of a
situation to the ICC in order to make the referral truly
effective. If a lack of cooperation on the participation
of the Security Council results in a failure to indict
a perpetrator of serious crimes, it undermines the
credibility of both the Council and the ICC. I would
like to point out that once the Security Council makes
a decision of referral, its members bear the moral
responsibility to cooperate with the ICC, even if they
are non-States parties to the Rome Statute. Japan
expects that the dialogue and cooperation will deepen
between the Security Council and the ICC in general
and on the financial implications of referral as well.

Japan, as the leading contributor to the ICC,
expects that the Court will further contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security as a
more effective, efficient and universal organ. Japan
therefore calls upon all States parties to fully cooperate
with the ICC in accordance with their obligation under
the Rome Statute, and also encourages all non-States
parties to accede to the ICC expeditiously. Japan is also
determined to continue its efforts to promote accession
to the ICC by other countries, in particular those in the
Asia-Pacific region, by extending assistance for the
development of legal systems and human resources.

