Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): I am
pleased, Mr. President, along with offering you my
sincere congratulations, to tell you how proud my
delegation is to see you bringing the mark of African
leadership to the Security Council during this month of
August 2006, a month replete with threats, particularly
due to the current upheavals in the Middle East.

In reiterating to you the unswerving support of
your friend and brother, Cheikh Tidiane Gadio,
Minister of State, who, because of urgent duties was
unable to be with us today, as he would have wished, I
should like on behalf of my delegation to congratulate
you and, through you, your country, Ghana, so dear to
my country, on the very timely choice of the theme of
the discussion which brings us together today. I should
like to convey respectful greetings to the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Qatar and of Cote d'Ivoire, to the
Secretary-General in the Ministry of State in charge of
Foreign Affairs of Guinea, to the Executive Secretary
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa, and to pay tribute to
them for their outstanding contributions to this
discussion. I am grateful to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Council for having authorized me to
address you on behalf of my country, Senegal.

After decades of deadly upheavals that have beset
a number of countries in West Africa, the subregion
seems recently to be experiencing a return to social
peace. Today, this normalization is to be seen in
Liberia, in Sierra Leone and in Guinea-Bissau, which
once seemed to be caught in an endless spiral of
violence. In Cote d'Ivoire, a country which was known
as a friendly, hospitable and stable country, the process
of national reconciliation is now taking shape. Thus,
the subregion is now enjoying favourable conditions
where the diligent support of the international
community would help to finally ground West Africa in
a positive process of peace and common prosperity.

In order to achieve this noble objective, we must
take the steps required by this favourable situation. I
will now merely refer to four of these steps. The first
step relates to consolidating confidence-building
measures. In countries of the subregion that are
emerging from conflict, where peace remains
precarious and fragile, special attention needs to be
given to the effectiveness of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
This exercise should include, to the extent possible, the
integration into State institutions, including the army,
of elements coming from various factions. That is
particularly crucial because peace cannot be reduced
merely to a cessation of hostilities and the conclusion
of an agreement. Peace, above all, means cultivating
mutual trust and undoing attempts to take recourse in
violence. Clearly, the implementation of this strategy
can work only with the substantial support of
international donors and the full involvement of the
new Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations
Office for West Africa (UNOWA), and the specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations.

The second step involves speeding up the process
of integration. The efforts of ECOWAS to integrate
member States must be strengthened. Achievements
already made in this area are many and encouraging
and are reflected at the ECOWAS level by an abundant
juridical and institutional framework. Among other
achievements, I would refer to the treaty that
established the Community and its various protocols,
in particular, the one relating to the Mechanism for

06-46 124
Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security, established in Lome in
1999, and the one relating to Democracy and Good
Governance, adopted in Dakar in 2001.

The work of consolidating the achievements of
the Community must take place through a proactive
campaign so that peoples of the subregion internalize
the ideals of ECOWAS and so that all States conform
without delay to the spirit and the letter of the
Community's rules. In this campaign, civil society and
non-governmental organizations have a decisive role to

play.

The third step is to promote the security-
development tandem. More robust struggle is required
to deal with the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. The illicit circulation of these weapons
encourages the appearance of criminal gangs, either
domestic or foreign, whose evil deeds undermine the
very foundation of States and render fragile young
nations under construction.

On this subject, I would recall the danger posed
by mercenaries, a phenomenon that was strongly
denounced a little less than three years ago in this very
Chamber by Minister of State Gadio during an open
debate on that question (see S/PV.4720). In order to
ward off the danger of small arms and illicit light
weapons and by their users, in 1998, ECOWAS
adopted the Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa, which has now become the Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, their Ammunition and
Other Related Materials, supported by the Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development, which benefits from support from the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The
support of the international community for this
programme is still needed to improve this vital sector
of Community security.

But, make no mistake, poverty causes Violence,
as reflected in the shocking, unbearable image of
young West Africans, overwhelmed by despair and
forced to take set sail on the waters of the Atlantic
aboard makeshift boats seeking some hypothetical
better life. For many of them, the odyssey ends in
tragedy. This distressing phenomenon is a reminder to
our partners of the need to establish with West Africa
more effective cooperation to convince young people
that life is also worth living in their own countries,
which are so rich in economic possibilities.

Finally, the fourth step involves consolidating
democracy and the rule of law. Efforts at the State level
must be continued to further develop a democratic
culture and the rule of law. All sectors of national life
must participate in this sacred endeavour, primarily
schools, civil society, non-governmental organizations,
opinion-makers and the media.

With regard to the media, journalists need to be
better trained and ethics committees must be
established to avoid a situation where, because of
irresponsibility or negligence, tension or conflicts are
created, with devastating effects. Another participant in
the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law
should be the justice system which must be free and
independent in a society where citizens who believe
that their rights have been violated are able to have
recourse to an ombudsman or to a State mediator in an
environment where executive, legislative and judicial
branches coexist and are strictly independent.

The normalization of the political situation in
ECOWAS countries should not be considered to be
irreversible - far from it. If we consider the classic
case of Guinea-Bissau, we can see that lack of support
from the international community at a crucial time,
when the country needed to consolidate the
achievements of peace quickly, led to the return of the
demons of Violence. That is a constant that applies to
all countries emerging from conflict or crisis, whether
they are in the West African subregion, elsewhere in
Africa or in other parts of the world.

I reiterate my heartfelt congratulations to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this important
debate. I venture to hope that your initiative will help
to raise awareness with regard to the consolidation of
peace and stability in West Africa.

