Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The
ongoing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
represents one of the gravest threats to peace, stability
and development in sub-Saharan Africa in decades.

The current conflict in the Congo has led to a
deepening humanitarian crisis, exacerbated the plight of
refugees and internally displaced persons, impeded the
delivery of critical food and medical assistance, and in
general hampered international and domestic efforts
towards development and democracy. If this crisis widens,
the implications for the region and the subcontinent could
be catastrophic.

In Washington, the United States just concluded a
ministerial meeting with representatives of over 40
African countries. Participants agreed on a partnership
agenda, a blueprint for the future of United States/African
relations and the future of the continent. Both the goals
discussed - the economic integration of African States
into the global economy, good governance, human rights
and democratization - and the substantial progress the
region has made in recent years could be jeopardized by
the growing conflict in the Congo.

That is why the United States, among others, has
been actively engaged in extensive shuttle diplomacy in
support of regional mediation efforts to help end the
conflict. Our approach is guided by a set of basic
principles: the preservation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; the belief that there can be no military solution to
the underlying problems of the region; and the belief that
the human and humanitarian rights of all peoples in the
conflict must be respected.

 

The United States fully supports the regional
mediation efforts currently underway, particularly those led
by the Southern African Development Community, known
as the Lusaka process. We continue to encourage these
efforts, as well as work being done by the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations to bring about a
comprehensive, peaceful settlement. This goal of peace,
however, has proven elusive and will require steady,
persistent engagement by all.

As the war is prolonged, it grows ever more
dangerous, leading to consequences that cannot be foreseen.
Every leader in the region, and the international community
itself, must be seized with the goal of ending the killing
now.

We believe it is critical that a ceasefire be agreed upon
as soon as possible. Direct talks between President Kabila's
Government and the rebels are essential to that end. Any
agreement must be accompanied by an inclusive national
political process and the creation of a mechanism to address
both the internal and external security concerns of the
Congo and its neighbours.

The United States condemns the reported massacres,
summary executions, torture, rape and ethnically motivated
harassment and detention of civilians taking place in the
Congo. We abhor the recruitment of child soldiers, the
killing of combatants who lay down their weapons, hate
propaganda and other abuses perpetrated by all sides. We
remain deeply concerned by the danger of renewed
genocide in the region and urge all parties to respect
international human rights and humanitarian law.

In particular, my Government is deeply troubled by
the ethnicization of this conflict. We are concerned by the
apparent willingness of some regional States to collaborate
militarily with ex-FAR and interahamwe, known
genocidaires. We are also concerned by any developments
that encourage insurgent movements, including UNITA, to
threaten and destabilize neighbouring States from Congolese
soil. Any agreement reached by the Congolese Government,
the rebels and external state actors will be unsustainable if
an effective means to contain these groups is not found.

United Nations investigative reports have pointed
towards atrocities and violations of international
humanitarian law in the Congo since 1996. Until recently,
the Government of President Kabila and other parties have
failed to cooperate with United Nations efforts to
investigate these abuses.

In this regard, the United States welcomes the
Congolese Government's recent invitation to the United
Nations human rights investigator Roberto Garreton. We
are pleased that Mr. Garreton was able to travel to the
Congo and we look forward to his report. We urge the
Congolese authorities to guarantee continued access for
competent international investigators to look into all
reported atrocities. All persons who commit or order the
commission of grave breaches of international
humanitarian law are individually responsible for their
actions. In this context, we welcome the decision taken by
regional leaders and President Clinton at the Entebbe
Summit of March 1998 to begin work on the creation of
an international coalition against genocide.

The United States calls on members of the
international community to redouble efforts to limit arms
flows to this region of conflict. The United States also
calls for safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
agencies to all those in need and for unrestricted access
by the International Committee of the Red Cross to all
detainees. All parties must guarantee the safety and
security of United Nations and humanitarian personnel.

