Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having taken the initiative
to convene this open debate. I also congratulate you on
your active role as Chair of the Council's Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. The debate two years ago raised
many useful ideas. That is why we look forward to
having such discussions annually. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Liechtenstein on behalf of the group of five small
countries. Allow me to add some comments.
You have provided us, Sir, with an excellent
concept paper (S/2010/165, annex). It shows that
working methods have been substantially improved. It
states that an increasing number of decisions taken by
the Council need to be implemented by all States
Members of the United Nations. It is thus essential that
States not members of the Council be informed of its
deliberations as soon as possible and be able to
contribute to the Council's decision-making process.

Measures to improve the working methods can be
divided into three categories: first, technical
improvements that can be implemented quickly;
secondly, existing practices that should be applied in a
more systematic way; and, lastly, the politically more
sensitive issues that we believe best resolved case by
case.

From a purely technical perspective, effectiveness
and transparency could be increased by using the latest
information technology. For example, the briefing
notes submitted by the Secretariat in informal
consultations or the draft outcomes discussed by
experts could be posted on the Council website.

We welcome the fact that in recent months
non-member States have been regularly briefed on the
monthly programme of work. However, we regret that
briefings after informal consultations are still largely
ad hoc and continue to depend on the goodwill and
availability of certain members of the Council
President's delegation. Given the growing tendency to
organize meetings of experts, we strongly encourage
the Council to promote transparency in that regard by
announcing such meetings in the Journal of the United
Nations and by organizing briefings on them. We
welcome the greater written coverage of meetings of
subsidiary bodies. Other measures should be
considered to make the work of the subsidiary bodies
more accessible.

With regard to politically sensitive matters, we
have often seen the Council reluctant to address
situations that are not on its formal agenda, but that
nevertheless require its attention. Recently, the Council
considered informal formats to address such situations.
That is an interesting and innovative approach.

Interaction between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission has been improved. We
support a regular dialogue between the Council and the
President of that Commission. We would welcome the
Council further involving the countries concerned and
inviting the Chairs of their respective configurations to
participate in the relevant informal consultations.

Lastly, thematic issues, such as human rights, the
protection of civilians and women and peace and
security, should be further integrated in the discussions
of country-specific situations and systematically
included in the terms of reference of Security Council
missions.
38
We hope that this open debate will lead to an in-
depth review of presidential note S/2006/507 and will
promote the adoption of an updated version of that note
by the end of this year. An action plan for its
implementation with a clear timeline could be prepared.
We are ready to work with the Council in that process.

