Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegation of Sweden,
which currently holds the presidency of the Security
Council, for organizing this open debate and for
presenting the concept note (S/2017/6, annex) on which
it is based. We welcome Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and thank him for his first statement as
Secretary-General to the Council.

We align ourselves with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We share the notion set out in the concept note by
the Council presidency that, despite the fact that the
Organization's mandate is to prevent the outbreak
of conflicts and engage at an early stage to prevent
the escalation of violence, the reality is different.
We also agree with the idea that the Council has
disproportionately been occupied with addressing
current crises rather than preventing the conflicts
of tomorrow. Its approach has therefore been more
reactive than preventive.

The Organization and its States Members have tools
available to them that have a common denominator in
the emphasis on the primacy of politics, indicating
that sustainable peace is achieved through political
solutions and not only through military and technical
commitments. In that regard, Guatemala would like
to emphasize the importance of working in a holistic
manner over the long term to maintain peace in all the
United Nations commitments before, during and after
a conflict. We also stress that the United Nations must
move from a linear approach to addressing conflicts to
a focus on prevention that is continuous, cross-cutting
and intersectoral.

Moreover, in the context of achieving sustainable
peace, it should be noted that this new term shares
common points with the 2030 Sustainable Development
Agenda, as noted in the concept note. The message is
clear: we cannot talk about peace without development,
and we cannot talk about development without talking
about peace.

For Guatemala, sustainable peace has a direct
relationship with investing in strengthening institutions,
security sector reform and good governance. An
example of that lies in the fact in our own country an
agreement was reached with sectors of organized civil
society that resulted in the creation of the International

Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG),
whose sole objective is to support the strengthening of
national institutions in the judicial sector, in particular
the Public Ministry.

With the support of CICIG, Guatemala is
strengthening its institutions, the rule of law is working
better and the citizenry is participating more actively,
demanding accountability and supporting the fight
against corruption and impunity. We emphasize that
CICIG is a cooperation tool devised and designed by
Guatemalans, which has been explicitly supported by
five Government Administrations and by society in
general in an explicit manner. For Guatemala, that is
an example of working to implement sustainable peace
together with our international partners.

Breaking down the silos within the Organization
and among Member States is a clear challenge. But it
is important to work with the idea of implementing the
three fundamental pillars of the Charter of the United
Nations together, in the sense that both peace and
security, development and human rights should all be
addressed in a cross-cutting manner as a whole. At the
same time, the Council should not always wait for cases
of conflict to be included in the agenda. We need to
invest in prevention in order not to wait until conflicts
erupt to take the necessary and pertinente measures.

