Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I should like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing. We fully appreciate and
support the efforts of the Secretary-General and United
Nations officials on the ground.

We are currently at the halfway point in terms of
the anticipated duration of the proximity talks before
proceeding into the envisaged direct negotiations. We
fully support this process and the efforts of the United
States. Nevertheless, we have hardly seen any
breakthroughs, as the Israeli side has not given up its
current approach. During recent weeks, Israel has
continued active settlement construction and
announced comprehensive future projects in the
occupied territories. The evidence suggests that Israeli
settlement expansion has actually increased since Israel
declared its moratorium on building.

Israel has also continued to implement its policies
on Palestinian home demolitions and evictions. Last
week, the Israelis destroyed at least six Palestinian
buildings in East Jerusalem. The Israeli Jerusalem
municipality is also preparing for the demolition of up
to 100 units in East Jerusalem, starting next month.
Israel has not stopped its policy of stripping the
residency rights of Palestinians living in Jerusalem
either. Among the victims were four elected members
of the Palestinian Legislative Council.

These policies are not at all compatible with the
understanding of permanent peace, nor do they make

any contribution to building confidence between the
parties: they simply obstruct the peace process. By
now, it should have been realized that Israel has
nothing to gain through pursuing such policies.
Undermining peace efforts and trying to prejudice the
outcome of the negotiations only harm its interests, its
standing in the international community and its
prospects for the future. In particular, Israel's policies
aimed at changing the status and fabric of Jerusalem
are deplorable and have far-reaching ramifications.

Israel has made some improvements in terms of
the goods and material allowed to enter Gaza.
However, this has not changed the fact that the
blockade imposed on Gaza is still in place. The
blockade continues. So does the suffering of the
Palestinian people in Gaza, as they are not allowed to
engage in normal economic activity, exporting their
products, importing necessary materials and moving
freely. Eighty per cent of the Palestinians living in
Gaza continue to rely on the support of international
aid organizations. Sixty-five per cent of the population
is living below the poverty line, with an unemployment
rate of 34 per cent.

We welcome the increasing international
awareness and sensitivity regarding the suffering of the
Palestinians in Gaza. The blockade imposed on Gaza is
a means of collective punishment. It is unacceptable
and immoral, and it poisons the region. The ordeal of
the Palestinians in Gaza will end only when the
blockade is completely lifted, as stipulated by
resolution 1860 (2009).

On 31 May 2010, Israeli military forces attacked
a civilian humanitarian convoy in international waters,
killing nine civilians. In accordance with the
presidential statement adopted by the Security Council
on 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9), which called for a prompt,
impartial, credible and transparent investigation
conforming to international standards, the Secretary-
General officially proposed an international panel of
investigation. We accepted the proposal of the
Secretary-General, and we continue to support the
Secretary-General in his efforts to establish a panel of
investigation. We hope that he will succeed in
establishing an independent and impartial panel of
inquiry shortly, as he anticipates.

