Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank Ms. Patricia O'Brien, Under-
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United Nations
Legal Counsel, for her serious and detailed
presentation on the report of the Secretary-General on
the modalities for the establishment of specialized
Somali anti-piracy courts (S/2011/360) to try suspected
pirates both in Somalia and in the region.

The situation has remained unchanged since our
most recent meeting on Somalia (see S/PV.6532).
Piracy attacks have continued to increase, as have the
geographical range of the attacks and the level of
violence and force used. Many hostages remain in
captivity.

My delegation was a sponsor of resolution 1976
(2011) because it set forth the essential measures for
moving forward with the fight against the crime of
piracy over the medium term, with the prospect of
contributing to national capacity-building in Somalia
so as to enable its authorities to meet their obligations
and needs over the long term.

Today, we remain convinced of the need to
support and bolster State institutions, while
recognizing its primary role in re-establishing security,
political stability and the rule of law and relaunching
its economic development as the bases for lasting
peace and stability. In his report, the Secretary-General
indicates that some of the assistance provided by the
Organization, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), has led
to progress towards the achievement of the goals
established in resolutions 1950 (2010) and 1976
(2011).

It is encouraging that steps have been taken to
build capacity in the assize sections of regional and
appeal courts in Somaliland and Puntland so as to
enable them to prosecute cases of piracy and other
serious crimes in accordance with international
standards. Also promising is the progress made in
building new prison facilities and renovating existing
ones. Nevertheless, the Secretary-General warns of
rising crime and the high level of impunity and
highlights the need to secure resources for the adequate
functioning of regional and federal courts.
Clearly, the specialized offices of the
Organization must continue providing assistance to
update and adapt the legislative basis at the regional
and federal level in order to categorize piracy as a
serious crime and draft a code of criminal procedure
that meets international standards of due process.

With regard to the assigning of jurisdictions, we
believe that the goal should be to establish courts with
extensive jurisdiction that can be exercised in ordinary
cases of piracy and in prosecuting financiers and
facilitators of piracy. Although the latter cases are more
complex and require more specialized courts and more
time in which to become fully operational, they can
have a greater impact on efforts to prevent and
eliminate the crime of piracy. Priority must be given to
the training of judges, lawyers and other related
professionals. They must be provided the necessary
time to develop capacity to effectively conduct
investigations and trials in accordance with national
and international needs.

With regard to the proposal to establish an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court, it
has been underscored that the Transitional Federal
Government and regional authorities consulted are
opposed to the establishment of such a court, owing to
their concern about the potential diversion of funds and
resources needed for capacity-building resources. My
delegation believes that any decision on the
establishment of a specialized court should have the
support of the Transitional Federal Government. In
addition, efforts should be made to ensure that
professionals trained in Somalia are not encouraged to
migrate. In any case, consideration should be given to
the cost-benefit ratio of a specialized anti-piracy court
and its implications for the security of the host State
and community.

The Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States
Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia needs to
have a guaranteed resource flow, including for the
building and renovation of prisons that meet
international standards in Somaliland and Puntland and
for the resumed operations of regional courts.

Bearing in mind the timelines and the difficulties,
as detailed by the Secretary-General, in effectively
implementing resolution 1976 (2011), it is essential to
stress the importance of using, in an effective and
timely manner, the regime established in resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) to impose sanctions on the
relatively smaller number of individuals identified and
located by the Monitoring Committee of Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) as leaders
of private militias and piracy networks. That could be a
strategic and effective way of supplementing the
prosecution efforts under way.

