Mr. Talbot (Guyana): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important debate today
and commend the leadership that your country has
demonstrated in the global response to the Ebola crisis.
We thank the Secretary-General, Dr. Nabarro, Dr. Chan
and Mr. Niamah for their presentations. We recognize
and appreciate the enormous deployment of effort
on their part by the entire United Nations system, in
particular the World Health Organization, and on the
part of the countries that have rallied to this challenge.

Guyana joins this debate to register its concern
over the deadly Ebola epidemic that has struck West
Africa, to express its solidarity with the countries
affected, particularly Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
and to convey its support for a robust response by the
international community.

In this context, we were pleased to co-sponsor
resolution 2177 (2014) and welcome its adoption.
We also look forward to the action that the General
Assembly will take tomorrow on this issue.

The present Ebola outbreak, on such a rapid and
unprecedented scale, is the largest outbreak of its
kind in history. The crisis brings with it a plethora
of challenges that require a multidimensional and
multisectoral response at the national, regional and
international levels. In addition to its obvious public-
health implications, the Secretary-General has drawn
attention to the significant political, social, economic,
humanitarian, logistical and security dimensions of
the crisis. Its potential for reversing peacebuilding and
development gains is acknowledged with concern.

The Governments of the countries affected are
making valiant efforts to respond to the crisis and
to contain the spread of the disease. At this stage,
however, given the exponential increase in the number
of cases and deaths, it has become necessary, indeed,
imperative, for the international community to mobilize
a coordinated response that is commensurate in scale
and pace with the enormity of the challenge. Guyana
supports all efforts towards that end, and we join in
the call for a massive scale-up of resources to assist
the countries affected and to prevent the spread of the
disease to others.

In that regard, our delegation also supports the
Secretary-General's initiative to establish the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. For its
part, the Government of Guyana is giving consideration
to an appropriate contribution in the context of the
global response.

