Mr. Guehenno: Let me first say that we hear the
call for a hard look at the action of the international
community, and that we are doing that without jumping
to conclusions, because it is a complex picture.
Certainly, nobody would want to characterize Kosovo
just on the basis of the horrible violence of last month.

In the past five years, before last month's
violence we had seen the statistics of violent acts
steadily declining, which bears witness to the fact that,
indeed, many Kosovars were prepared and were
beginning to live next to each other. I think, however,
that we must also recognize that this was more
coexistence than a really multi-ethnic society, and that
coexistence was indeed very fragile, as we could see
before the violence in the difficult functioning of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government or the
municipalities, where it was hard to have various
communities working together.

The issue of organized crime was raised by the
Ambassador of the Philippines. Certainly, it
compounds the political problems that I have just
mentioned. I am not privy to any information or
intelligence relative to Al Qaeda, but certainly I know
that organized crime - in the more traditional form of
smuggling, racketeering, corruption and
intimidation- does indeed represent a very serious
problem in Kosovo. It is a serious problem also
because there are sometimes connections with political
activists. I would want to stress to the Council that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) Police is taking very active
measures to fight organized crime, although it is a very
difficult phenomenon to eradicate.

As to the economy and its sorry state, I would
make a link to crime in that regard, because crime is
both a cause and a consequence of the lack of progress
in the economy. It is a cause because it makes some
operations, such as privatization, more difficult.
Indeed, we would not want privatization to entrench
criminal interests, and so some precautions need to be
taken. At the same time, it is certainly a consequence
of the sorry state of the economy, because it is easier
sometimes to make a living by crime than by legitimate
activities. Thus, the progress in the economic situation
of Kosovo is a fundamental element of overall progress
there. There certainly will be few returns of Kosovo
Serbs if there are no jobs for the returnees. There will
certainly be little investment from abroad - whether
from the Albanian diaspora or from the investment
community at large in the world - if there is no sense
that there is a vibrant economy in Kosovo. Thus, there
is a vicious circle there in the pessimism on the state of
the economy in Kosovo.

Let me conclude on the standards. When I was in
Kosovo just before the violence erupted, I was struck
by some misunderstanding - which I think still exists
among many in Kosovo - on the nature of our efforts
with respect to the standards. Too many see the
standards as some artificial complication which would
be imposed by the international community to create
some kind of ideal society. I tried to make clear that,
for the international community, the standards are
certainly not some kind of artificial exercise. They are
the indispensable foundation of a stable society in
which various communities can live in peace and
prosperity without the heavy presence of the Kosovo
Force or UNMIK. I think we need to convey that
message very strongly. The standards are not there to
please the international community; they are there to
help the Kosovars achieve the stability and prosperity
that they deserve.

