Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We look
forward to working very closely with you, and we believe
that this month is going to be a very active and
productive one. I should also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Ambassador Holbrooke on his brilliant
presidency last month.
My delegation has taken a close look at the
comprehensive and, I may add, sombre report of the
Secretary-General, in document S/2000/53. This morning
we have heard from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de Mello, who made a very
helpful and, I must say, frank presentation to outline the
situation in East Timor. We benefited tremendously from
it. At the same time, we must say that he and his team
are doing wonderfully well under very difficult
circumstances. The Secretary-General called for his team
to make strenuous efforts during the last three months,
and I believe that that is what it is doing. I hope that his
efforts will continue to bear fruit in the coming months.

I have a few points to make. Taking into account
your advice, Mr. President, that we should be precise, I
would like to outline eight points. I am setting aside the

 

humanitarian situation, because that has been appropriately
addressed in both the report and Mr. Vieira de Mello's
statement. I believe that the United Nations team there is
doing well on that count.

My first point relates to public safety and the law and
order situation. As has been mentioned by others, we
believe that that is a priority which should be addressed. In
this context, we urge that the full complement of the
civilian police be deployed very soon. Last month we heard
that only one fourth of the mandated strength is there. We
believe it will be possible to expedite deployment and that
that should be a priority.

Secondly, we believe that the return of the refugees is
also important. The facilitation by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other United
Nations agencies is very important. We would also like to
request the Indonesian Government and others involved to
facilitate this process.

Thirdly, we believe that capacity-building is a key
area. The United Nations should not be seen as calling the
shots there. It should build the capacity among the local
population so that it can take charge. In that context, we are
very happy that the National Consultative Council is
working very well, meeting regularly with the people from
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), who are helping them. We believe that
the focus of this capacity-building should be on the area of
human development and governance. I think that that is
where the work of the United Nations has been fruitful in
other countries, and that is what UNTAET should be doing
there.
My fourth point relates to the unemployment situation.
As the report states, and as Mr. Vieira de Mello pointed
out, 80 per cent of the population are without any means of
support and 50 per cent are illiterate. Furthermore, as we
read in today's Herald Tribune, the unemployment situation
has resulted in violence. We read that 7,000 East Timorese
lined up to apply for 2,000 United Nations jobs and that,
finally, in frustration, they resorted to violence and rock
throwing. I believe that this, too, is an area that we should
address as effectively as possible. On education, we would
like to see the focus on the education of girls. I think that
that is something which should be built into the focus of
the education efforts in East Timor.

My fifth point concerns the judicial system and the
civilian administration, which, I think, is the part of the
capacity-building that we spoke about. I was happy to hear
today that the East Timorese are taking the lead.
Mr. Vieira de Mello mentioned the preparation of the
criminal procedure code, and training is taking place in
Australia for judicial purposes. I think this is a positive
approach and we believe that it should be carried further.

Sixthly, on reconciliation efforts, we are very happy
that the Indonesian Government has been very
forthcoming in this regard. Mr. Vieira de Mello's visit last
month to Jakarta, and the proposed visit of President
Wahid to East Timor, are very important signals that
reconciliation efforts are being made in the right
direction.

My seventh point relates to human rights violations.
I think that this is what we have learned from today's
presentation, from the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry and from the report of the
Indonesian Commission of Inquiry into Human Rights
Violations in East Timor, which the national Government
of Indonesia prepared. All these reports point to serious
violations of human rights, and we believe that that issue
needs to be addressed. But a major concern of ours is that
we should try to create a situation in which human rights
are not violated in the future. It is important to take that
into account.

My eighth point relates to regional support. We
believe that the Association of South-East Asian Nations
and the other regional organization, the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, should step
forward to support development and reconciliation efforts
in East Timor. I think regional actors and Powers can
play a very useful role in this regard.

Finally, when Mr. Vieira de Mello spoke about the
challenge of beginning the infrastructural and
developmental work planned for six months, he asked for
a quick advance disbursement of funds. Yes, that is
important, and we believe that it will be possible to work
out a mechanism that will result in quick disbursement of
funds. The United Nations is not very well known for
quick utilization of the resources available to it. For East
Timor we have a commitment of $522 million for
800,000 people. This is a major commitment, and it
would be really frustrating to see the efforts falter and fail
because of lack of disbursement of funds. I think this is
what is important and believe that we, as members of the
Council, cannot and should not allow this to happen. We
should be careful not to allow the East Timorese
enthusiasm for independence to sag at this point in time.

 

