Mr. iivalj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like, at the very outset, on behalf of the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Permanent Mission of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations and
myself, to express my deepest condolences to the
Ambassador of the United States of America, to the
American people and especially to the families of the
victims for recent terrorist acts, unparalleled in
American and human history.

We Bosnians, who survived a four-year siege,
strangulation, murders and atrocities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, express our sympathy, grief and sadness
for the innocent people who were killed in such a
cowardly manner.

As we are considering the twentieth report of the
High Representative, I would like to express our
appreciation and gratitude to the Security Council for
all the efforts and endeavours that it has made in
helping and assisting in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At the same time, I would like to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, and
Ambassador Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
comprehensive, eloquent and detailed briefings they
presented today, and to express our sincere
appreciation to them, as well as to members of their
offices, for all the efforts undertaken, contributions
made and work done in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In my statement, I will start with the positive
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. After too
long a period of negotiation, the election law has
finally been approved. We therefore believe that Bosnia
and Herzegovina is on the right track towards
becoming a member of the Council of Europe. The
State Border Service is gaining ground in establishing
control of over 70 per cent of the border of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is 1,600 kilometres long. Of
course, we expect to cover the entire border as soon as
possible. This is an extremely important issue for
combating all kinds of illicit activity, especially drug
smuggling, trafficking in human beings, illegal
migration, corruption and so forth.

Furthermore, the State institutions are slowly,
gradually strengthening. The level of refugee return is
still far from satisfactory, but it is improving slightly in
comparison with previous years. The detention of all
indicted war criminals and full cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is a very important precondition for
facilitating the refugee return in minority areas. The
presence of indicted war criminals in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a constant and unnecessary source of
instability and fear, and represents a threat to the
fragile peace and stability in our country.
It is of paramount importance that the
Constitutional Court decision that all people are
constituent on all the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina be fully implemented; that is not the case
at the moment. Serbs are not constituent in the
Federation, and Bosniacs and Croats are not constituent
in Republika Srpska. The fulfilment of this requirement
will give an additional boost to the realization of annex
7, one of the most important parts of the Dayton Peace
Accords.

Furthermore, I would like to reiterate that the
economy is by far the most important issue in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As we have pointed out in previous
statements, we need the assistance of the international
community to overcome the very painful transition
from the former old-style centralized economy to a
modern, free-market, regionally and globally oriented
economy. We know that many issues have significant
influence on the economy, and in that regard, we
deeply appreciate the efforts of the Office of the High
Representative concerning judiciary reform. Despite
the very positive involvement of the international
community in issues related to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I am going to mention here a couple of
unpleasant examples: the tender for the third licence
for GSM. - a telecommunications operator - and the
establishment of the public broadcasting service. In
spite of the fact that the international community has
been in charge of the transformation of television in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for a long time, it has so far
failed to produce visible results. Accordingly, we are
delighted with the proposal for a new kind of
relationship between the Office of the High
Representative and the Council of Ministers, based on
shared responsibility and the establishment of a
consultative partnership forum. That should avoid all
possible misunderstandings.

As the international community is eager to see
capable, well-educated and reliable persons in the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we would also
like to have, at all levels, representatives of the
international community who are fully dedicated to the
overall prosperity of our country.

We are fully aware that the only feasible
approach to the difficulties we are facing is a regional
approach. In that light, cooperation among the
Republic of Croatia, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has
significantly improved, and we are witnessing
numerous visits among those three countries by
delegations at the highest level. Only if we see a
significant improvement in mutual cooperation among
the States of South-East Europe, combined with an
unambiguous message from the European Union that
we are going to be a part of it after having met certain
criteria, can sustainable development, peace and
stability in the Balkans be attained. Otherwise, the
region will continue to be overburdened with ethnic
conflicts, and the gap between the region and the rest
of Europe will widen. We consider that the
international presence, especially the United States
presence, in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still
indispensable to reintegrating a safe, stable, democratic
and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In spite of all the obstacles ahead and some
continuing negative trends, we are deeply convinced
that respect for the rule of law has started to gain
ground, and that Bosnia and Herzegovina will become
a self-sustained democracy and a proud member of the
European family.

