Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Madam President, and the Argentine presidency
for convening this important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. It is a main pillar of
the overall reform of the United Nations that we consider
necessary. In the current system, too, transparency,
openness and efficiency are more necessary than ever
to promoting a sense of ownership of the Council on
behalf of the entire international community.

(spoke in English)

We commend the improvements that have been
made in rendering the Council's working methods
more responsive to the growing demand for openness
and interaction among Council members and the
broader membership. I am referring, for instance, to
the increasing number of open debates and the informal
wrap-up sessions by the Security Council Presidents on
their monthly work.

As President of the Council ofthe European Union,
Italy praises the attention dedicated to cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations.
But more improvements in the Council's working
methods are needed, such as greater interaction
between the Council and the wider membership
through regular consultations and detailed reports, the
deeper involvement of interested parties and regional
organizations, and more contacts with other main
bodies of the United Nations.

We also wish to underline the importance of the
Council's consultations with countries that contribute
troops and police officers to peacekeeping operations.
A perspective from the field can be fundamental,
especially when mission mandates are being defined
or renewed. Italy has welcomed past briefings to the
Security Council by the military leadership of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and looks forward
to seeing United Nations Force Commanders more
involved in the decision-making process.

At a time of serious crises in several areas of the
world, improved working methods are also crucial
to the Security Council's ability to fulfil its main
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. That also holds true for ensuring effective
and responsible follow-up to cases referred to the
International Criminal Court by the Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that the Council should have a forum where
such follow-ups can be regularly discussed.

We should redouble our efforts to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes of
international concern. The fight against impunity
will not be effective without greater cooperation,
both collectively and individually. One fundamental
challenge is how to respond to cases of non-cooperation
on the part of States. Non-respect of Court-ordered
arrest warrants constitutes a violation of international
law. In specific cases referred by the Security Council,
such violations also constitute a breach of obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations.

Concerning the role of the Ombudsperson,
from whom we have heard this morning, we should
acknowledge that ensuring respect for the rule of law
and human rights is an essential part of our task in
countering terrorism. Therefore, providing fair and
clear procedures for listed individuals has to be seen
as part of our collective action. Consequently, the work
of the Ombudsperson should receive full support and
cooperation to ensure adequate and timely consideration
of requests from individuals seeking removal from the
consolidated list.

Improving the working methods is part of the
Security Council reform process. Italy believes in a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council that
encompasses all five clusters, including working
methods. The veto mechanism is one of the key issues
of Security Council reform. The Security Council plays
a crucial role in regulating international relations. My
country is opposed to any attempt to delegitimize the
authority of the Council. At the same time, we are all
aware that the current veto system does not reflect
today's reality. Moreover, in some cases it has prevented
the Security Council from delivering appropriate
responses in cases of mass atrocities. While we are
working on a comprehensive solution, something can
be done under the current system.

We join those who call for a voluntary code of
conduct for permanent members of the Council on the
use of the veto when taking action to prevent or end mass
atrocities. Veto power presumes a clear responsibility
to prevent or end the perpetration of atrocity crimes.
In that respect, Italy is ready to engage with the rest of
the membership in a constructive dialogue leading to
an early outcome.

