Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg warmly thanks Pakistan for convening
this open debate on peacekeeping. We welcome the
exemplary commitment of your country, Mr. President,
which is reflected in the fact that it is one of the leading
United Nations troop-contributing countries. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation.

This debate allows us to have an exchange on all
dimensions of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and the challenges and opportunities resulting from the
developments in those operations in the past few years.

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.

Peacekeeping operations are at the heart of the
work of the United Nations. Today, they are more
complex and diverse, working in increasingly difficult
environments and in situations that can suddenly
change. In order to meet that reality and given the
fact that security, development and the rule of law are
intrinsically linked, the great majority of peacekeeping
operations are now multidimensional. As a result, the
mandates ofpeacekeeping operations may now include,
in particular, strengthening rule-of-law institutions,
security and defence sector reform, the protection
of civilians, particularly children affected by armed
conflict, the protection and promotion of human rights,
combating sexual violence and the support of inclusive
political processes, such as establishing the necessary
security conditions for the provision of humanitarian
assistance.

All of these issues go far beyond any traditional
concept ofpeacekeeping, reaching for the establishment
of lasting conditions conducive to the health of societies

and their citizens. Peacekeepers are therefore called
on to be peacebuilders from the outset by fostering
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict around
the world, and increasingly, by supporting the host
country's public institutions. Luxembourg welcomes
progress in that direction.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are complementary
and deeply linked. They require a holistic, coordinated
and integrated approach that - from the initial planning
stages of a peacekeeping operation through eventual
modifications of the mandate - takes peacebuilding
into sufficient consideration and clearly integrates
its priorities into mandates. As many members of the
Council have said, the Security Council must ensure
that peacekeeping mandates are clear, credible, realistic
and unambiguous.

Taking into account the contributions of various
actors, including the Peacebuilding Commission, and
the basic principle of national ownership, no attempt
to integrate peacekeeping and peacebuilding can
succeed unless the roles of the many players are clearly
defined and their work is effectively coordinated.
Such an approach will increase the added value of
every contribution and bolster the effectiveness and
efficiency of every stakeholder. We also believe that
the United Nations should strengthen the pool of civil
capacity, especially by enlisting the expertise of people
from countries that have experience in post-conflict
peacebuilding or democratic transition.

It is clear that no lasting peace can be achieved
unless we address the root causes ofa conflict from the
outset. The crises in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa
make that evident every day. In our view, including
all sectors of a population, in particular the most
vulnerable groups, such as women, in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations is the best way to prevent,
in both the short and the long terms, the resurgence
of the frustrations that can reignite a conflict.
Luxembourg has therefore contributed to the efforts of
the Department ofPeacekeeping Operations to increase
women's participation in political processes, especially
in Haiti, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan and Timor-Leste.

We are pleased that the draft resolution to be adopted
today (S/2013/27) highlights the essential role played in
United Nations missions by advisers for the protection
of the most vulnerable populations, especially children.
Their roles as advocates, facilitators, advisers to heads

of missions, information officers and monitors are
critical components for the protection of children.

The Council is right to underline the importance
of deploying qualified and experienced peacekeepers,
with all the necessary skills, including language skills,
and who respect the Organization's zero-tolerance
policy with respect to misconduct. Sexual exploitation
and abuse must not be tolerated. On the other hand,
every measure should be taken to ensure the safety and
security of deployed personnel. Luxembourg strongly
condemns any attack on United Nations peacekeeping
personnel.

I conclude by expressing Luxembourg's deep
gratitude towards all peacekeeping soldiers, police and
civil workers who do indispensable work, often under
very difficult circumstances, in implementing the
mandates entrusted to them by the Council. We honour
the memory of those women and men who have given
their lives executing their duty in the service of the
United Nations and the cause of protecting international
peace and security.

