Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Iran): I thank you, Sir,
for having convened another public meeting on the
grave situation in the Palestinian territories.

"Horrendous" and "horrific" are common
adjectives used by emergency workers and media
representatives to describe the situation in Jenin and
some other towns in the West Bank in the wake of
atrocities committed by the Israeli army. Mr. Roed-
Larsen, the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process described the devastation
left by Israelis in Jenin as being "horrific beyond
belief". Given the extent of the devastation they
caused, it was all the more criminal and indicative of
criminal intent to deny rescue and emergency teams
full access to the area for 11 full days. It is now
becoming more and more clear that, as an independent
forensic expert with Amnesty International has said, a
massacre took place in Jenin. In this context, it is
morally repugnant to call the main criminal figure
behind these crimes a man of peace and still boast
about conducting a value-based foreign policy.

Based on the information that has emerged thus
far, there is no doubt that the code of conduct in war
and international humanitarian law are being blatantly
violated. There should be no doubt either that those
who are behind the devastation and massacre in Jenin
are war criminals and should not be allowed to go
unpunished. Those who may stand in the way of
bringing the criminals to justice obstruct justice, and
history will remember them as accomplices in the
aggression.

There can be no justification at all for subjecting
a whole civilian and defenceless population to a
collective punishment in the severest possible form.
The victims of the barbaric crimes in the Jenin refugee
camp and elsewhere were already scarred and ravaged
by decades-old humiliation and occupation of their
lands by the Israelis. Their only guilt was to resist the
will of the occupying and aggressive Power, as all
other peoples throughout history have done.

The pictures depicting atrocities committed by
the Israelis in the occupied Palestinian land, which
have been beamed into the living-rooms of people
across the globe, have outraged world public opinion.
Those vested interests that advocate and relay, here and
there, official Israeli propaganda will only influence a
few like-minded, malevolent persons or deceive some
naive people.

In Afghanistan, the international community had
to deal with just two groups, namely the Taliban and
Al-Qaeda, which had virtually occupied Afghanistan,
repressing the Afghan people and turning Afghan
territory into a launching pad for terrorist acts. They
had nothing to do with the Afghan people and were
resolutely opposed by them from the beginning.
However, in Palestine a whole nation has either been
forced to live in exile or has been taken hostage by the
Israelis and systematically brutalized for decades.
Those Afghans who fought the occupation in the 1980s
were dubbed freedom fighters and assisted by the
international community. Similarly, those who now
continue to fight an inherently comparable occupation
in the Middle East are freedom fighters and obviously
not terrorists, and should be assisted by the
international community too.

What is happening in Jenin and elsewhere in
Palestine is part of a well-planned scheme by the
Israelis. Having dropped the empty pretence of seeking
peace that they had maintained for several years, they
are now engaged in systematically tearing down
Palestinian institutional capacity. They are destroying
Palestinian political and economic institutions with a
view to taking them back to square one and undoing
the process of empowerment they had embarked on. It
is cynical that they reduce the Palestinian security
agencies to ruins and place their architect, Mr. Arafat,
under house arrest, on the one hand, and expect them to
stop violence, on the other.

In light of what happened recently in the
occupied territories, it is all the more incumbent upon
the international community, represented by the
Council, to take effective measures with a view to
stopping for good Israeli atrocities. With this objective
in mind, the Council should, first of all, put an end to
the contempt shown by the Israeli regime for Security
Council resolutions, thereby eroding their authority.
Now, weeks after the adoption of resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002), the Israelis continue to flout
them.

Secondly, an international commission of inquiry
should be established and mandated to look into what
happened in Jenin and elsewhere. It is essential that
those who ordered and actually committed war crimes
against civilians be brought to justice. The Council has
already done so in the cases of the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. Why should not it be done in the case of
Palestine?

Thirdly, a multinational force to be stationed on
Palestinian territory is long overdue. Such a force, if
mandated and deployed beforehand, could have averted
recent violence and saved many human lives. Given the
circumstances, an armed multinational force mandated
to enforce the Council's decisions is a must, and any
hesitation on the part of the Council on this issue will
lead to more bloodshed on the ground. Given the
intransigency and contempt increasingly shown by the
Israelis, we believe that resolute action by the Council
under Chapter VII the Charter is now more necessary
than ever.

