Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
briefing. I also thank Mr. Ivica Dacie and Ms. Vlora
Citaku for their statements.

Like my Japanese colleague, I have my own
memories of Pristina. I had the privilege to visit it 16
years ago as a member ofa Security Council delegation.
Since then the Security Council and UNMIK have
continued to play an important role in supporting
Kosovo's institutions to tackle the many challenges
that lie ahead. Ukraine strongly supports the work of
Mr. Tanin and UNMIK in promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo and in the
region, as well as in its constructive engagement with
Pristina and Belgrade. We also commend the UNMIK
partners on the ground, including the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission and the
European Union for their cooperation and continuing
contributions to peace and progress in Kosovo.

Ukraine takes note ofthe latest report (S/2016/99) of
the Secretary-General on UNMIK, submitted pursuant
to resolution 1244 (1999). We agree with the Secretary-
General's analysis and observations on the situation in
Kosovo and urge all related parties to take measures
to stabilize the situation and reach the necessary
consensus on the implementation of previously reached
agreements. I would like to focus on four main points

that we consider important for further stabilization.

First, Ukraine welcomes the continuation of the
negotiation process between Belgrade and Pristina
and the achieved agreements under the auspices of the
European Union last year. We welcome the signing
and ratification of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement between the European Union and Kosovo
and support its European integration. At the same
time, we are deeply concerned about the latest acts
of violence by Kosovo opposition parties. Those
actions have a negative impact not only on the security
situation in Kosovo, but also on the whole process of
implementation of the package of the Belgrade-Pristina
agreements. Such actions are unacceptable, and we call
on all political actors in Kosovo to abstain from all forms
of violence. We reiterate the calls for respect for the rule
of law, democratic procedures and international norms.

Secondly, Ukraine welcomes the agreement on
the establishment of the association of Serb majority
municipalities in Kosovo and supports the commitment
by the Kosovo institutions to continue this process.
This agreement is an important mechanism for further
stabilization; delaying its implementation would be a
step in the wrong direction and would erode the mutual
trust that is necessary in any dialogue process.

Thirdly, Ukraine commends the establishment of
the specialist court and the agreement of the Government
of the Netherlands announced on 15 January to host
that institution in The Hague.

Fourthly, we fully share the view of the Secretary-
General that it is important to continue the progress
made in the integration into Kosovo of institutions
of former Serbian civil protection personnel. We also
commend the initiatives by business leaders within the
Chamber of Commerce in both Belgrad and Pristina
to put aside political problems and to build new
cooperation within the business community.
