Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is grateful for the convening of this
informative meeting on the situation in Colombia and
the briefing by Mr. Jean Arnault on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. We especially
welcome the participation of Vice-President Oscar
Naranjo and, through him, convey our gratitude
to President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon and his
Permanent Representative to the United Nations,
Ambassador Mejia Ve'lez.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm Peru's
commitment to the peace process in the sisterly Republic
of Colombia - a commitment based on a shared history
and vision of the future, and active cooperation aimed
at sustaining peace and the development of our peoples.

We highlight once again the example that the
Colombian peace process offers to the international
community and to strengthening Latin America and
the Caribbean as a zone of peace. Peru expresses its
appreciation to the Colombian people and Government,
as well as to the various parties involved in the process,
their authorities and leaders, for their courage and
determination and for having placed the supreme value
of peace above all their differences. It is obviously a
complex process that faces many challenges at this
stage of implementation - no doubt more complex
than the previous one - but it looks to the future
with hope and conviction that sustaining peace is
inseparable from sustainable development. With
respect to the latest developments, we want to share the
following comments:

Peru supports the comprehensive strategy based
on a preventive approach, led by the Government in
partnership with local authorities and civil society, to
mitigate the factors of risk and vulnerability. In that
sense, we highlight the efforts to address organized
crime in rural areas formerly controlled by the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), within
the rule oflaw and in full respect for human rights.

The laying-down of arms has undoubtedly been
a milestone in the peace process. We welcome the
efforts of the national authorities aimed at the full
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace so
as to minimize the cases of dissidence of the former
militants of the FARC. At this stage of the process, we
highlight the actions of the Office of the Prosecutor
and the importance of the measures adopted by the
Government to guarantee the security of all citizens,
particularly in the framework of the National Protection
Unit and the implementation of the new Horus plan. It
is of the utmost importance to prevent and avoid the
occurrence of further deaths of social leaders, human
rights defenders and former members of the FARC.

We agree with Mr. Arnault that reintegration
constitutes a guarantee to prevent the perpetuation
of the conflict. In that regard, we consider that the
reconversion of the FARC to legal political life and
the accreditations granted by the High Commissioner
for Peace, with the guarantees that have been provided
and other support, are key aspects of the process that
undoubtedly require the tolerance and commitment
of all Colombian society, which are supported and
underwritten by all countries, in particular the members
of the Council.

Along the same lines, we value the efforts ofnational
authorities to promote access to land and productive
projects in rural areas. These measures go beyond
the commitments assumed in the Peace Agreement
and complement other reintegration mechanisms and
training programes offered by the Government with a
view to achieving sustainable peace.

We wish to conclude by welcoming the open,
transparent and inclusive way in which the Colombian
peace process is being conducted, with the support
of the international community. We also welcome
the united commitment of the Council, which, at the
request of the parties, has monitored the process from
its origins, as well as the important work carried out by
the Verification Mission in that regard.

From our Latin American perspective, we would
also like to acknowledge the work accomplished on this
topic by Ambassador Elbio Rosselli Frieri of Uruguay,
under whose presidency of the Security Council a visit
to Colombia was organized. We also pay tribute to
the role played by Ambassador Mattew Rycroft of the
United Kingdom on this issue.

As a non-permanent member that only recently
joined the Security Council, Peru reiterates its full
support for the authorities and the people of Colombia
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement.

