I would like to thank Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar and Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Rajasingham for their briefings. People in Syria are trapped in an endless war. They are subject to crimes against humanity at the hands of Al-Assad's ruthless regime. They are striving to survive in lamentable conditions. The situation at our doorstep in north-western Syria is alarming, with a sharp rise in cases of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Some 1.5 million out of 4 million Syrians in that region live in hundreds of overcrowded camps for internally displaced persons and are directly exposed to COVID-19, without any means of prevention and isolation. Hospitals and health facilities are struggling. Since the previous Security Council meeting on Syria (see S/2020/1049), the percentage of health-care workers among current cases increased to 15. Half the number of the health-care workers infected throughout Syria are in the north-west. We have mobilized all our resources in order to minimize the impact of COVID-19 on vulnerable groups, especially women and children. In accordance with the recent trilateral agreement on the fight against COVID-19, the Turkish Red Crescent, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World Health Organization have started to deliver health aid and items in the north-west, which are worth around $7.7 million. We will also continue to support and strengthen the resilience of the Syrian people through our own means and by facilitating the cross-border humanitarian operations. The unimpeded flow of humanitarian assistance is essential. With limited cross-border operations, the United Nations is making enormous efforts every month to reach 1.3 million people in northern Aleppo who were previously served via the Bab Al-Salam crossing point. Since the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020) in July, around 2,500 trucks have crossed into the north-west through Bab Al-Hawa. This figure corresponds to only half of the volume channelled through our crossing points within the same timeframe prior to the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020). If the Council fails to reauthorize the Bab Al-Salam crossing point, it will condone the further deterioration of the humanitarian situation. This might have security repercussions for the whole region and beyond. Preserving the ceasefire in Idlib is a sine qua non for the protection of millions of vulnerable civilians living in dire conditions. Turkey remains fully committed to ensuring a lasting ceasefire in Idlib. We continue to engage with Russia in technical talks and in joint efforts towards the full implementation of the additional protocol. Unfortunately, there is a worrying increase in ceasefire violations targeting civilians and moderate opposition groups in the Idlib de-escalation Area. These attacks risk triggering a new humanitarian crisis and provide a pretext for terrorist organizations to exploit the situation. All ceasefire violations in contravention of the additional protocol and existing agreements must be stopped. While we are making every effort to alleviate the human suffering and taking all the necessary measures to preserve the ceasefire in Idlib, we also continue to contribute to advancing the political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015) (2020). Turkey, in its capacity as an Astana guarantor, played a leading role in the establishment of the Constitutional Committee. Currently, the Committee is the sole functioning mechanism within the political process. We wholeheartedly support Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts to facilitate the Committee's work in a systematic manner. We reiterated our strong support for his facilitation role during his visit to Ankara on 2 and 3 November. We welcome the announcement that the next two rounds of the Constitutional Committee will be held during the course of next week and in January 2021, respectively. We believe that it is crucial to accelerate the work of the Committee through regular meetings. The next rounds should focus on the substance and the constitutional process should, in due course, yield results that address the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. Syrians should not wait another decade for their expectations to be met. Advancing the work of the Committee and the political process in general will contribute to the common goal of creating an environment conducive to the voluntary, safe and dignified return of Syrians. With 4 million Syrians living in Turkey and 5 million under our care and protection in Syria, we are aware of the demands and expectations of the Syrian people from the international community. It is a shame that the Al-Assad regime is organizing meetings under the pretext of discussing the return of refugees. These are attempts by that murderous regime to add insult to injury. Through mechanisms in place not only with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees but also with neighbouring countries, we have been discussing the issue of returns in full compliance with United Nations criteria. We are ready to support any initiative reflecting United Nations parameters on this matter, with agreed modalities and scope. We will continue to oppose any initiatives attempting to support the regime's agenda and its unlawful actions. Let me briefly touch upon the situation in Al-Hol camp, which has increasingly become a source of concern. Over 63,000 people, 94 per cent of whom are women and children, live in extremely miserable conditions in the camp, where security incidents and reports of deaths continue to be recorded. Family reunification and repatriation remain crucial for long-term solutions to this lasting problem. In this part of Syria, the actions of the terrorist organization Kurdish Workers Party/Kurdish People's Protection Units (PKK/YPG) threatening the territorial integrity of Syria have been steadily increasing. Yesterday's bomb attacks carried out by the PKK/YPG in Afrin and Al-Bab, resulting in scores of civilian casualties, are the latest testaments to the total disregard which that terrorist organization has for human life. The PKK/YPG continues to release Da'esh detainees en masse through so-called amnesties, when it serves its interest. According to media reports, in the last two months alone PKK/YPG released over 1,000 Da'esh members. In the face of such brazen acts, it truly defies logic when some Member States still insist on portraying the PKK/YPG as a reliable partner in the fight against terrorism. How can anyone in their right mind trust one terrorist group to combat another? How many more Da'esh members need to be arbitrarily released by PKK/ Y PG before the international community reacts? The international community can no longer remain silent in the face of these terrorist acts, infiltrations and harassments. Turkey will certainly not remain idle. We will not hesitate to take steps necessary to safeguard our national security and ensure that peace and stability prevail. To conclude, let us remember how we reached this point. The regime, instead of meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, has employed all instruments of violence in its disposal to prolong its grip to power. The people ofSyria have been punished brutally, including by chemical weapons, barrel bombs, demographic change, sexual violence, arbitrary detentions, torture, starvation and sieges. These are facts. They are all well documented. We all know the blunt reality. The persistent lies of the regime do not change that. As to the delusional remarks of the regime representative, I would like to emphasize that I do not consider him to be my legitimate counterpart. His mere presence here is an affront to the millions of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of this regime. Therefore, I will not honour him with a response.
