Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank the briefers for
the presentation of their assessments and progress
reports on the work of their respective Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism (S/2014/343, S/2014/350 and S/2014/351).

Members of the Council are all aware that this year,
from 7 April to 4 July, Rwanda is commemorating the
twentieth anniversary of the one-hundred-day genocide
against the Tutsi. On 8 November this year, we will also
mark the twentieth anniversary of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) established
by the Security Council in its resolution 955 (1994).
Therefore, as we consider the reports submitted to us,
we shall also take stock of the work of the ICTR during
the past 20 years.

Rwanda acknowledges the important role played by
the ICTR and by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in advancing
international criminal justice. Indeed, both Tribunals
have produced a substantial body of jurisprudence,
including on the definition of genocide and on superior
responsibility. In the Akayesu case, the Tribunal, while
establishing that genocide was committed against the
Tutsi ethnic group in Rwanda, also ruled that acts of
rape and sexual violence constitute crimes of genocide
if committed with the intent to destroy the targeted
group. We also recognize the fact that the ICTR indicted
93 individuals, mainly the masterminds, planners and
organizers of the genocide, who were out of reach for
the Rwandan justice system as they were international
fugitives.

The ICTR and the ICTY clearly established that
genocide was committed in Rwanda and Srebrenica
respectively, and we take this opportunity to once again
call on all members of the international community,
including political actors, to fight the scourge of
genocide denial, which is an insult to the victims and
an obstacle to long-term reconciliation.

Rwanda also appreciates the medical and
psychological services provided by the Mechanism
to witnesses residing in Rwanda, particularly the
victims of psychotrauma and HIV/AIDS among women
raped during the genocide. That was one of the main
contentious issues of the past few years, as those
services had only been provided to the people indicted
or convicted in Arusha.

Rwanda fully understands that all of the people
indicted in judicial proceedings will not necessarily
be convicted and sentenced. Nonetheless, we are
extremely troubled at the dangerous trend we see in the
ICTR appeals, where military commanders and cabinet
ministers have been acquitted, despite some of them
having been found guilty of serious charges by the
Trial Chamber. I would recall that, in 1998, the then-
Prime Minister of the genocidaire Government pleaded
guilty to genocide and even produced a substantive
written confession on how the genocide was planned
and executed by the authorities.

Allow me to put things in historical perspective.

Could anyone in this Chamber or elsewhere have
accepted that Joachim von Ribbentrop, Adolf Hitler's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, or Heinrich Miiller, Head
of the Gestapo, could be acquitted in Nuremberg? I do
not think so.

Unfortunately, that is what happened at the ICTR,
where a number of cabinet ministers, including the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and military commanders,
including the Head of the Gendarmerie, have been
acquitted by the ICTR, mainly by the Appeals
Chamber. To add insult to injury, the ICTR has also
granted a number of early releases to people sentenced
for genocide despite the seriousness of the crime
committed.

One of my interlocutors, a very prominent person
working for the ICTR, told me two days ago, "You
know, Ambassador, we need to take that kind of action
so that we maintain a kind of credibility with the
international community." I looked at him and I said,
"Oh, that is well and good." I think that the ICTR,
despite all its achievements mentioned previously,
should strive to gain credibility among the Rwandan
people, and especially among genocide survivors, those
directly concerned, rather than among members of the
international community.

With regard to the four cases referred to national
jurisdictions under rule 11 bis of the ICTR Statute, the
situation varies.

Two cases - those of Jean Uwinkindi and Bernard
Munyagishari - were transferred to Rwanda in April
2012 and July 2013, respectively. The trial owainkindi
started last month, while that of Munyagishari is in
pre-trial proceedings before the Rwandan courts. At
the same time, two other cases - those of Laurent
Bucyibaruta and Wenceslas Munyeshyaka - were
transferred to France seven years ago, in November
2007. Let me recall that the investigations in France
against the two individuals started well before the
2007 referral; they started in 2000 for Bucyibaruta
and in 1995 for Munyeshyaka. We are informed by the
monitoring mechanisms put in place by the ICTR that
the trials in those cases will begin in 2015 and 2016,
respectively - that is, 16 and 20 long years after the
start of the respective investigations.

While Rwanda welcomed the conviction of
Pascal Simbikangwa by a criminal court in Paris in
March - which was the very first trial of a genocide
suspect in France in 20 years - we are extremely
concerned by the repeated delays of proceedings
in cases referred by the ICTR to France. It has been
said that justice delayed is justice denied. We call on
the French authorities to ensure that the remaining
investigations are expedited, and we hope that they will
be.

Rwanda is still concerned that nine ICTR fugitives
remain at large, including the three top-priority
fugitives, Felicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana, We recall resolution 2150 (2014),
adopted by the Council on 16 April, which calls upon
all States to cooperate with the ICTR, the Mechanism
and the Government of Rwanda in the arrest and
prosecution of those fugitives, and further calls upon
States to investigate, arrest, prosecute or extradite
all other fugitives accused of genocide residing on
their territories, including those who are Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda leaders. In the
meantime, we thank Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow
for his continued efforts in tracking the fugitives,
including by dedicating a page on the Mechanism's
website containing updated information related to the
search for those nine fugitives.

Rwanda commends the ICTR for its outreach
programmes, in particular the awareness-raising
activities of the Umusanzu Information and
Documentation Centre in Kigali and its 10 additional
provincial mini-information centres. As stated in the
Mechanism's progress report (S/2014/350, annex I),
the Centre has played an important role in information
dissemination and facilitated access to ICTR
jurisprudence and other legal materials, for the benefit
of the Rwandan authorities, including the judiciary,
academics, civil society and the general public.

In the long term, however, we have on many
occasions expressed our view that the ICTR archives,
although they are the property of the United Nations,
should be located to Rwanda upon the completion of
the Mechanism's mandate. Indeed, the ICTR records
constitute an integral part of Rwandan history, are vital
to the preservation of the memory of the genocide, and
will play a critical role in preserving current and future
generations from genocide denial and revisionism.
Rwanda will continue its consultations within the
United Nations system to achieve that goal.

In conclusion, we hope that as the ICTR marks its
twentieth anniversary, it will live up to the expectations
of Council members when they adopted resolution 955
(1994). I thank the Tribunal for its achievements, but
we regret that its decisions in recent years will hardly

convince Rwandans that it has served justice and
reconciliation in our country.
