Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and wish you every success. I
also wish to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Lavrov of Russia, for the effective efforts he made in
conducting the work of the Council last month. I also
wish to support the contents of the Sudanese statement
on behalf of the Arab Group.

Our meeting today embodies international
concern vis-a-vis the method pursued by the Security
Council in addressing one of the most dangerous and
painful developments relating to the oldest and most
discussed item on its agenda, which is the occupation
by Israel of the State of Palestine and the continuation
of the Middle East problem. Despite the recent set of
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
1405 (2002) drafted and adopted by the American and
British delegations - which called, inter alia, upon the
Israeli Government to cooperate with the important
fact-finding team put together by the Secretary-General
to investigate the war crimes perpetrated inside the
Jenin refugee camp - we were surprised that these
same States hastened to produce forms of retreat from
the legal undertakings binding on the Israeli
Government to disguise their failure in convincing the
Israeli Government to abide by international
resolutions.

What happened in the Jenin refugee camp is not
subject to doubts or justifications. All signs and
information have explicitly indicated the commission
of systematic war crimes by Israel inside that camp, a
crime punishable by international law. Otherwise, how
can the world justify the signs of murder and
comprehensive destruction of buildings and facilities
over the heads of hundreds of their inhabitants, and the
measures of tight military closure by the Israeli
occupying forces to prevent access by international
relief and news agencies to that camp, including
independent United Nations elements? Why has Israel,
after 12 days of consultations with the Secretary-
General, persisted in resorting to marginalizing the
fact-finding team to Jenin and hampering its arrival?
Are not the results of these illegal policies and
measures by Israel sufficient to understand the
dimensions of the Israeli officials' desperate attempts
to shirk their responsibilities and the consequences of
the serious war crimes by their troops? Such policies
should not be condoned or tolerated, no matter how
long it has been since these crimes were committed.

We deeply regret the lack of a response among
influential Security Council members to the demands
of the Arab Group and to other peace-loving States
calling for the preservation of the fact-finding team as
the mechanism entrusted by resolution 1405 (2002) to
investigate the facts and implications of massacres and
war crimes committed inside that camp.

We consider that that measure, in addition to the
efforts made by these parties to pressure the Israeli
Government to force it to cooperate with that team
were not at all enough. They were mild to a great
extent compared to the unprecedented Israeli policy of
blatant rejection and defiance. This runs counter to the
provisions of the Charter, international resolutions and
international protocols and regulations governing
international relations, including human rights
conventions, the Fourth Geneva Convention and others
relating to decolonization, elimination of occupation,
and rejection of systematic international terrorism.

While we express our disappointment at the
unbalanced way in which the Security Council has
followed up on resolutions relating to the occupied
Palestinian territories, which has impeded the
protection of the Palestinian people today, we call
forcefully upon the Secretariat and the influential
members of the Security Council to fully shoulder their
responsibilities in line with the Charter, free from a
policy of double standards and bias in favour of the
more powerful side and against the weaker, injured
party in this equation.

In this connection, we would like to emphasize
the following. First, there is a need for the international
community to condemn Israel, the occupying force, for
its war crimes inside the Jenin refugee camp and in
other parts of the Palestinian territories. It has to reject
Israel's blatant attempts at justifying its crimes under
the pretext of fighting terrorism.

Secondly, the United Nations has to fully
shoulder its legal and ethical responsibilities to
investigate Israeli crimes in Jenin. Those who are
directly and indirectly responsible for these crimes
should be tried along the lines followed by the United
Nations in its war-crimes trials in Yugoslavia and
Rwanda.

Thirdly, the international community must resort
to Chapter VII of the Charter and take effective
measures that would serve as a deterrent to Israel. This
should be in a manner conducive to applying these
resolutions in all the occupied territories, lifting the
siege on the Church of the Nativity and the city of
Ramallah, halting the murder and destruction by Israel
of the Palestinian people, its leadership and its
institutions, releasing the thousands of Palestinian
detainees and ending the policy that impedes the
delivery of relief supplies and assistance to areas
affected by Israel's military incursions.

Fourthly, the international community should deal
with Israel according to international resolutions as an
aggressive occupying force. This requires the dispatch
of a United Nations international force to protect the
Palestinians, restore their territories, pave the way for
restructuring their institutions and buildings destroyed
by the Israeli military machinery, and develop social,
economic, national, cultural and development
programmes inside the Palestinian territories.

