Mr. Antonio: Let me start by joining others in
commending you, Mr. President, and all the members of
the Security Council for this timely initiative to organize
an open debate during your country's presidency of the
Security Council on a very critical topic of vital interest
to the African Union (AU) and the continent as a whole.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
and thank the outgoing members of the Security
Council for their contribution to advancing the cause of
peace and security in the world, with a special mention
of South Africa, a member of our organization, for its
contribution, along with the other African members of
the Security Council, in advancing the African agenda
in this very important body.

Africa's vested interest in this subject matter is
substantiated by the scale and complexity of the conflicts
being witnessed on the continent today, ranging from
illicit trafficking and the flow of drugs and weapons,
transnational organized crime and wider regional
implications. The experiences of the African Union in
its efforts to address conflict situations on the continent
have shown a direct correlation between sustainable
peace and the scaling up ofpost-conflict reconstruction
and peacebuilding, as well as development.

It will be recalled that the African Union adopted
a policy on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development (PRCD) in Banjul, the Gambia, in June
2006, aimed at improving the timeliness, effectiveness
and coordination of peacebuilding activities in post-
conflict countries and at laying the foundation for
social justice and sustainable peace and development.
The AU PCRD policy is underpinned by five
core principles, namely, African leadership; national
and local ownership; inclusiveness, equity and
non-discrimination; cooperation and cohesion; and
capacity-building for sustainability.

The Commission has continued to work on post-
conflict reconstruction and development through
assessment missions to countries emerging from
conflict and through raising the awareness of partners
and Member States to permit them to provide the
required support and exchange experiences.

Moreover, in order to renew efforts aimed at post-
conflict reconstruction and development with a view
to consolidating peace where it has been achieved,
the African Union, in July 2012, launched the African
Solidarity Initiative, an AU-led process for mobilizing
enhanced support from within the continent for post-
conflict reconstruction and development in countries
emerging from conflict. The overriding objective of
the African Solidarity Initiative is to promote African
solidarity commitments in support of African mutual
reliance as part of an urgent agenda to significantly
address the magnitude of the challenges being faced
by the countries concerned in their reconstruction,
peace consolidation, recovery and development. One
overall intention is to promote a paradigm shift that
puts African self-reliance centre stage as a key force for
enhanced and effective development of the continent
driven by the motto "Africa helping Africa".

As the continental flagship initiative, the African
Solidarity Initiative is aimed at instituting an expanded
and coordinated platform for mobilizing a higher
level of support, particularly from Africa, for post-
conflict reconstruction and development. Such support,
while including financial contributions, would also
target in-kind sharing of expertise, approaches, best
practices, training facilities, familiarization schemes
and capacity-building commitments as essential
non-monetary forms of support.

We at the African Union Commission are
convinced that the launch of the African Solidarity
Initiative will go a long way towards mobilizing
from within the continent's support for African
countries emerging from conflict and consolidate and
expand intra-African cooperation and mutual self-
help, consistent with the AU policy on post-conflict
reconstruction and development, as well as the 1975
Inter-African Convention Establishing an African
Technical Cooperation Programme.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community at large to supportthe Africa-led efforts I have
mentioned, aimed at building and consolidating peace
in post-conflict situations, especially those countries
on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. In
supporting those efforts, it is important to underscore
as cornerstones the principles of complementarity and
African ownership and leadership. The success ofthose
efforts lies in the strong collaboration and coordination
among the Peacebuilding Commission, the AU
Commission and the regional economic communities.

