Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) - the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of
Oman, the State of Qatar and the State of Kuwait - I
thank you, Sir, for convening this emergency meeting
to discuss the dangerous events that continue to rage

in Yemen. I also thank Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, for his
efforts.

The GCC reaffirms its full support for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Yemen and for the legitimacy of President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour. We reject all ongoing
unilateral actions taken by the Houthis. We reiterate the
GCC's readiness to support the security and stability
of Yemen, preserve its constitutional legitimacy and
reject all attempts to undermine it in order to restore
Yemen's security and establish conditions conducive
to a resumption of the political process pursuant to the
GCC Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism. We
hope that Yemen will not become a headquarters of
terrorist organizations.
Since the adoption of resolution 2201 (2015)
on 15 February, the Houthis have continued to take
dangerous unilateral actions in an attempt to exacerbate
the situation and to undermine stability in Yemen
and the political transition there. These measures are
blatant violations of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2201 (2015). The
Houthis continue to commit their atrocities and have
failed to withdraw their forces from State facilities and
to release Government officials from detention. They
continue to take measures that are the sole prerogative
of the legitimate Government, in clear violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. They have dismissed all decisions adopted by
the international community, instead of striving to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions and
to maintain the unity of Yemen. They have bombed
the presidential palace in an escalation that can only
further exacerbate the situation at all levels.

At a time when the Security Council is assessing
the outcomes of its own resolutions, the Houthis and
their supporters continue to move to take control of
the city of Taiz - an escalation intended to challenge
the resolve of the international community. They
are consolidating their control of Yemen without
considering the consequences of their actions on the
country's stability and security. In the light of their
atrocities and violations, we call on the Security
Council to take practical and urgent measures to ensure
that its resolutions are implemented and to maintain
international peace and security by adopting decisions
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which will thwart those who violate its resolutions and

prevent weapons from falling into the hands of the rebel
groups.

We are deeply alarmed by the deterioration of the
current security situation, including an upsurge in the
activities of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, which
facilitate the spread of the ideologies of extremism,
terrorism and violence. The increasing terrorist attacks
in Yemen, including the bombing of mosques in Sana'a
and Sa'dah, have been strongly condemned by the
GCC, given their worrisome impact on the security and
stability of Yemen and the region.

Confirming the GCC's efforts in support of the
security and stability of Yemen and its understanding
that these can be restored only through serious dialogue
among all sectors of the population, the GCC leaders
have responded to the plea sent by the President of
Yemen to His Majesty King Salman Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud of Saudi Arabia to convene a conference
on Yemen under the auspices of the GCC secretariat
in Riyadh, to which all Yemeni parties are invited.
We reiterate our invitation to all Yemeni groups to
participate in the conference, and hope that our Yemeni
brethren shall prioritize the interests of their country
and accept the invitation. They will enjoy all possible
support of the GCC at all levels, because the security of
Yemen is directly linked to that of the GCC.

Throughout every crisis in Yemen, the GCC has
always sought to lend a hand to our Yemeni brethren,
with whom we have always shared and will always
share the responsibility to ensure the security and
stability of the region. This will not happen without
ongoing cooperation among the countries of the region
to ensure mutual respect and non-interference in each
other's internal affairs.

The current dangerous situation in Yemen will
require hard work on our part to prevent Yemen's
descent into even deeper peril, enhanced international
efforts and efforts on the part of the international
community to take its responsibilities seriously. We
reiterate our commitment to supporting the aspirations
of the Yemeni people and maintaining regional peace
and security and the unity of Yemen, which are top
priorities of the Gulf Cooperation Council. As we
have said, Yemen's security and stability are directly
related to the national security of GCC members, and
we will take all measures necessary to protect Yemen's
security, stability and vital interests.

