Mr. Perovie (Montenegro): Let me begin by offering
my sincere and deepest condolences to the Government
of the Russian Federation, the family and the friends on
the passing of our respected colleague, His Excellency
Mr. Vitaly Churkin, Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations.

Montenegro is pleased to contribute to this important
debate and commends Ukraine for organizing it.

We live in an increasingly divided world, fractured
by violence, conflicts and political breakdowns and
other worrying developments that are threatening the
future of entire generations. The European security
landscape is also marked by instability, and our ideals
are and will be repeatedly challenged. Furthermore, the
international community, including the United Nations,
constantly finds itself in crisis-management mode. By
devoting all our energy to just one crisis or by just
reacting to crises, we will never get things done. We
should recognize the clear need for decisive action in
reversing such trends, as well as the need for new ways
of building peaceful and resilient societies and avoiding
backsliding away from peace, security, basic respect
for human rights and sustainable development.

We all know that prevention can work and does
work and that our Organization can do better. The
price of overlooking prevention, on the other hand, is
high and very easy to see. That is why we would like
to underline the significance of United Nations early-
detection and early-warning mechanisms. The Security
Council must consider making better use of the wide
range of tools at its disposal to prevent the emergence
of conflicts. Needless to say, such an approach is far
more cost-effective.

Progress and peace in Europe must not be taken for
granted. We should foster them in every country and at
every opportunity, and we should keep in mind lessons
learned in our continent. We in Montenegro know from
experience that the best and, truly, the only sustainable
way to solve differences and alleviate tensions and
conflict situations is to use the tools of diplomacy
and dialogue. The United Nations and the Security

Council often become overstretched and overburdened
with various crises, and cooperation and partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in the area of peacebuilding
should be strengthened. Those organizations should
play a more active role in assisting and, if need be, in
leading efforts to bringing about peace and stability.

Regional and subregional organizations have deep
knowledge and strong local networks and are, therefore,
in a position to offer tailor-made approaches. Equally
important, they ensure that the countries directly
affected by crises are involved, as we have seen in many
instances in Africa. For those reasons, the role of the
European Union (EU) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe in international security
and in advancing peace in Europe is indispensable.
One of the latest examples of the proactive
engagement of regional organizations from our region
is the European Union-facilitated dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo on the normalization of relations.
Montenegro welcomes that EU initiative, which is
very much in line with our firm belief that there is
no alternative to dialogue as we search for durable
solutions. We know that putting dialogue into practice
is not always easy and that any success will be possible
only if there is strong and sustained political support
by all States.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is not the task of the United Nations and other
international organizations alone. It is a process of
individual, collective and institutional transformation
and one of inclusive development. Without inclusive
State institutions, we are unlikely to have either
sustained peace or a basis for long-term development.
We also believe that it is crucial to involve women and
youth in the peacebuilding process as stakeholders
and decision-makers, and that should be primarily
the responsibility of all Member States and regions.
But we need to strengthen our understanding of how
international actors can support the process.

A collective global response and a stronger and
more effective United Nations is needed for confronting
the challenges of today's world. We should use the wide
range of potential tools at our disposal with focus and
dedication, so as to achieve results. Working together
towards a world that will bring about peace, security
and development is our task, challenge and opportunity,
and Montenegro is committed to playing its part.

