Mr. Backovic' (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to speak to the Council for the first time as
representative of the Republic of Serbia. Let me welcome
the Presidents and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I thank them for their semi-annual reports.

The fight against impunity for serious international
crimes is a milestone for the principle of the rule oflaw
at the international level. The unambiguous willingness
of States to cooperate with ICTY regarding all acts that
the Security Council recognizes in Tribunal's statute
as serious international crimes should be Viewed as
a contribution to that fight. Serbia's contribution in
that regard is best evidenced by the statistics on its
cooperation with the ICTY. Parallel to that cooperation,
the authorities of my country continue to fight impunity
for core international crimes through proceedings
before national courts.

The Republic of Serbia has handed over 45 defendants
to the Tribunal out of the total of 46 whose surrender
had been demanded from Serbia. One defendant
committed suicide before he could be handed over to the
Tribunal. Of that number, 14 defendants were arrested
in the Republic of Serbia; 4 defendants were arrested
abroad within the framework of cooperation between
national security services with foreign agencies; and
27 defendants voluntarily surrendered.

Serbia also gave ICTY Prosecutors free access
to important evidence located in Serbia, such as
documents, archives and witnesses. So far, Serbia
has positively resolved 2,151 out of 2,172 requests
for assistance received from the Office of the ICTY
Prosecutor, and 7 requests for assistance from the
Office ofthe Mechanims Prosecutor. Serbia has allowed
757 witnesses to testify freely despite their right and/or
obligation to withhold testimony due to State, military
or official secrets. Various defence teams issued 1,332
requests, and no pending requests for assistance or
disputes in that regard have been recorded. Serbia
carried out all 11 requests for witness protection. It
is also important to note that Government agencies
successfully monitored all the provisional release
cases and ensured that all the accused were returned to
detention at the ICTY's request. The Serbian authorities
are currently monitoring two provisional release cases.

In addition to cooperating with the ICTY, Serbia
remains committed to improving the efficiency of
domestic war crime proceedings, as evidenced by the
obligations that Serbia has undertaken in accordance
with its action plan under chapter 23 of its national
strategy for the prosecution of war crimes, adopted by
the Serbian Government earlier this year, as well as by
the fact that eight indictments for war crimes against
15 individuals have been confirmed in Serbia in 2016.

Accountability for core international crimes,
regardless of the national, ethnic or religious status of
the perpetrators and victims, as well as reconciliation
and cooperation in the region, continue to be priorities
for Serbia. However, it is important to note that not
all of those goals can be attained by Serbia acting
unilaterally; for that, regional cooperation is necessary.
Serbia is committed to improving that cooperation, and
of course a similar commitment on the part of other
countries in the region is needed, too.
We are aware that the fact that a new war crimes
prosecutor has not been elected has caused some delays
in implementing the strategy in Serbia, but I am pleased
to inform the Council that the new election process
has almost been completed. It must be carried out in
accordance with our Constitution and the relevant
laws, and with full respect for the autonomy of the
public prosecutor's office and the independence and
democratic proceedings of the National Assembly. None
of those authorities should be exposed to any pressure
or inappropriate internal or external influences when
deciding on candidates for the position of war crimes
prosecutor. However, the war crimes prosecutor's
office has been performing its duties diligently, as the
number of confirmed indictments testifies. That is
also in line with Serbia's commitment to strengthening
its institutions, regardless of who the leaders of those
institutions are.

Despite the clear legal arguments to the contrary,
there is still criticism concerning the case of the
Prosecutor v. Jojic' et al. case in the new report of the
Tribunal (S/2016/670). According to arrest warrants
issued by the ICTY Trial Chamber in a case of contempt
of court, Serbia is once again facing accusations of the
non-extradition of three individuals, Petar Jojie, Vjerica
Radeta and Jovo Ostojie. In that regard, I would like to
remind the Council of the decision of the Belgrade High
Court issued on 18 May, which stated that in this case the
legal conditions for executing the Tribunal's warrants
were not met, because our law on cooperating with the
ICTY stipulates that legal grounds for executing ICTY
arrest warrants are provided only by indictments for
core statutory crimes - such as grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949; violations of the laws or
customs of war; genocide, and so forth - as opposed
to indictments for contempt of court. Naturally, the
Serbian law on cooperation with the ICTY closely
follows the provisions of the ICTY Statute.

By its adoption and full implementation of its
law on cooperation with the ICTY, Serbia has proved
its commitment to prosecuting all the crimes that the
Security Council has listed in the ICTY statute. Under
Serbia's Constitution, our courts operate autonomously
and independently, and pass judgement in accordance
with the Constitution, the country's laws and the
generally accepted rules of international law and other
ratified international treaties.

Serbia has never failed to execute an ICTY arrest
warrant based on the ICTY statute and the generally
accepted rules of international law. The Belgrade
High Court decision does not preclude similar future
cooperation. However, there is no legal basis for the
extradition in this case. The French authorities applied
an identical provision of French law to an identical
situation in refusing extradition in the case of Florence
Hartmann. That decision was not reported to the
Security Council as improper in any way. To sum up,
the statute simply does not provide for the surrender of
indictees accused of being in contempt of court. That
is not written in the statute. Presumably, if the Council
had intended that indictment for crimes other than
serious crimes could serve as a basis for extradition, it
would have written that into the statute. Article 29, as
mentioned, does not provide for that, and I invite the
Council to take a look at it. Nor does any other provision
in the statute. That interpretation does not succeed, and
probably would not succeed under the domestic laws of
the countries of most of the members of the Council. It
is very possible that the Council's intention of providing
for the Tribunal's prosecution and personal jurisdiction
only of serious crimes has to do with the resources that
the Council was able to dedicate to it at the time.

The second point that I would like to make has
to do with the confirmation of the judgement in the
case of Mr. Dukic'. That judgement was rendered by
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and since
Mr. Dukie is now in Serbia and Belgrade, the judgement
has to be confirmed. The confirmation process has
so far taken a year. Six hearings were held at which
Mr. Dukie did not appear, owing to health problems,
for which he presented doctor's notes as evidence. As a
result, the judge has ordered his health to be assessed by
an expert witness to decide whether he is well enough
to be present at the confirmation hearing. Serbia has
not refused or failed to confirm the judgement. I do not
believe that the period ofa year that has elapsed so far,
compared with the length of time that the Tribunal has
taken in some cases, is excessive. There is therefore no
reason to point to this case with any criticism. Needless
to say, Serbia is committed to respecting all of its
international and bilateral agreements in that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that Serbia's
cooperation with the ICTY has been second to none.
Serbia remains committed to contributing actively to
the Tribunal's efforts to accomplish its mission, as
well as to effectively prosecuting war crimes before its
domestic courts. That is the only way we can achieve
justice for the victims, regardless of their national,
ethnic or religious origin. We will continue to strive for
reconciliation, cooperation and stability in the region.
The citizens of all the former Yugoslav republics
deserve it.

The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.
