Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto and Executive Director Fedotov for
their briefings and their efforts. I also want to thank
Ambassador Umarov for his briefing. Over the past
two years, under his capable leadership, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) has
done a tremendous amount of useful work, and China
is grateful to him. I have also listened carefully to
Ambassador Saikal, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, and Ms. Haress, the representative of
civil society, and thank them for their statements.

China has been following the current political
process and the security and humanitarian situations
in Afghanistan very closely. In the wake of the
parliamentary elections in October, the political process
in the country has entered a new phase. Afghanistan's
National Unity Government is committed to promoting
socioeconomic development and maintaining peace and
security. The Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
held in Geneva in November adopted a j oint communique
and the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework,
reaffirming the international community's steadfast
support to the country in all areas. The international
community should now honour its commitment in
earnest and continue to aid Afghanistan in the following
four areas.

First, Afghanistan must be helped to maintain its
political stability. While the parliamentary elections
were held in October, the results have not yet been
announced. As preparations for next year's presidential
elections are under way, we hope that the country's
Independent Election Commission can learn lessons and
draw on its experiences in the parliamentary elections
to strengthen the arrangements for the presidential
elections. All stakeholders across the political
spectrum in Afghanistan should strengthen their unity,
consider the maintenance of national political stability
a shared responsibility and resolve their differences
through dialogue.

Secondly, the international community must help
Afghanistan improve its security environment. The
outbreak of violence on 20 October, the day of the
parliamentary elections, claimed many lives and ended
up becoming the deadliest day of the year. In the first
nine months of this year, fighting inside Afghanistan
resulted in a record number of civilian casualties.
Statistics from the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime also show that drug production in the
country remains high. The international community
should strengthen its coordination and cooperation
with a view to effectively implementing the various
Security Council resolutions related to these issues,
and should support the work of the relevant subsidiary
bodies, such as the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011). It should also continue to
support the Afghan national security forces in building
their capacity to respond effectively to threats such as
terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking.

Thirdly, Afghanistan needs help in advancing the
reconciliation process. The Government ofAfghanistan
recently again called for unconditional talks with the
Taliban and reorganized its negotiating team. The
international community should support an inclusive
political process that is Afghan-led and -owned, back
the Government's efforts to promote peace talks;
encourage the Taliban to return to the negotiating
table as soon as possible and give support to the Kabul
process, the Moscow format and other international
mechanisms with a view to making further progress.

Fourthly, we must help Afghanistan achieve self-
driven development. The investment and business
environments in Afghanistan improved in 2018. We
hope that all the country's political parties will work
together to advance its development in accordance
with Afghanistan's National Peace and Development
Framework and national priority programme. The
international community should continue to help the
Government and the people of Afghanistan improve
their livelihoods, and should respect the Afghan
people's independent choice of political system and
development path. Regarding development, I would like
to respond to my colleague from Kuwait, who made a
reference in his statement to a Chinese proverb. China
has another saying - that development is of paramount
importance, and it is indeed of paramount importance
to Afghanistan as well.

As a traditionally friendly neighbour of Afghanistan,
China has always given support to its political process
and its reconstruction and development. As Ambassador
Saikal said, the second dialogue between the Foreign
Ministers of China, Afghanistan and Pakistan was
held in Kabul on 15 December with great success. The
three sides reached a broad consensus and reaffirmed
their joint commitment to realizing a comprehensive
and inclusive political settlement as soon as possible,
strengthening the momentum of improvement in
the relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan,
facilitating practical cooperation and connectivity by
advancing the Belt and Road Initiative, expanding its
cooperation on counter-terrorism and jointly promoting
regional security, stability and development. During
the dialogue, the three sides also signed a memorandum
of understanding on countering terrorism and issued a
joint statement on the tripartite dialogue.

In order to help the millions of people who have
been affected by drought in Afghanistan, China recently
provided Afghanistan with more than ¥60 million
in humanitarian assistance. We will continue to use
the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Foreign Ministers'
dialogue and the quadrilateral coordination
group on the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process - which consists of China, Afghanistan,
Pakistan and the United States - the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group
and other multilateral mechanisms to provide support
and assistance to Afghanistan in the relevant areas.
China will continue to work with Afghanistan to
actively implement the memorandum of understanding
on jointly advancing the Belt and Road Initiative,
facilitating its trade relations with other countries in
the region and building its infrastructure, connectivity
and socioeconomic development so as to contribute to
the security, stability, development and prosperity of
Afghanistan and the region as a whole.

