Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Since the inception of the
crisis in Iraq last year, Pakistan has been guided by the
interests and welfare of the Iraqi people - before the
war, during the war and after the war. Following the
war in Iraq, Pakistan pleaded for full respect for certain
basic principles: Iraqi sovereignty and the interests of
the Iraqi people; the unity and territorial integrity of
Iraq; and Iraq's control over its own natural resources.
We were glad that those principles were reflected in
resolution 1483 (2003) and subsequent resolutions
adopted by the Council.

As we all acknowledge today, Iraq is entering a
new phase in its political existence. An interim
Government has been formed, and it has claimed all the
attributes of full sovereignty. As we have been advised,
the formation of the interim Government, through a
consultative process led by the Secretary-General and
his special envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, is a first step
in the transition to a fully representative Government.
The role of the United Nations and of Mr. Brahimi is,
in our view, a vital one in fostering acceptance of the
Iraqi interim Government within and outside the
country.

The Government of Pakistan has welcomed the
appointment of the interim Iraqi administration as a
step towards restoration of a fully representative
Government in the country. Pakistan hopes that Iraq,
under the interim administration, will exercise full
sovereignty, which will lend it credibility, protect Iraq's
unity and territorial integrity and help restore security
and stability in the country. Pakistan also hopes that the
United Nations will play a central role in assisting the
Iraqi people to exercise full sovereignty and to bring
about the earliest possible restoration of security and
stability and the reconstruction of their country.

We look forward to hearing a detailed report from
Mr. Brahimi in the near future and to obtaining his
evaluation of the situation and of future prospects. We
listened with interest and attention to the statement
made by Foreign Minister Zebari in the Security
Council today. My delegation will be responsive to the
views of the Iraqi interim Government in its
consideration of the draft resolution which the Security
Council is currently considering. In that context, I
would like to offer some comments and pose a few
questions to the Foreign Minister.

Foreign Minister Zebari mentioned that more than
400 political groups have mushroomed in Iraq;
obviously not all of them are represented in the interim
arrangements. We would like to know whether the
interim Government intends to continue efforts to
ensure the broadest possible inclusiveness of various
political groups and to evoke the widest possible
support from the Iraqi people.

Secondly, we have noted that the Iraqi interim
Government wishes to have full authority; in that
context we would like to inquire whether it would
envisage any limitations on this authority through a
self-imposed restraint. The people of Iraq, Foreign
Minister Zebari has told us, need - and have requested
the multinational force - to help stabilize the security
situation. We would be grateful to learn his evaluation
of the principal sources of the security threat faced by
Iraq today. Secondly, does the interim Government
have in mind any time frame with regard to the
presence of the multinational force
Foreign Minister Zebari also mentioned that the
multinational force will have to be regulated and that a
partnership will be established between the Iraqi
authorities and the multinational force. We would like
to know whether consideration has already been given
to the nature of this partnership in the security sphere
and whether the establishment of any mechanisms has
been envisaged for the purposes of regulating that
partnership.

Finally, I would like to leave a few questions for
the Foreign Minister's consideration. Perhaps the Iraqi
delegation could respond later if it cannot do so at the
moment. These relate to the provisions in the draft
resolution concerning the arms embargo and to the
international monitoring body over the Iraqi
development fund. Does the interim Government feel
that these provisions are consistent with the provision
of full sovereignty and full authority to the Iraqi

Government?

Finally, we expect that the interim Government
will also soon establish contacts and consultations with
its neighbours. We would be happy to learn of any
plans for such contacts and cooperation, which we
believe will enhance security and stability, both in Iraq
and elsewhere in the region.

