Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Before I begin my
prepared text, I would like to make a few preliminary
observations.

We began our discussions this morning in this
Chamber with a very important meeting with
Mr. Karzai, the head of the Interim Authority in
Afghanistan. It is no secret that the United Nations
faces formidable challenges in Afghanistan, and none
of us knows what the results will be like. I mention this
because, if indeed we do succeed in East Timor after
having faced many serious challenges two years ago,
this success in one corner of Asia - the south-eastern
corner - will have, we hope, a ripple effect and also
contribute to the success of another, probably even
more challenging, assignment - the one that we are
taking on in Afghanistan.

We also want to join our colleagues, of course, in
paying tribute to Australia for the contribution it has
made to East Timor, and we certainly welcome the
important speech that was made by its Prime Minister
when he addressed us this morning.

We also welcome the presence of Ms. Liz
O'Donnell, Minister of State of Ireland, particularly
because Ireland's contributions to East Timor have also
been exemplary.
We would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his excellent report. It is both
comprehensive and detailed, and it makes a strong case
for the way ahead for the United Nations role in East
Timor. We welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello, and the
Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
East Timor, Jose Ramos-Horta, back to the Council.
We thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his briefing,
which was, as usual, insightful and useful. We are
confident that Mr. Ramos-Horta's briefing will be
equally insightful and useful. It might actually be
helpful if he could respond to some of the comments
made this morning, as part of a dialogue that we should
have with the East Timorese in the build-up to
independence.

We fully support the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). East Timor today, standing at the
threshold of independence, is a very good example of
what the United Nations can achieve. Indeed, what the
United Nations has accomplished in East Timor is
remarkable by any standard. Indeed, it is hard to find a
good historical comparison. From scratch, the United
Nations has, in less than three years, helped to restore
peace and normalcy to a shattered land, nurtured a
nascent East Timorese Government and put in place a
democratic process that saw the peaceful and
successful elections of the country's very first
Constituent Assembly. For this we must acknowledge
the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
and, of course, of our good friend Sergio Vieira de
Mello, as well as those of UNTAET and all of those
who have worked tirelessly to bring East Timor to
where it is today.

But - and I am glad that the Australian Prime
Minister also made this point - it is clear that the
United Nations has unfinished business in East Timor.
Despite the remarkable progress made since October
1999, there is still much of the United Nations mandate
that is left uncompleted. The Secretary-General, in his
latest report, stated that

"the comparative fragility of the political
foundations of this new country, its very limited
pool of professional and administrative expertise,
lack of strong independent security mechanisms
and nascent state of economic development mean
that East Timor will continue to require
significant assistance from the international
community well after independence, in order to
ensure stability and realize the potential for
progress that has been generated over the past
two years". (S/2002/80, para. 4)

East Timor's independence, therefore, does not
mark the end of the United Nations engagement in East
Timor. On the contrary, it signals the beginning of an
important new phase of United Nations involvement -
one where the United Nations and the international
community must make secure the gains achieved for a
lasting period.

Of course, it is not anyone's intention that the
United Nations should linger on in East Timor for any
longer than necessary. We do believe that East Timor
needs a good exit strategy. But the United Nations
cannot ensure the continued success of its good work in
East Timor unless its Members are fully committed to a
smooth and successful transition. It is all too easy to
succumb to the mistaken persuasion that the United
Nations should disengage as rapidly as possible simply
because the situation in East Timor now appears to
have stabilized. This is an overly simplistic and
dangerous view. There are enough examples in recent
history to warn us of the dangers of precipitate exits,
for instance, Afghanistan - the subject of our first
meeting this morning - and Somalia.

Should the situation in East Timor unravel as a
result of the United Nations haste to depart, we will
again find that the cost of prevention would have been
much less than that of the cure. As I had pointed out at
our last meeting on this issue, in October 2001, what
the United Nations has achieved in East Timor has
come about only through hard thinking, shrewd
judgement, hard work, dedication and commitment. I
wish also to reiterate that we should never take this
success for granted, because it is a remarkable -
perhaps even exceptional a story. It is therefore the
Council's job to continue to make the right decisions in
order to ensure that it gets the job in East Timor done
right today so that it does not have to return tomorrow.

How the United Nations handles East Timor after
independence will have wide-ranging consequences for
our region as a whole. East Timor's future and that of
our region are inextricably linked. East Timor is,
therefore, for us and for others in the region, not just
another abstract agenda item but a question of vital and
immediate strategic importance. A stable East Timor
can contribute to the stability and security of the region
and complement the region's efforts to prevail over the
political and economic problems it faces. It would be
remiss of us to let East Timor run the risk of becoming
a failed State. The stakes are too high, both for East
Timor and the region. The Council has recognized and
affirmed the need for a substantial international
presence in East Timor after independence. It must now
sustain and build on that momentum to ensure that the
United Nations effectively follows through on its
commitment to fulfil its responsibilities in East Timor.

The Secretary-General has put forward a set of
recommendations for the United Nations successor
mission in East Timor, and the Council broadly
endorsed those recommendations in an October 2001
presidential statement. With the renewal of UNTAET'S
mandate - which, as Ambassador Eldon said, the
United Kingdom and Singapore have worked on, and
which we hope will go through smoothly this week -
we now look forward to more specific proposals from
the Secretary-General on the follow-on United Nations
peacekeeping operation and to a thorough discussion of
these proposals in due course.

Finally, I wish to conclude by referring to a small
point that came up in the Council's debate on East
Timor on 31 October last year - that is, the discussion
between France and Singapore on this issue. I am
pleased to inform the Council that France and
Singapore have had a healthy exchange of views on our
respective contributions to East Timor. We have agreed
that both countries have contributed significantly to the
territory, both in the early days of INTERFET as well
as in the period of UNTAET. We also agreed that
France and Singapore have a common interest in
ensuring that East Timor becomes a true success story
of the United Nations. France and Singapore will work
closely together to achieve this conclusion.

