Mrs. Craft (United States of America): Today's
vote on draft resolution S/2019/756, on a humanitarian
ceasefire in Idlib, underscores the commitment of the
international community to bringing peace and stability
to north-west Syria. The Security Council must act to
end the violence, in particular against civilians in Syria,
and to enable humanitarian actors to provide assistance
to the most vulnerable populations. After nearly nine
years of conflict, the Syrian people deserve nothing
less. The United States is proud to have voted in favour
of the draft resolution, authored by Belgium, Germany
and Kuwait, in order to uphold our shared responsibility
to protect civilians whose lives are at stake. It is deeply
regrettable that the Council was not able to agree to a
ceasefire draft resolution that would have saved lives
in Idlib, especially as the Al-Assad regime and its
allies prepare to launch another offensive on the people
of Idlib.

It is also regrettable that the Council cannot agree
on a draft resolution that includes language that would
have held the Al-Assad regime and Russia responsible
for their vicious attacks against the Syrian people.
Let there be no mistake: for five months the Al-Assad
regime and its allies have engaged in attacks that have
devastated civilians, as well as civilian infrastructure,
such as schools, hospitals and water facilities. The
Al-Assad regime and Russia were responsible for 1,031
civilian deaths in Idlib province between 29 April
and 29 August, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

While they can continue to try to hide behind lies
and disinformation in the Council today, there is no
doubt that the regime and Russian forces responsible for
those attacks must be held accountable for their actions.
The world knows that, despite their denials, Russian and
Syrian planes dominate the skies in north-west Syria,
and so far, the Russian Federation has failed to comply
with the United Nations de-confliction arrangements
intended to keep civilians and hospitals safe. The
Al-Assad regime and its allies tell the international
community that they are merely conducting counter-
terrorism operations. But we have seen this before. What
we are witnessing is not counter-terrorism but an excuse
to continue a violent military campaign against those
who refuse to accept the Al-Assad regime's authority.
Russia's veto of today's draft resolution - Russia's
thirteenth veto on Syria - represents yet another
attempt to absolve itself and the Al-Assad regime of
their culpability in the deaths of thousands of Syrian
men, women and children.

Russia has unequivocally proven, through its
actions in the Council and on the battlefield, that it
has no interest in protecting Syrian civilians in Idlib,
Aleppo, eastern Ghouta or Dara'a. Nor does it have
an interest in a lasting humanitarian ceasefire. We
are disappointed that China decided to be complicit
in those activities, joining Russia in its decision to
veto the draft resolution. What Russia cares about is
protecting Bashar Al-Assad, at the expense of the
lives and peaceful aspirations of the Syrian people.
We once again call on Russia to join the international
community in a process that will result in the definitive
stabilization of the country.

