Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): Let me express at the
outset my sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
through you to the members of the Security Council, for
allowing my delegation to participate in the debate of the
Council on the agenda item before it. This being my first
occasion to address the Council as the permanent
representative of my country, may I also take this
opportunity to congratulate you on the assumption of the
Presidency of the Council for the month of June.

The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned at the
serious threat that the testing of nuclear devices by India
and then by Pakistan poses to the global nuclear non-
proliferation regime, to regional stability in South Asia and,
above all, to international peace and security. These tests
are all the more regrettable as they come at a time when
the international community has made consistent strides
towards a strengthened regime for nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament through the indefinite extension of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
as well as towards increasing its universality and through
the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). My Government has been closely watching
the developments with great concern and acute interest, not
only as a signatory to the NPT and CTBT but also as a
country that declared a denuclearization policy voluntarily
and unequivocally in 1991.

We firmly believe that the international community
should rise to the challenges posed by the testing in a
resolute manner. Failing to do so would undermine the
effectiveness of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
prompt the escalation of a nuclear arms race in the region
and beyond. We are particularly concerned that it would
also send the wrong message to other parts of the world,
further destabilizing the very foundations of the global
non-proliferation regime. In this regard, we strongly
applaud a series of initiatives taken by the Security
Council as the primary organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and we
wholeheartedly endorse the resolution just adopted by the
Council today as comprehensive in scope and balanced in
content. My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express its appreciation to the sponsors of the resolution,
in particular Japan and Sweden, for their initiative and
persistent efforts to produce a text with the broadest
possible consensus among Council members.

My delegation fully associates itself with Council
members in calling upon all countries concerned to stop
their nuclear- weapon development programmes and in
strongly urging all States that have not done so to join the
N PT and CTBT without delay and without conditions. We
are also of the view that recent events once again confirm
the urgent need for reaching early agreement on a treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.

We are deeply concerned that the threat posed by the
nuclear tests in South Asia could spread to other regions
through the transfer of technology for nuclear weapons or
ballistic missiles to and from the third countries. We
attach particular importance to this danger, as it clearly
poses the risk of a domino effect under the pressure of
nuclear proliferation. The Republic of Korea firmly
believes that the spread of nuclear-weapon technology
should be prevented at all costs with concerted action by
the international community, as a prerequisite to make the
world a safer place in which to live.

Given the gravity of the risks and the uncertainty
involved, we believe that the Security Council should
remain actively seized of the matter and ready to consider
further steps, as it sees fit, to ensure the prompt and full
implementation of the present resolution.

My delegation also recognizes the role of the
Secretary-General in matters related to international peace
and security and therefore welcomes his efforts to defuse
tension in the region by encouraging dialogue and
reconciliation, as he has done in many parts of the world.
In this regard, we are looking forward to his report to the
Council, as requested in the resolution.

 

For our part, I assure you, Mr. President, that my
Government will continue to do its best to work with
Council members towards the cause of a nuclear-weapon-
free world. In this connection, we welcome the decision to
allow the participation of non-members today as yet more
proof of the strong commitment of Council members under
your leadership to enhancing the transparency of the
workings of the Council.

To conclude, I should like to reiterate the firm
commitment of my Government to nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament in general, and to a nuclear-weapon-free
Korean peninsula in particular, as it has manifested on a
number of occasions.

