Mr. Rock (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate on Haiti. We hail it as an indication that
Haiti is on the international community's priority
agenda, and it must remain there.

I wish also to note the presence of President-elect
Rene Preval among us and to congratulate him on his
election victory. We wish him the best of luck in
carrying out the important mandate that the Haitian
people have confided to him. Allow me also to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, for his admirable work in
Haiti in recent years. His ongoing dialogue with all
Haitian politicians and his efforts to mobilize the
international community have contributed enormously
to laying the foundation for a constructive relationship
between Haiti and the international community.

Mr. President, the fact that you have initiated this
debate on behalf of Argentina reminds us that there is a
regional aspect to and regional solidarity with Haiti.
This is imperative to the success of international efforts
in Haiti. Therefore, we must ensure that there is full
partnership with the Organization of American States
and the Caribbean Community in the international
community's involvement in Haiti.

This Council meeting is being held at a time
when there are still several crucial steps on the horizon
for Haiti. These include the second ballot of the
parliamentary elections, the accession to office of the
new President and his Government, and local and
municipal elections. The renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) next August is yet another important
step, this time in terms of what form the United
Nations presence in Haiti will take after the elections.
Various development initiatives coordinated by the
Interim Cooperation Framework and developed in the
medium term as part of a national poverty reduction
strategy will also be implemented so as to mitigate the
leading causes of insecurity and instability in Haiti.

Completing these steps will solidify the success
of the political transition and lay the foundations for
sustainable development in Haiti. Consequently,
Canada will help in the preparations for each of these
steps and ensure they are successful.

For the moment, let us turn our attention to the
short-term challenges upon which both Haiti and the
international community agree. First, it is vital that the
second round of elections be held on the scheduled
date - 21 April 2006 - so the new Government can
take office. It is also of utmost importance that local
and municipal elections then be held quickly.
Furthermore, comprehensive reform of the Haitian
national police must be undertaken, as mentioned in
Security Council resolution 1608 (2005). To ensure
success, all parties involved must have a common
strategic vision and a political will to move forward on
policing and to properly begin the even more complex
work of reforming the legal system.

These reforms and the re-establishment of the
rule of law in general are in line with a vision of
sustainable development. They are also vital if some
major human rights problems in Haiti are to be
resolved. We must also stress the importance of
including a gender-equality component once these
reforms are developed and implemented.

(spoke in English)

Canada wants to congratulate all those who have
demonstrated the flexibility and the commitment that
will be required to fulfil the various responsibilities to
be faced, given the enormous, indeed the colossal,
challenges brought on by the instability that has
prevailed in Haiti over the past few years. Future
success will depend on MINUSTAH and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations continuing to
reconcile the legitimacy of their presence and a United
Nations Charter mandate with tighter coordination with
all of the donors through the Interim Cooperation
Framework mechanism and its sectoral issue tables.
This will ensure the partnership of the Haitian
authorities, optimize the various areas of expertise and
consolidate international action. Future work in the
fundamental and sensitive sectors of justice and
security will also require that we be more sensitive to
local realities.

Canada hopes that the spirit of cooperation
between the people of Haiti and the international
community will increase in the coming months and
years. The reforms ahead are going to take a lot of
work. Canada commits today that it will continue to
cooperate with Haiti as an equal partner by fully
respecting its Constitution, its culture and its diversity.
We stress the need to work with a united Haitian
people, moving towards true national reconciliation,
and with national authorities who are politically
inclusive and committed to working democratically
towards political, economic and social development.
The recent successes are encouraging for the future.
Delays in other areas show the distance we have yet to
travel. We must move ahead in partnership with the
Haitian people, and that is why, despite the extent of
the challenge Canada remains clear-sighted yet
confident and determined to contribute to Haiti's
development.

