Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
recent report to the Security Council on small arms. In
addition, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Abe, for his
introductory remarks.

The issue of small arms has attracted a great deal
of attention from the international community in recent
years. This reflects a common awareness that the
excessive accumulation of and illicit trade in small
arms is jeopardizing stability, post-conflict
reconstruction and social development in the areas and
countries concerned.

It is gratifying to note that the United Nations has
already taken a series of effective steps to deal with
this issue. In 2001, the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Firearms Protocol and the Programme of Action on
small arms were concluded. They provide a legal and
policy basis for an adequate solution to the issue of
small arms. This reflects the determination of the
international community to combat the illicit trade in
small arms.
During the past three years, great progress has
been made in accelerating the entry into force of the
Firearms Protocol and the implementation of the
Programme of Action on small arms. In particular, the
success of the 2003 United Nations First Biennial
Meeting of States on small arms has given fresh
impetus to the general implementation of the
programme of action.

The General Assembly, at its current session,
adopted resolution 58/241, which establishes a working
group to negotiate an international instrument to enable
States to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons. This will no doubt further stimulate
international efforts to combat illicit small arms.

Likewise, the Security Council has also attached
increasing importance to the issue of small arms. It has
organized several special meetings to consider the issue
and has adopted relevant presidential statements and
resolutions.

Moreover, the Security Council has also
emphasized the importance of resolving the problem of
the illicit trade in small arms in its consideration of a
series of related issues, including the protection of
civilians and of women and children in conflict.

Ensuring the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes in
the settling of regional conflicts, including the
collection and disposal of small arms, has also been of
major concern to the Security Council. All of these
factors have played a positive role in reducing the
illicit flow of small arms and in strengthening peace
and stability in the regions concerned.

In 2002 the Secretary-General put forward 12
recommendations concerning ways and means by
which the Security Council could contribute to dealing
with the question of small arms. Since then, United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council, have
made significant progress in dealing with this issue,
and we would like to express our appreciation in this
respect.

In our view, the Security Council should continue
to pay close attention to the issue of small arms, in
keeping with its mandate, and actively promote the
implementation of DDR processes in conflict regions
while closely monitoring the implementation of
relevant arms embargoes.

The Security Council should also strengthen its
coordination with the General Assembly and other
United Nations bodies for concerted action to promote
the settlement of the question of small arms.

China has always attached great importance to the
combat against the illicit trade in small arms. We have
actively participated in international efforts in this
regard. In recent years, the Chinese Government has
been resolutely implementing the Programme of Action
on small arms, and it is now actively preparing for the
ratification and implementation of the Firearms
Protocol. Chinese experts have also actively
participated in the United Nations Group of
Governmental Experts to identify and trace illicit arms.

We would like to join others in deploying
common efforts to facilitate an early and adequate
settlement of the question of small arms throughout the
world.

