Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Mark Simmonds, Minister for African
Affairs and President of the Security Council, for
having organized this important briefing. I take this
opportunity to commend the United Kingdom through
you, Mr. President, for the positive role it continues to
play in favour of Somalia and its people. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted shortly.

I wish to acknowledge the presence of Her
Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Federal Republic of Somalia, and His Excellency
Mr. Tekeda Alemu, Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia and representative of the Chairperson of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
I also wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General, for his briefing.

As the people of Somalia continue to rebuild the
country, which was described as a failed State during
the last two decades, we can today be reasonably
optimistic. We are indeed witnessing significant
progress towards sustainable peace and stability in
Somalia. The Federal Government of Somalia, under
the leadership of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud,
has shown its commitment and willingness to address
major challenges, which will ensure peace, stability
and development while promoting human rights in
Somalia. In that context, we will come to the six-pillar
policy framework, adopted by the Federal Government,
which aims to tackle the most urgent issues for the
Somali people. We call on the international community
to continue its support of that aspiration for prosperity
and self-reliance.

We praise and acknowledge the tremendous efforts
of the Somali National Security Forces, which, with
the support of African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), has succeeded in improving security in
the country, defeating Al-Shabaab in a number of cities
and areas. However, the fight against Al-Shabaab is far
from over. We hope that the efforts made by the Somali
National Security Forces will be amplified in order to
ensure an the full liberation ofofSomalia. In that regard,
we urge the Security Council to consider positively the
request of the African Union (AU) addressed to the
Secretary-General to provide additional resources to
AMISOM, which is reaching its maximum operational
capability. Those necessary resources, which include
enablers and force multipliers as well as the means
to reconfigure AMISOM. forces are critical for the
Mission to be able to hold territory and to expand areas
under its control.

On that note, we once again reiterate our gratitude
to AMISOM, its troop-contributing countries as well
as the AU, the IGAD and financial partners, such as
the European Union, for their support to Somalia.
Furthermore, it is imperative for long-term security
in Somalia that the Federal Government undertake
security-sector reforms and work at building a strong
and professional army able to defend and protect the
Somali population while combating Al-Shabaab and
any other threats facing the country.

We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the broad
mandate it was entrusted with in support of the Federal
Government of Somalia. We stress, however, the need
for effective national ownership in the peacebuilding
phase. In that regard, we are convinced that Nicholas
Kay, the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, has the competence required to
lead United Nations efforts on the ground.

On the political process, Rwanda welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Somalia to continue
its effort to establish regional administrations and
to engage country-wide reconciliation and political
outreach. We call upon the Federal Government and
regional administrations to always aim for dialogue in
their relationship in accordance with the provisional
federal Constitution.

We acknowledge the imrpovement in the
humanitarian situation and we note that the needs remain
very significant, with 2.7 million Somalis dependant on
assistance. We urge international solidarity for Somalia
and we once again commend the United Kingdom for
hosting the Somalia Conference in London on 7 May.

In conclusion, Rwanda stands ready to continue its
support of Somalia and assist other countries. Somalia
has indeed made significant progress and is ready
to own its destiny with the support of bilateral and
multilateral partners. Security challenges remain, but
we are convinced that Somalia will at last win its battle
after two decades of conflicts and statelessness.

