Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): At
the outset, let me wish you, Madam, my warmest
congratulations upon your delegation's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. I also wish to thank your predecessor, His
Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein,
Permanent Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, for all that he accomplished while leading
this body. I would also like to assure you of the full
cooperation of my delegation in the exercise of your
lofty and important responsibility.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/341), which places particular emphasis
on the evaluation of the United Nations contributions
to efforts to incorporate the rule of law at the heart
of the activities of the international community in
maintaining peace and international security.

We are gathered here once again to consider
together how to strengthen the rule of law in the
maintenance of peace and international security, a
topic that illustrates, in many ways, the urgent need to
end impunity and underlines the Council's unwavering
commitment to doing so. The interrelationship between
the rule of law and peace means that we must take a
stand against impunity in armed conflicts and take
decisive action on the best ways to mainstream the rule
of law as a foundation for lasting peace in the context
of peacekeeping operations.

As highlighted by the Declaration of the High-
level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule
of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1), impunity cannot
be tolerated, especially when we are faced with the
most heinous crimes, such as genocide, war crimes and
other crimes against humanity. The Council members'
common duty, as members of the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, is to prevent humankind from
ever again facing genocide and other crimes against
humanity.

In several theatres of operation, the seeds of
conflict between communities are sprouting and
growing as they are fed by impunity. In addition to
causing conflicts, the scourge of impunity unleashes a
desire for vengeance, which causes fresh outbursts of
violence in countries that would otherwise be focused
on post-conflict reconstruction.

That raises the overarching issue of the
administration of transitional justice, which is believed
to ensure a definitive return to peace in countries in
conflict. In fact, the adoption of amnesty laws, the
establishment of truth and reconciliation commissions
and the integration of rebel forces into the ranks of the
regular army should, in no case, prevent perpetrators
of war crimes or crimes against humanity from being
brought to justice. Therefore, a balance must be struck
between the need for reconciliation and the need to
fight impunity, as difficult as that may be, in order to
ensure lasting peace.

Today, the multifaceted nature of peacekeeping
operations is welcomed by all. However, bitter failures
in certain transition processes lead us to revisit one of
the fundamental elements of peacekeeping operations,
namely, the promotion of the rule oflaw on the basis of
strong and democratic institutions, in particular in the
peacebuilding phase. We would like to clarify that it is
the primary responsibility of Governments to establish
a democratic system and set in motion a process that
brings those who have perpetrated human-rights abuses
to justice. In that regard, my delegation would advocate
a holistic strategy for better coherence among the
activities of deployed missions in the political, security,
development, human-rights and rule-of-law fields.

In that respect, it is of the utmost importance
that the Council highlight the need to improve the
effectiveness of such missions, taking into account the
challenges encountered in the fight against impunity.
Along those lines, United Nations missions' activities
on the ground should be concentrated on strengthening
judiciary and security bodies, such as law enforcement,
the justice system and the prison system. It follows
that the rule of law is the touchstone of any system for
conflict prevention and settlement, peacekeeping or
peacebuilding.

I would therefore like to welcome and highlight
the close relationship between the rule of law and the
aims of our Organization, which are threefold: peace
and security, human rights, and development. I can
assure the Council that my country remains committed
to those ideals, which are the basis for a viable future
in any society.

