Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We wish France all
the best during its presidency of the Council for this
month. We also pay tribute to the Secretary-General
for his briefing, and commend him for continuing to
show commitment to the cause of civilians especially in
conflict situations. We also welcome the other insightful
briefings and comments we received this morning.

Botswana remains committed to the promotion of
and respect for humanitarian principles, in accordance
with international law and human rights law. As we
have always maintained, we reiterate our long-held
belief, which is shared by many, that States have the
primary responsibility to protect their own populations
from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It is for this reason that
Botswana continues to subscribe to the principle of
the responsibility to protect as a natural framework
to strengthen national sovereignty, while placing
responsibility on those who have the power to protect
and serve. It is in this regard that we reaffirm our abiding
faith in the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as the various multilateral
instruments under international humanitarian law and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

With regard to the role of peacekeeping and other
missions,wetake note ofthe deploymentofpeacekeeping
operations and special political missions in many
countries around the world as the most significant action
taken by the Security Council. The proliferation of such
missions illustrates just how instrumental they are in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We recognize the complex and Violent environments
in which peacekeeping personnel operate. We also
share the View that care and attention should be given
to strengthening missions' capabilities to effectively
discharge their mandates. To achieve that, we believe
that adequate the training and capacity-building of
personnel before, during and after deployment are
absolute necessities.

It is the View of my delegation that before conflict
erupts and perhaps escalates beyond proportion, there
are signs and signals pointing to a potential cause. In
this case, we believe that those within the Vicinity of the
potential problem must be able to detect early warning
signals so as to enable the exploration of preventive
measures through an inclusive and mutually acceptable
process. It is the duty not just of all parties involved in
conflict but also that ofthe State to ensure that measures
are taken to protect human rights and humanitarian
law. It is in this regard that we agree with the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, among others,
that all troops must be trained in the protection of
civilians prior to their deployment to missions, and that
they must not hesitate to take action to protect civilians
in accordance with the rules of engagement.

We must increase our efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in order to protect women
in armed conflict, as well as to involve them in all
levels and processes of mediation, peacekeeping and
peace maintenance, as well as reconstruction and
development. As history has shown, whenever there
is conflict there is likelihood of abuse of the rights of
populations, especially the vulnerable groups. Quite
often, there is systematic gender-based violence,
sexual enslavement, rape and the enlisting of children
in armed conflict by those who wield power. In most
cases, it is opportunistic militias, rebels, wayward
Government forces and sometimes leaders who use
brutal force, rape, massacre and repression as weapons
of war. Where governance institutions have collapsed,
impunity reigns. Women, girls and boys always bear
the brunt of all these atrocities.

My delegation Views the commission ofthese crimes
very seriously and condemns them in all their forms and
manifestations. It is in this respect that we have always
called for those responsible for perpetrating human
rights abuses to be held accountable for their deeds.
The various multilateral criminal justice tribunals that
exist in the world must therefore be explored to bring
justice to the victims of these crimes.

As a friend and supporter of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), we have no doubt that the ICC
serves as the only permanent court of last resort for
victims of crimes against humanity, war crimes and
genocide. We believe that the millions of victims across
the world deserve dignity and justice. To this end, we
must not fail in our moral duty to offer them protection
in the face of impunity. We call on the Security Council
to continue to support the ICC in its quest to safeguard
the rights of Victims.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana's
support for the international community's efforts to
protect innocent civilians during armed conflict. 1
wish to also stress the importance of consolidating
and ensuring the implementation of existing normative
frameworks on the protection of civilians in country-
specific situations.

