Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for your words. To you and to all my
colleagues and friends around this table go my most
sincere thanks for the friendship and the cooperation
that have been offered me. Thanks to all the members
of the Council, my experience in the Security Council
has been very rewarding.

There have been a lot of challenges and
achievements. There has also been, unfortunately, a lot
of frustration when we have not succeeded in
delivering what the outside world, especially those
who are the most vulnerable and those who suffer on
the ground, was expecting from us and from the United
Nations.

There is indeed an ever-increasing demand by the
people of the world for a more effective Security
Council action and presence. Expectations to that end
are very high and important challenges are ahead of
2

this Council. Ibelieve that the best way for the Council
to be successful in addressing the issues before it,
however difficult and sensitive they may be, is first of
all to strengthen its listening culture. That listening
culture should be more open and receptive to the
feelings and values prevailing among the members in
general and among interested parties in particular. We
sit here around this table on behalf of all United
Nations Member States, and if we do not nurture
within the membership at large a perception of
ownership of the Security Council's proceedings, then
it will be difficult at the end of the day to
have implementation and compliance, because
implementation and compliance will be there only if
ownership is preserved at the same time.

There should be no surprise that Article 25 of the
Charter concerning the binding nature of the decisions
of the Council, is fading from our radar screen. The
listening culture that I was referring to implies that we
have to make every possible effort to understand each
other. To do so is a sign of strength, not of weakness. If
we listen and understand, it will be easier to work
together with equal dignity and mutual respect, which
are building blocks towards effectiveness and results-
oriented action.

We must never lose sight of the fact that what
matters most at the end of the day is to be able to
deliver and have an impact on the ground, so that the
Security Council will make a difference and be
perceived as doing so. What is at stake is our
credibility and our relevance, and I am grateful to all
my colleagues here for how we have managed to make
some progress along the path before us in preventing
the progressive irrelevance and marginalization of this
Council, a situation in which all of us in the
international community at large would be losers.

For me, these 19 months in the Security Council
have been months in which I have learned a lot. I have
been indeed fortunate to work together with the entire
Council on so many challenging and sensitive issues
along a common path towards our common and shared
objectives. I will take with me a lot of memories and, I
suppose, a lot of nostalgia too.

Allow me to conclude by quoting from a farewell
letter that my wife and I received from the United
Nations African Mothers Association, an important
association that is very close to our hearts. The letter,
signed by the President of the Association,
08-44376
Mrs. Kumalo, the wife of the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, recalls that "in Africa
we say mountains never meet, but people who have
ever crossed each others' path are likely to meet
again". With those words, I say farewell to all of my
friends here, and I urge them to take care of themselves
and of their loved ones. I will not forget them.

