Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom voted to abstain in the voting on resolution 2504 (2020). We will not vote to stop vital aid reaching Syria, but neither will we vote in favour of a resolution that reduces aid provision for vulnerable populations and puts lives at risk. Although four of the five permanent members of the Security Council abstained in the voting, we obviously did not do so for the same reasons. I will come back to that. Since the Syrian conflict began, in 2011-2012, the United Kingdom has committed over $3.5 billion to Syria's humanitarian crisis. We have provided over 28 million food rations, over 17 million medical consultations and over 12 million vaccines. They Syrian people have seen many sad days since 2011. But this day is potentially one of the saddest, because it is the first time that a Security Council member has chosen to play politics with humanitarian assistance - and not only play politics with the United Nations and humanitarian assistance. In doing that, Russia is playing dice with the lives of the Syrian people in the north-east. We are gravelly disappointed that, due to Russian's decisions to approach the matter in this way, the Security Council has been left with no choice but to adopt a resolution that does not meet the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. The humanitarian situation in Syria has not significantly improved and, to our deep regret, neither is there a significant improvement on the horizon. The urgent need for cross-border assistance continues, and not only in Idlib. It is not a political tool to be bargained with. It should be purely based on humanitarian need. As a number of speakers have said, the United Nations - the body charged by the international community with delivering humanitarian assistance and coordinating humanitarian efforts - asked for four crossings and 12 months. The diplomatic effort that went into negotiating the resolution cannot disguise the fact that it is in truth a woefully inadequate response to the situation on the ground. The exclusion of any border crossing into north-east Syria is, in our view, deeply regrettable. It puts the lives of thousands of civilians in Syria at risk. More than 1.4 million people relied on medical supplies through the Al-Yarubiyah crossing in the past year. The World Health Organization estimates that health-service availability will be reduced by up to 50 per cent. Trauma care will suffer. Child health care will suffer. Immunization provision will suffer. A World Health Organization shipment through Al-Yarubiyah would provide over 700,000 people with essential medicines and supplies for three months. It is on its way and will arrive in Irbil on Sunday. The Russians like to say, and said to the press today, that humanitarian aid is coming from within Syria - and therefore border crossings are not needed. That is not the assessment of the United Nations. It is not the assessment of respected humanitarian non-governmental organizations like the International Committee of the Red Cross or the Safe the Children Fund. I doubt very much that it is the assessment of the 1.4 million people in the north-east of Syria who have been relying on this aid. Let me be very clear that the Russian Ambassador set out what he believes the inclusion of the reference to the General Assembly resolution means for the idea that the consent of the Syrian Government is needed for aid to cross over into Syria. It is not needed. The reference to General Assembly resolution 46/182 is ina preambular paragraph. It is not applicable to the cross- border situations of Syria. What is applicable are the humanitarian principles themselves. There are four: humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. That means the aid has to go to those most in need, and the General Assembly resolution says the United Nations is central to that effort. We believe that the Council should be prepared to take action, including restoring cross-border access in the north-east, if the Secretary-General's review concludes that alternative humanitarian access routes are inadequate to meet the humanitarian need of the population. The closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing places the responsibility for ensuring that vital aid reaches vulnerable populations in north-east Syria squarely on the Syrian authorities. The Russians said that was something the Syrian authorities could be relied on to do. I beg to differ, given the way Syria treats many of its people. This is worse than putting the fox in charge of a hen coop. The closure of Al-Yarubiyah means that we will need to monitor very closely the response of the Syrian authorities and the Russians, who have people on the ground. We will expect them to provide the necessary authorizations and remove bureaucratic impediments so that aid can be delivered on the basis of the United Nations humanitarian principles. We will ask the United Nations to report regularly on the humanitarian situation in the north-eastern part of Syria. I call today on both Syria and Russia to give concrete assurances to the Council that any aid distributed by their representatives, or those associated with them, will be done on the basis of those most in need, and need alone, and that organizations registered and operating in Damascus, whether or not affiliated with the United Nations, will also get the permissions and the access that they need to deliver aid to Syrian people on the basis of those most in need, and need alone. That is what humanitarian principles mean - humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence - and that is all they mean.
