Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
appreciate your presence, Mr. President, and your upfront
leadership at this meeting.

We could have quite a long exchange about
sanctions, but the analysis has been largely completed in
the series of excellent seminars and workshops over the
past two years and in academic works like The Sanctions
Decade by Lopez and Cortwright. So what this session
should do is lay the basis for a revised Security Council
approach.

The case for the use of sanctions remains
compelling. Apart from the threat of or the use of force,
they are - in their full range, from travel bans at one
end to comprehensive economic embargoes at the

 

other - the only coercive measure available to the
international community to respond to threats to
international peace and security. We need them to bring
into line those States and regimes which breach the
boundaries of acceptable behaviour, defy the international
community and ignore diplomatic efforts.

It is essential for the Council to take the initiative to
refine this powerful instrument and improve its
effectiveness. The United Kingdom welcomes the decision
of Council members to establish a working group to
improve the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions.
Their mandate is a challenging one. The working group
should take account of the conclusions and
recommendations of the series of seminars. The United
Kingdom will not only play a constructive role in the
group, we will be prepared, if Council colleagues approach
the task in the same spirit, to acknowledge where the
Council has underperformed in the past and where
sanctions have failed to produce the right results. The
Secretary-General said this morning at the International
Peace Academy seminar,

"Getting sanctions right has often been a lesser
objective than getting sanctions adopted".

We have here an important opportunity to upgrade United
Nations effectiveness in the maintenance of peace and
security, to deter more powerfully those who are tempted
to use force illegitimately to secure their political objectives
and to alleviate the damaging side effects among the
innocent and the vulnerable.

The United Kingdom will feed its detailed ideas into
the working group. Briefly, sanctions regimes adopted by
the Security Council should, ideally, present clearly defined
and realistic objectives and a clear exit strategy; ensure
consistent application by describing clearly the precise
scope in terms of goods and services sanctioned; devise a
workable mechanism to achieve the objective; provide for
regular review of implementation; provide scope for
flexibility and graduation up and down the scale in response
to the target's reactions; set out effective arrangements for
enforcement by all States, but especially neighbours, and
take into account the resources and the national legislative
action required; and, lastly, devise from the beginning ways
of protecting the innocent from unintended consequences
while maintaining the intended impact of the sanctions
themselves.

There has been much discussion of "smarter"
sanctions. I hope that modern technology will be able to
help us in the financial arena. I rather suspect that the fox
will be able to stay ahead of the hounds in this particular
hunt, but it is a vital area. Since money is such a slippery
commodity, let us see where we get to with diamonds and
with arms. They will be difficult enough, as the case of
Angola will show us. Again, the United Kingdom thanks
Canada for the leadership it has shown in implementing
sanctions against UNITA to provide us with momentum
in our wider tasks.

The role of the sanctions committees is, as we have
seen, the key. Their chairmen have a particular
responsibility, but all Council members have to be
prepared to put themselves out in support. We need
experienced and energetic help also from the Secretariat,
and the General Assembly must be prepared to authorize
the resources necessary for a properly equipped and
properly staffed sanctions unit headed by a senior officer.
The system has to be capable enough to tap into national
facilities for information and investigation. In the end, our
aim must be to have as effective an international effort on
sanctions-busting, including illegal arms flows, as we are
beginning to have on drugs, terrorism and money-
laundering. Does anyone think that is asking for too
much?

I believe that if we invested in such an international
capability on sanctions, and if Member States as a whole
carried out their obligations in support, the United Nations
Charter would be more widely respected in practice and
conflicts would occur less frequently. We would all gain.

