Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General
Andrew Gilmour for their sound introductions to
our debate.

My delegation believes that gross and flagrant
human rights violations are the flip side of the nuclear
ambitions and aggressive policy of Pyongyang, and
therefore represent a threat to international peace and
security. In that light, I recall paragraph 45 of resolution
2321 (2016), unanimously adopted on 30 November
in response to the fifth nuclear test conducted by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In that
paragraph, the Council reiterates its deep concern at
the grave hardship that the people in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea are subjected to, and
condemns the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
for pursing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles
instead of the welfare of its people.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(A/71/439) clearly indicates that there has been no
tangible improvement in the human rights situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea since the
report of the commission of inquiry (A/HRC/25/63)
was published in 2014. Therefore, the human rights
and humanitarian situation must remain high on the
international agenda and be regularly discussed,
including in all three principal organs of the United
Nations that deal with human rights, namely, the
Human Rights Council, the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

Ukraine welcomes the steps undertaken by the
international community in the past few years to
convince the Government in Pyongyang to change its
course of widespread and systematic human rights
violations. We strongly support the conclusions and
recommendations of the commission of inquiry on
human rights in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, as well as the establishment of the High
Commission for Human Rights office in Seoul one year
ago for monitoring and reporting on the situation on the
ground. And yet, no tangible progress on the issue can
be reported so far.

The last time the Council considered the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was on
10 December 2015 (see S/PV.7575). Since then, that
matter has been raised in the Human Rights Council and
the General Assembly. Has the human rights situation
improved? The long but not exhaustive list of violations
that cause immeasurable suffering to the people in
North Korea, and remain a fact of life over there,
include torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatments or punishments; rape, extrajudicial and
arbitrary detention and public executions; the absence
of due process and the rule of law, the imposition of
the death penalty for political and religious reasons;
and collective punishments that have lasted as long as
three generations.

We share the sense of importance and urgency
for North Korea to engage with the international
human rights system, including by ensuring safe and
unfettered access to the territory of the country for
United Nations monitoring mechanisms, in particular
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as well
as for the Group of Independent Experts on Issues of
Accountability for Human Rights Violations, including
crimes against humanity.

Can the international community tolerate the
continuation of flagrant human rights violations
in the twenty-first century? The answer seems
obvious. Ukraine therefore supports the decision of
the Third Committee on the need to take appropriate
action to ensure accountability, including through
the consideration of referral of the situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the
International Criminal Court and of the further
development of sanctions in order to target effectively
those who appear to be most responsible for human
rights violations.

This year has been unprecedented in terms of
increased tensions on the Korean peninsula, due to
the extremely irresponsible and provocative policy
of Pyongyang. We express our grave concern over
the impact of diverting resources to advance nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles programmes on the
humanitarian situation in the country. The evolving
militarization has already adversely affected and
continues to undermine the socioeconomic situation. It
has produced a downward spiral and steady deterioration
in which the quality of the lives of ordinary citizens, who
regularly suffer from food shortages and even hunger.

What justification can there be for wasting
precious and limited resources on military programmes
at the expense of the livelihood of the people who are
literally held hostage by the grand ambitions of a few
power- and attention-hungry individuals? Would any
adequate Government choose a path of recklessly
endangering international peace and security over its
direct responsibility to ensure that its own people do
not suffer from malnutrition?

It is important that the international community
acts decisively and jointly to find the balance between
promoting dialogue with Pyongyang and pressing for
accountability, due to its numerous blatant violations
of international law. Left unaccountable, totalitarian
regimes perceive themselves as invincible and challenge
their neighbours and international order. If the Council
is serious about conflict prevention, it should act early
and swiftly. Peace and stability in the region depend
on it.

