Mr. Courtial (France) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I wish to thank you for having convened
today's debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the area of
peace and security. I welcome your presence here
today, which bears witness to the leadership role that
South Africa intends to play in the Security Council. I
wish also to extend my thanks to the Secretary-General
for his presentation and for his report (S/2011/805), as
well as to Commissioner Lamamra.

I should like to make several observations. As
you recalled, Madam President, almost two thirds of
the discussions held in the Security Council pertain to
Africa, and 80 per cent of all peacekeepers are
deployed on the African continent. It is against that
backdrop that the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of peace and
security has continued to grow.

The African Union provides the United Nations
with on-the-ground access. Its efforts in that respect
bear witness to the fact that the continent is
endeavouring to gradually shoulder responsibility for
its own security, in accordance with the San Francisco
Charter. For its part, the United Nations provides the
African Union with legitimacy in the framework of the
Charter as well as skills, resources and expertise that
can provide support to missions charged with conflict
prevention and management on the continent.

Today all our efforts are focused on ensuring that
that original partnership, which is fully in line with the
spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, lasts and flourishes.

The Secretary-General's report recalls that today
conflict prevention, peacekeeping - in the strict sense
of the word - and peacebuilding lie at the heart of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. So as to ensure conflict prevention, the
United Nations has established regional offices in
Dakar and Libreville and has created partnerships with
African organizations.

The United Nations Office in West Africa is fully
engaged in initiatives in the area of mediation and good
offices, specifically in Guinea, the Niger and Benin, in
systematic coordination with the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States.

The new United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, established in Libreville, is tasked with
a similar role. Moreover, the African Union is involved
in the assessment missions deployed on the ground by
the United Nations in the face of the new cross-cutting
threats, such as the recent ones in the Sahel region.

In addition to its presence on the ground, the
United Nations has strengthened the mediation

capacities of the African Union by supporting the
creation of a unit to that end within the African Union
Commission. That cooperation has increased the
capacities of the African Union, which today is
carrying out complex mediation missions, particularly
in Somalia and the Sudan, where the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, led by Mr. Mbeki, is
addressing the settlement of pending disputes between
Khartoum and Juba.

In future, the challenge will be to better
coordinate the respective mediation efforts of the
United Nations and the African Union. The guidelines
in this respect that are currently being drawn up will
undoubtedly be useful in that context.

The United Nations and the African Union are
also cooperating in the conduct of peacekeeping
operations. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur is playing a decisive role in the
stabilization of the security and humanitarian situation.
One of the challenges facing the mission is that it is
governed by a chain of command that is split between
the United Nations and the African Union. Experience
has shown that strengthening day-to-day cooperation
between the Secretariat and the AU Commission will
improve the effectiveness of military personnel on the
ground.

In Somalia, the United Nations is providing
significant logistical support to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which is tasked with
supporting the Transitional Federal Institutions and the
Somali security forces in the establishment of security
in the country and in the implementation of the process
of political transition. That technical cooperation is
crucial to enabling AMISOM. to carry out its mission in
a particularly complex context and to counter the
challenges posed by Al-Shabaab fighters.

While the African Union is calling for increased
United Nations support, we should nevertheless ensure
that the options put forward not fall exclusively under
the domain of security. The progress made by troops on
the ground must be consolidated by the implementation
of the political strategy by the Transitional Federal
Government, backed by the international community,
as the Security Council has recalled in several
resolutions.
The conduct of peacekeeping operations is, of
course, interlinked with the issue of funding, in
particular in the current, very difficult budgetary
context. Along those lines, we must seek improved
operational effectiveness, in particular by

strengthening the chain of command in such operations
and by improving cooperation with troop-contributing
countries.

We also take note with interest of the efforts
made by the African Union to reform its management
methods and diversify its sources of funding for
peacekeeping operations. The African Peace Facility
provided by the European Union is an initial
appropriate step in response to the request by the
African Union for lasting and predictable funding for
its operations. It is crucial that new players step up to
the plate so as to guarantee the lasting nature of this
funding.

Peacebuilding should also be at the heart of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. In the Sahel, in West Africa and in the
Great Lakes region, we have seen an increasing
number of, and a growing interlinkage between, factors
of instability, terrorism, trafficking and rebel activity,
which undermine the security and integrity of States.
Such challenges must spur us to continue to support
security sector reform; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration initiatives; and the promotion of the
rule of law.

Here I should like to underscore the importance
that France attaches to support for the holding of free,
fair and peaceful elections. In the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan, the combined efforts of the United
Nations, through its peacekeeping operations in the
region and its Office in Libreville, and of the African
Union in combating the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
are yet another example of the cooperation between
these two organizations.

Regional participation is key to finding a lasting
solution in the face of that threat. The recent adoption
by the African Union of a strategy to combat the LRA
is most welcome.

Clearly, challenges to peace and security on the
African continent are far from being homogenous.
Thus increased cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union is essential. The
contacts and meetings promoted by the Secretary-
General between the Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, as well as between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, fall within that

framework and will, in keeping with the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, guarantee the best
possible coordination between the African Union and
the United Nations. That is also the task of the new
United Nations Office to the African Union.

My country welcomes the progress made as a
result of the cooperation between the United Nations
and the AU and will continue to play an active role in
supporting United Nations peacekeeping, as well as the
African Union and subregional organizations in terms
of both funding and training.

As President Sarkozy stated during the Africa-
France summit held in Nice last year, Africa must be a
key player with respect to larger issues of peace,
security and global equilibrium. France has taken
action in that respect and hopes that in the framework
of the necessary reform of the Security Council, Africa
will assume its rightful place, including among the
permanent members.

