Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank the Japanese presidency for convening this
debate, which comes at a particularly crucial time for
peacebuilding in Africa.

My delegations aligns itself with the statement
to be made on behalf of the European Union. I wish,
however, to make the following comments in my
national capacity.

At the outset, it is necessary to underscore that
Africa is not all made of one and the same cloth, and
the diversity of situations there is great. The conditions
in Africa vary from one subregion to the next. Peace,
however, is struggling to take root in the various parts
of the continent. Several African countries emerging
from conflict are faced with significant challenges,
such as Mali and the Central African Republic. Other
countries that have made progress on the road to
peacebuilding, such as Burundi, are again facing a
crisis situation. South Sudan has just witnessed a new
outbreak of violence and serious violations of human
rights, nearly one year after signing a peace agreement.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the road
to rolling out the electoral process remains long, but
positive steps have just been taken, such as the granting
of collective and individual pardons, in order to foster
a political climate of trust within the national dialogue.

The concept note circulated for this debate
(S/2016/586, annex) identifies a number of crucial
elements for peacebuilding in Africa. Given the
situations Ijust mentioned, one point appears essential
for the United Nations system in general, and the
Security Council and the missions that it mandates in
particular, namely, the fragile and sensitive nature of
transition situations. A peace agreement is often only
the first step, rather than the conclusion of a process.
That is fully reflected in the concept of sustaining
peace, which has been enshrined in identical resolutions
of the Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) and the
General Assembly (resolution 70/262). Belgium urges
the Security Council to fully integrate the perspective
of sustaining peace in its future deliberations
and decisions.

The holding of credible elections is a major
challenge in the context of post-conflict and post-crisis
transitions. That entails maintaining, both upstream
and downstream, a political space where the freedom
of expression and assembly prevails for all political
actors and every component of civil society. Numerous
countries on the continent, including a number of
countries emerging from conflicts, have recently held,
or are expected soon to hold, elections. Such periods
are often marked by fragility and renewed tensions.
They deserve our renewed attention so as to avoid
turning back the democratic progress already achieved
and to sustain the progress made in peacebuilding. We
must pay particular attention to ensuring the holding
of free, transparent and inclusive elections, which goes
hand-in-hand - as I have already mentioned - with
respect for human rights, including civil liberties,
during every phase of the electoral process.

With regard to supporting the electoral process
and post-election mediation, the United Nations and
regional organizations have long been recognized as
actors. It is important, however, that they agree upon
shared principles. It is in the international community's
interest that all stakeholders agree on the distribution
of roles and on a common vision of what they want to
accomplish in this area.

As reflected in the Sustainable Development Goals,
the establishment or re-establishment of accountable
and effective institutions in countries emerging from
conflict is crucial - whether in the justice, security
or public-finance sectors - along with the support of
the relevant partners, such as international and regional
financial institutions.

In that regard, we must underscore the international
and regional initiatives aimed at improving transparency
in the development and management of natural resources,
including ensuring their traceability, ensuring that they
do not fuel conflicts and ensuring transparency in
financial flows resulting from the development of those
resources. The rich natural resources of the African
continent have not yet been transformed sufficiently
into prosperity and employment opportunities for the
population, nor into resources for the State. Proper
and transparent governance of that sector is key for
sustainable peace.
The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
is also worth noting. Beyond the organization of
the sector of extractive industries, that process has
committed the countries concerned to strengthen
governance of their public finances. That initiative
could play a very useful role in the framework of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) because it encourages
resource-rich countries to mobilize their revenues
to benefit sustainable development. The illegal
exploitation of natural resources has long fuelled the
terrible cycle of armed conflict and made economic and
social development impossible. We need an inclusive
approach on the part of all stakeholders so as to rebuild
trust among populations and mend the social contract
between them and the authorities.

In conclusion, all of those efforts will be in vain
if the root causes of the conflicts and crises in Africa,
the sources of chronic instability, are not addressed.
National ownership and the inclusiveness of the
processes designed to respond to those situations are
essential in efforts to achieve sustainable peace, as
are - and this has not been emphasized enough -
political will on the part of leaders, the increased
participation of women in all peacebuilding processes
and their role as development actors and actors in
conflict prevention and conflict resolution.

