Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria fully endorses
the statement made by the Italian presidency on behalf
of the European Union, and I would like to elaborate
on four aspects.

First, justice and the rule of law are the very
foundation of our international system and the United
Nations. International norms are the standards by
which we assess right and wrong in international
affairs. The statements made on 24 September and
today give hope that the debate will continue and lead
to a renewed understanding and strengthening of
justice and the rule of law in the United Nations.

Secondly, justice and the rule of law are the
cornerstones of peace, security and the stability of
States, especially in post-conflict situations. To that
end, Austria has contributed substantially to the
training of local police and State border and justice
officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo. As
a member of the Human Security Network, Austria is a
strong advocate of the rights of civilians, in particular
children, in armed conflicts. Training for police and the
judiciary and the establishment of child protection
units, as well as raising awareness among combatants,
are important in this regard. The recent mandate
establishing the multidimensional United Nations
Mission in Liberia is a positive example.

Thirdly, a priority for societies ravaged by war or
internal conflict is to ensure that the perpetrators of the
gravest war crimes and crimes against humanity are
brought to justice. The Security Council has devoted
increasing attention to this issue. Austria fully
supported the creation of international criminal
tribunals for Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and
Cambodia. However, for financial, political and
practical reasons, the Security Council is not able to
deal with all situations in which grave crimes have
been committed. Austria therefore fully supported the
establishment of the International Criminal Court,
which by means of its subsidiary jurisdiction is
designed to ensure that national authorities devote
serious attention to their obligations to investigate and
prosecute such crimes. The International Criminal
Court thereby contributes to the efforts of the Security
Council to ensure the respect of international law.
Austria is confident that the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court will cooperate
successfully to achieve their common goal of
strengthening the rule of law and justice in
international relations.

Fourthly, among the foremost duties of the United
Nations is ensuring and enforcing compliance with
international norms. The Security Council has a special
responsibility in that regard. A Council dedicated to the
resolute implementation of international law is the best
incentive for the implementation of law at the national
and local levels.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the United
Kingdom presidency for this excellent initiative and for
the very welcome opportunity to debate the crucial
issues of justice and the rule of law in the Security
Council. We are looking forward to the follow-up of
this process, which the presidency has so ably initiated.

