Mr. Kyrychenko (spoke in Russian): We hope
that this meeting will enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and the regional organizations in such
areas as the maintenance of international peace and
security, especially in conflict prevention and
settlement, and in post-conflict peacebuilding.

As is known, the establishment of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) was a very
difficult matter. In essence, it was formed under the
pressure of the need for a firm response to the
appearance of a fundamentally new geopolitical
situation. This, in fact, was compounded by a problem
that arose because of a deep crisis in the economy and
other spheres of public life in the former Soviet areas.

By and large, however, the formation of the CIS
put an end to a chaotic process of break-up of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and to its
destructive impulse; this historical fact is recognized
by the entire international community. It is an
unmistakable achievement of the CIS that it formed
new structures for the establishment of fundamentally
new inter-State relations, allowed for a peaceful way
for political disengagement for the former Soviet
Republics and promoted the establishment of new
sovereign States.

Nonetheless, we were not able to avoid conflicts
and contradictions. Unfortunately, some of them spilled
over into open confrontation and conflict. The most
serious were in Tajikistan, Georgia, Moldova and the
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. Major factors that
promoted the emergence of conflict situations in the
former Soviet areas are as follows. Socio-economic
problems worsened and social disparity and
polarization increased among the population. There
was a lack of clarity and mixed interests among the
major geo-political centres with regard to new
independent States with regard to spheres of influence.
Political forces struggled for power, and there was an
upturn for the armed forces. Problems in inter-ethnic
relations arose, and there was a mass exodus of
national minorities, especially Russian speakers. Clan
and other types of conflicts grew, and in regions of
Central Asia and the Caucasus the role and influence of
Islamic fundamentalism, and of international centres of
terrorism, the drug trade and other criminal
phenomena, increased.

For the stabilization process, it is very important
to define and analyse possible reasons for the
emergence of conflict in each specific situation, in
order to prevent and settle those conflicts, for
peacebuilding in the post-conflict area, and to ensure
the security and strengthening of trust and confidence.

In the CIS, the system to prevent and settle
conflicts, post-conflict peacebuilding and the
strengthening of the stabilization process are at a
formative stage. Nevertheless, through the efforts of
the CIS countries - first and foremost, of the Russian
Federation - and in close cooperation with, and with
the help of, United Nations structures and those of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), we have been able to achieve some results.

There have been a number of cases of States in
conflict where we have broken through the stage of
armed conflict and gone to political dialogue. We
searched for compromise and solutions; as a result of
the Russian Federation's mediation in Nagorno-
Karabakh, on 12 May 1994 a ceasefire was established.
In Transdniester, a ceasefire has been in effect since
July 1994, on the basis of the agreements and
principles for a peaceful settlement of armed conflict.
In the conflict area in Abkhazia, Georgia, since 14 May
1994 we have had an agreement on a ceasefire and
disengagement of forces.

We must especially point out that in 2000 we
were able to settle the conflict in Tajikistan. A
settlement was signed on 27 June 1997 in Moscow
between the Tajik officials and the opposition, an
overall agreement on the establishment of peace and
national harmony. As a consequence, hostile activities
ended, and the collective CIS peace forces and the
United Nations observer missions were dissolved. That
played a significant role in the Tajik settlement.

Now the next stage - that is, post-conflict
peacebuilding - has occurred. In order to intensify
cooperation, the Executive Committee of the CIS has
established working relations with the United Nations
Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding. In October of last
year, a Memorandum of Understanding and Partnership
was signed between our organizations for a post-
conflict recovery for the Republic of Tajikistan. The
end of the civil war in that country is a clear example
of how, through the joint efforts of the United Nations,
the OSCE and the CIS, an armed conflict in one of the
bloodiest conflict areas at the end of the twentieth
century can be practically settled.

We in the CIS understand that the lack of
settlement in the conflict in the territories of Georgia,
the Republic of Moldova and in and around Nagorno-
Karabakh essentially has an impact on the political,
social and economic conditions for development in
those States that have been drawn into conflict. Those
factors have made difficult the process of a democratic
society and prevent the full functioning of a free trade
area. They are a threat to peace and stability in the
region and in the CIS as a whole.

For this reason, we must find ways for new forms
of cooperation and joint action among regional
organizations in their areas of responsibility, as well as
new approaches to the stabilization process. We agree
that developing cooperation between regional
organizations is more important than ever, since the
major threat to security stems from new global
conflicts and challenges.

In this connection, we feel it possible to put
forward some proposals designed to consolidate efforts
and cooperation in the prevention and settlement of
conflicts and in post-conflict peacebuilding. The CIS
has adopted a concept on the prevention and settlement
of conflicts in the territory of States of the CIS. Such
documents are being worked out by other international
organizations as well. Through a comparative analysis,
we have been able to prepare an overall document,
which includes a platform for security adopted at the
OSCE Istanbul Summit.

Also, as we see it, one urgent task is the working
out of a comprehensive plan for measures for building
trust in the political, humanitarian, environmental and
other spheres, such as the reasons for lack of
confidence among States, and retaining international
membership of the United Nations, missions, and the
OSCE in areas of conflict. We think we could have a
significant number of members in missions who, to our
mind, could be nationals of CIS countries that are not
parties to the conflict and that are not neighbours to
those in conflict. With this approach, we could avoid
duplication of effort. At the same time, we could
expand the possibility for close cooperation in the
political and military spheres, which are brought into
play in the peacekeeping and stabilization processes. In
order to achieve maximum harmony and effectiveness
in the activities of the CIS and the United Nations, we
should provide a clear machinery for consultations
among the interested structures and an exchange of
information on the status of the settlement of a
conflict, on the situation in the regions and on planned
and implemented stabilization measures.

Joint seminars and conferences, with the
participation of their leaders and specialists from the
relevant structures of international organizations, might
be of some assistance. By using such a form of
cooperation, we could not only exchange information
and experience, but also could promote a quest for new
methods and forms to prevent, localize and settle
conflicts and for post-conflict peacebuilding.

Another urgent matter is cooperation in settling
the conflict around Nagorno-Karabakh. We have in
mind the participation of representatives of the CIS
Executive Committee as observers in the negotiation
process in the Karabakh settlement. That was
expressed by the President of Armenia, Robert
Kocharian, and the President of Azerbaijan, Ilham
Heydar oglu Aliyev.

Regarding the Transdniester conflict, we also
believe that the representatives of the Executive
Committee could take part as observers in the
negotiation process and in settling the conflict in and
around Transdniester.

Regarding a settlement of the conflict in
Abkhazia, Georgia, we are compelled to note the two
key issues - the future political status of Abkhazia
within Georgia, and the problem of the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their homes - still
have not been solved. For this reason, the major task
this year, as we see it, is the creation of favourable
conditions for negotiations, establishing an atmosphere
of at least some minimal degree of trust among the
parties, support for the efforts of the Russian
Federation and development of the Sochi process for a
settlement.

