We welcome the holding of today's quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle East, and especially the presence of the State Secretary. We also thank the briefers for their thoughtful briefings. We have been following with deep concern the developments surrounding the question of Palestine, in particular the announcements of unilateral actions that could lead to serious consequences for the stability of the Middle East and, by extension, for the world. Peru joins the majority of States, regional organizations and civil society organizations in calling on Israel to rescind its plans for annexation. If implemented, these plans would be a flagrant violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations and seriously undermine the prospects for a viable Palestinian State, a situation that the international community cannot and must not tolerate. In these delicate circumstances, we wish to reaffirm our commitment to the only solution that we consider consistent with international law: that of two States with internationally recognized and secure borders, negotiated directly between Israel and Palestine on the basis of the borders in force until 1967, which must, moreover, lead to the determination of the final status of Jerusalem. This requires, inter alia, that respectful actions be taken in the political, religious and social spheres, with a view to building mutual trust so that a constructive dialogue may be resumed. The leaders of both parties are responsible for showing concrete signs of moderation and commitment to peace. It is also necessary that the Israeli Government put an end to the practices of settlement, demolition of buildings and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, which undermine the two-State solution and contravene the provisions of the Council adopted in resolution 2334 (2016). We are concerned in particular about plans to expand settlements in Har Homa, East Jerusalem, which would further affect the connectivity of the occupied Palestinian territory. Peru reaffirms its recognition of Israel's right to preserve its own existence and security by exercising self-defence. We strongly condemn the continued firing of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices, which endanger the lives of Israeli civilians and cause material damage. Palestinian militants must cease such practices immediately. In this context, we underline the urgency of the parties agreeing to the global ceasefire called for by Secretary-General Antenio Guterres as an essential measure to prevent and mitigate the devastating effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and to strengthen diplomatic action, in line with the important resolution 2532 (2020), recently adopted by the Council. With regard to the pandemic, we wish to commend the outstanding work of the United Nations and its agencies in support of the Palestinian Government. We also look forward to more fluid cooperation between Israel and Palestine in providing an effective response to this scourge. We draw particular attention to the grave humanitarian crisis in Gaza, which has been exacerbated by COVID-19 and which serves as a breeding ground for radicalization and extremism. We believe that the provision of basic goods and services, the development of infrastructure projects that generate employment and efforts to overcome the confinement of millions of Palestinians must remain priorities for the international community. To this end, we stress the critical state of the finances of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the need to provide it with a stable and predictable flow of resources. In this regard, we commend the leadership of Jordan and Sweden in mobilizing the solidarity of the international community last June, with pledges that will alleviate the financial shortfalls of that crucial body. We consider it equally indispensable to advance the process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We stress the efforts made by Egypt in this regard and the importance of the Security Council following them closely and providing the necessary support. In order to resolve the question of Palestine and promote sustainable peace in the Middle East, it is necessary to act in accordance with international law and the United Nations Charter. The trust and credibility required for any good-faith negotiations necessarily include respect for the rule of law and minimum standards of coexistence. We welcome the willingness expressed by various countries to use their good offices, particularly those that have historically participated in this process. We emphasize the need to revitalize the Middle East Quartet and the validity and relevance of the Arab Peace Initiative.
