The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
resolutions and the statements of its President on
the situation in East Timor.

"The Security Council warmly welcomes
the successful staging on 30 August 2001 of the
elections for East Timor's first Constituent
Assembly, in particular the orderly and peaceful
conduct of the elections and the very high voter
turnout, which demonstrated the wish of the East
Timorese people to establish a full participatory
democracy. In that regard, the Council recognizes
with appreciation the important role of the East
Timorese leadership and welcomes the
cooperation extended by the Government of
Indonesia during the election period.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor for facilitating a
smooth and representative election process. The
Security Council calls on all parties to fully
respect and implement the election results, which
provide the basis for a broad-based Constituent
Assembly. The Security Council looks forward to
the establishment on 15 September of the
Constituent Assembly and the new Cabinet within
the framework of resolution 1272 (1999). The
Security Council calls upon all parties to work
together to draft a constitution which reflects the
will of the East Timorese people and to cooperate
for the successful completion of the final steps
towards independence, in a complex process of
stabilization in East Timor, which will take some
time and will involve many actors.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of a substantial international presence
in East Timor post-independence.

"The Security Council looks forward to
receiving the Secretary-General's October report
focusing on the transition and post-independence
periods."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2001/23.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30p.m.
