Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like
to join others in expressing our sincere thanks to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, Mr. Ghassan Mr. Salame, for his informative
briefing.

Please allow me to focus on three important
aspects: first, moving the political process forward;
secondly, addressing the economy; and thirdly,
promoting accountability.

When we joined the Council at the start of this year,
we saw an opportunity for Libya to take significant
steps towards stability. We emphasized then that what
was needed above all is the political will of all Libyan
leaders to look beyond their personal interest and to put
their people first. Today, we have to conclude that it
is precisely that lack of will that has held the political
process back ever since. The House of Representatives
and the High Council of State should show their
commitment by laying the groundwork for elections to
take place.

Throughout all the discussions, the voice of half
of Libya's population continues to be ignored. I am of
course referring to Libya's women. The parties need to
step up their efforts. We expect women to be part ofthe
Libyan delegations at the Palermo conference next week.
We welcome the Special Representative's proposals
to revitalize the political process and overcome
obstacles. He has our full support. The Council and
the international community need to unite behind the
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and stand ready to support those efforts, including
by listing spoilers in the political process. We are
encouraged by the efforts of the Special Representative
to address the security situation in Tripoli by reaching
a ceasefire.

Work on security and political reconciliation needs
to be reinforced with economic reforms and financial
transparency. That brings me to my second point,
concerning Libya's economy. Too many people profit
from Libya's political stalemate, which leads to a lack
of financial transparency and economic division. On
Tuesday we heard from Ms. Reitano (see S/PV.8393)
that by far the largest share of revenues from organized
crime in conflict areas ends up with corrupt leaders.
They are the main beneficiaries of instability, violence
and a lack of State capacity for enforcement. That needs
to be addressed, including in Libya. We welcome the
rapprochement between the two Central Banks and
the increased focus on economic reforms. The Council
should actively support the fight against illegal money
flows through the black-market economy. The sanctions
regime will continue to be an important tool in that
regard.

My third point concerns accountability. Following
last week's briefing on the invaluable work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya (see S/PV.8388), we have to step up efforts to end impunity,
strengthen the rule of law and bring to justice those
who pursue violence.

With the establishment of a new listing criterion
earlier this week, the Council took a promising step
towards addressing sexual and gender-based violence
in Libya. That sends a powerful signal to perpetrators
of sexual violence that the international community
stands ready to take action against those practices
in Libya.

Existing sanctions need to be better implemented. In
that light, we welcome last week's visit by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya. That message of better
implementation was conveyed by the Committee
during its visit to Libya, and supported by the Council
in resolution 2441 (2018), adopted on Monday.

Sanctions alone are not enough, however. To
ensure accountability we need to follow through on
prosecutions. In that regard, we call on all parties to
cooperate and execute the warrants of arrest against
fugitives indicted by the ICC, including against
Mr. Al-Werfalli.

In conclusion, we strongly urge Libyan leaders to
step up their efforts, take on their responsibilities and
seize the opportunity offered by the Palermo conference
next week. The Council expect results, but above all
else the Libyan people expect results.

