Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): First of all, Sir, let me
say how happy we are to see you here once again,
presiding over a meeting of the Security Council on a
subject that is so vital and important to all of us. I
should like to take this opportunity to compliment the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador
Anwarul Karim Chowdhury, for conducting the affairs
of the Council with remarkable ability and skill.

I will begin by thanking the Secretary-General for
his report on the prevention of armed conflict.
Although the report took some time to mature, we are
pleased to note that the Secretaries-General of this
world body have always shown personal interest in
conflict prevention and dispute settlement. We laud the
efforts of the present incumbent in this connection. We
only hope that his good offices will also extend to
those disputes that still remain before this Council,
unresolved and outstanding. Two instances are worthy
of his special attention because a lot of blood is
flowing in these cases. These are Kashmir and
Palestine. Both are cases of continued denial of the
peoples' right to self-determination. Both caused wars
and are still the scenes of armed conflicts between the
struggling people and the occupation forces.

Now that the Secretary-General's re-election has
been sealed thanks to the exemplary leadership that he
provided to the United Nations, we hope he will have
no hesitation in assuming a more proactive role to
facilitate a peaceful solution of the two issues. For
modalities he does not need to await the final verdict
on his report. Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter
has enough relevant material for him to work with.

Now as to the report itself, well, there is much in
it to be commended. We appreciate the seriousness of
purpose with which the Secretary-General and his able
team have worked on this report, and we compliment
them. Much as one would like to go along with its
contents, we cannot help but disagree with some of its
basic premises and assumptions. There are some
underlying contradictions.

For instance, we do not think that Member States
and civil society alone have the primary responsibility
for conflict prevention. While they may have some
responsibility in cases of intra-State conflicts, this does
not hold true for cases of inter-State conflicts. In
instances where two or more Member States are
involved, the ultimate responsibility rests with this
intergovernmental world body, this being one of its
obligations under the Charter.

Please note that the word "conflict" does not
figure in the Charter even once, but this does not mean
that the United Nations should absolve itself of the
responsibilities assigned to it under both Chapters VI
and VII for the pacific settlement of disputes and the
maintenance of international peace and security. There
is also no justification for selective implementation of
the Security Council resolutions on the flimsy basis
that some resolutions are more sacred than others
because they carry the seal of Chapter VII. The
Council should not act selectively or discriminate
between regions and situations. It must implement all
its resolutions and decisions.

If conflict prevention is the primary responsibility
of national governments and civil society, then what is the
raison d 'etre of the United Nations? If that were the case,
we would be turning to Amnesty International or perhaps
the Ted Turner Foundation for intervention, rather than to
this Council. But we do not, and this is because the
United Nations and no other institution has the primary
role in conflict prevention. And conflicts are prevented
through the peaceful settlement of disputes. Neither
conflicts nor disputes can be wished away. Closing eyes
to them or shifting responsibility is no solution and will
be of no service to this Organization.

The Secretary-General's report rightly states that
the earlier a conflict-prone dispute is identified and
addressed successfully, the less likely it is that the
situation will deteriorate into violence. But a conflict
can be addressed effectively and successfully only if
this body, and in particular the Security Council, has
the political will to do so. Too often this vital catalyst
is conspicuous only by its absence, and too often good
intentions have fallen victim to political expediency
and power politics. As a result, disputes are allowed to
fester and potentially dangerous situations allowed to
explode. Bloody conflicts erupt and nations implode
while the Council remains indifferent, like an ostrich
with its head in the sand.

Even when the report tries to address potential
conflicts, it has a tendency to confuse root causes of
conflicts with their symptoms. Such misdiagnosis is
often followed by a tendency to prescribe one set of
medicines for all maladies. All potential future
conflicts are assumed to be intra-State rather than both
intra- and inter-State ones. All root causes are
essentially described - I am referring to what was
mentioned in the report a as economic and social,
thereby ignoring the obvious political causes, which in
fact are the real underlying reason for most conflicts
and disputes.

A simple glance across the globe will show this
reality. There is no social or economic genesis to the
conflicts in Palestine or Kashmir. Both are a legacy of
political injustice and a manifestation of ongoing
repression. Similarly, the conflicts in the Balkans, the
Horn of Africa and the African Great Lakes region
cannot be attributed to social and economic causes
alone. Poverty, hunger, disease, illiteracy and poor
governance are the symptoms, not the causes, of these
conflicts. The underlying political reasons in all these
cases are too well known. Hammering away at socio-
economic factors is an oversimplification of the matter.
There are other deeper and intractable causes of all
major conflicts and disputes which the Secretary-
General's report has not been able to address.

Only a couple of months ago, in a similar debate
in this body, I spoke of the inability to address the root
causes 7 political expediency, the lack of political will
and the failure of the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, to honour its Charter obligations f as
the main reasons for two of the most persistent
conflicts that have been afflicting our own region.
Ironically, it is the dichotomy of approach on the part
of the Council which is causing this situation. Kashmir
and Afghanistan are the classic examples of selectivity.
Selectivity on Kashmir is seen in the Council's total
inaction and inertia on its own resolutions and
selectivity on Afghanistan is manifest in the excessive
enactment of punitive measures and so-called smart
sanctions, which have been hurting only the 25 million
innocent people of Afghanistan. The fact is that, in
both cases, conflict continues, peace remains elusive
and human misery is being aggravated.

There should be no discrimination in the
implementation of the resolutions of the Security
Council on the basis of their adoption under Chapter VI
or Chapter VII of the Charter. Such distinctions are
irrelevant. Technicalities of this nature cannot be
applied to a situation involving the destiny of a people
or when there is a serious threat to the peace and
security of a region. After all, both Chapter VI and
Chapter VII are part of the same Charter.

Therefore, it will come as no surprise that we,
who have seen the United Nations fail to prevent or
resolve conflicts so close to us, will be sceptical about
how it intends to prevent conflicts in the near or distant
future. We feel that this report, in spite of some
positive elements, offers no solution to the misery of
millions of people in our region.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's sincere
efforts to tackle this complex subject in his
comprehensive report. The answer to many questions,
in our view, still lies in the faithful implementation of
the provisions contained in the United Nations own
Charter. Some of the provisions in particular need to be
highlighted. For example, paragraph 1 of Article 1
commits the United Nations to taking effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to peace. This gives the United Nations the lead
role in conflict prevention. Under Chapter VI of the
Charter, conflict prevention, as part of the pacific
settlement of disputes, is established as a major
function of the United Nations. Article 34 allows the
Security Council to investigate situations which might
lead to friction or dispute threatening international
peace and security. Articles 36 and 37 lay out the
responsibilities of the Council in preventing or
resolving a dispute. The Secretary-General, under
Article 99, also has a responsibility to bring to the
notice of the Security Council any matter which may
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. This does not restrict the Secretary-General
from using his good offices, fact-finding missions and
personal envoys to prevent conflict. Article 29 of the
Charter allows the establishment of subsidiary organs
of the Security Council to assist it in its functions.
Such mechanisms may be used to address conflict
prevention on a continuing basis, as proposed in the
Secretary-General's report.

While the Charter is clear on what needs to be
done, the United Nations, including its Secretary-
General, as well as the Security Council and the
General Assembly, have to play their part in
implementing these provisions. Not doing so on the
basis of political expediency or mere technicalities
would be a disservice to the Charter itself. We are
hopeful that, when the General Assembly takes up this
question, it will give substantive consideration to the
report. In addition, in our opinion, the international
community must be guided by certain broad parameters
in its actions on the prevention of armed conflicts.

Pakistan will continue to remain actively
involved in all the discussions in the United Nations on
the prevention of armed conflict, an issue which is of
vital concern to us. I wish to voice our support for the
Secretary-General's pledge to move from a culture of
reaction to a culture of prevention, and finally to a
culture of peace and prosperity, the twin goals of the
United Nations. In doing so, I reaffirm Pakistan's
cooperation and support for the international
community's efforts to prevent armed conflicts, in
keeping with our commitment to global peace,
collective security and the honour and dignity of
peoples all around the world, as well as their progress
and prosperity.

