Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank France for having organized this important open
debate under its presidency of the Security Council.
The presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Development of France and other
Ministers reflects the importance of the subject we are
discussing today. We listened with great interest to the
introductory briefings of the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, as well as to the statement made by the President
of the Central African Republic.

Luxembourg fully supports the European Union
statement, as well as that made by the representative
of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians. Let me point out some matters
of particular importance to us at the national level.

It is glaringly obvious to us that civilians are the
main victims of armed conflicts. They are paying the
heaviest price in human lives, be it in Syria, Yemen,
South Sudan or the Central African Republic. Civilians
are increasingly targeted and tortured in order to
terrorize, force mass displacements or inflict a moral
defeat on an enemy that cannot be overcome on the
battlefield. One corollary to this fact is the absolute need
for the Security Council to demonstrate determination
and consistency when it comes to ensuring respect
for international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians.

The protection of civilians must not be just a
rhetorical priority confined to debates and thematic
resolutions. Since the early 20005, the Council has
endowed itself with a normative framework and
ambitious mandates in particular with respect to the
most vulnerable groups - children and women - by
developing its children and armed conflict agenda and
its women and peace and security agenda. It is important
to implement these with rigour and without exceptions
or restrictions.

To that end, the majority of the peacekeeping
operations deploy specialist advisers - women's
protection advisers and child protection advisers. We
are convinced that these advisers, whose usefulness
has been tried and tested, should continue to exercise
the specific role for which they are mandated by
the Security Council. Their essential tasks include
gathering trustworthy information on the situation of
civilians and the risks they face.

In the area of peacekeeping operations, trust
and credibility are essential. For that reason, United
Nations personnel, whether civilian or military, must
be irreproachable. We support the policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse, and we
welcome the Secretary-General's decision to exclude
from peacekeeping operations national forces listed in
the annexes of his reports.

To show our commitment, Luxembourg has
decided to make a voluntary contribution of €135,000,
or about $150,000, to support the work of the Special
Coordinator on Improving United Nations Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, Ms. Jane Holl Lute,
and her team. We hope that this support will bear fruit
and help to prevent these heinous crimes and assist the
Victims Among the priorities for action, we consider
it essential to ensure that peacekeepers and United
Nations personnel in general receive adequate training
before deployment.

Finally, I would like to conclude my statement by
focusing on prevention. No conflict erupts without
warning signs. These signs can be manifold, but they
generally include the intensification of violations
of human rights. We therefore fully support the
initiative of the Secretary-General's Human Rights Up
Front initiative, and we encourage him to pursue its
implementation.

Our organization was created to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. The protection of
civilians must be at the heart of our action. We cannot
afford to fail.

