Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased that
this important topic - the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security - is being discussed
by the Council during the South African presidency. I
would therefore like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having taken this initiative. We are
also appreciative of the efforts by the Secretary-
General to promote justice and the rule of law.

Few regions of the world have been so deeply
affected and, without too much hyperbole, so
devastated by the adverse consequences of a lack of
compliance with the rule of law as the Horn of Africa.
It is therefore axiomatic for us that strengthening the
rule of law would have a hugely transformative impact
on the state of peace and security in our region. There
is little doubt that an improvement of the security
situation and the prevalence of peace would be a great
boon to the aspirations of the region's peoples for
economic revival, creating hope in a region where hope
has been a distant dream for too long. For many, that
might also mean achieving the Millennium
Development Goals.

But the task of ensuring the supremacy of the rule
of law, both in the domestic sphere and in relations
among States, has not been easy for our region. It is
also self-evident, whatever might be its theoretical
validity, from the experience of the Horn of Africa, that
the lack of compliance with the rule of law in the
domestic domain is invariably associated with flagrant
disregard for, and lack of compliance with, rules of
international law governing inter-state relations.

Strengthening and promoting the rule of law
provides a firm foundation for ensuring justice, and
thus for maintaining domestic peace and stability in
nations. A host of issues arise in that regard, with
respect to capacity-building and the lack of robust
institutions for the administration of justice when one
focuses on the issue of the lack of compliance with the
rule of law. Respect for the rule of law and the capacity
to make rules that are complied with are particularly
vital in order to ensure that societies in transition from
war to peace succeed in that exercise.

However, it appears obvious to us that, when this
topic is discussed by the Security Council, it is
absolutely critical to pay sufficient attention to the
matter of the lack of compliance with the rule of law
that manifests itself in flagrant violations of the
principles of international law that governing inter-
State relations. A quick glance at the recent history of
the Horn of Africa makes that abundantly clear, as does
what is taking place there as we speak.

Beyond a doubt, if there were to be some
progress in our region in that respect - for which the
Security Council is in a position to make a great
difference - the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development region would make a huge leap forward
in ensuring peace and security in the region. The
positive implications of that for international peace and
security are unquestionable.

