Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The difficult situation that continues to
prevail in Darfur, as well as in the process of settling
that situation, continues to give rise to legitimate
concerns among the members of the Security Council

and the entire international community, primarily as
regards further exacerbation of the humanitarian
situation and a new outbreak of violence. Recent
events have shown that the Sudanese leadership has
adopted a policy of independently seeking a solution to
the problem of Darfur without the involvement of
United Nations peacekeepers in that process. Let me be
frank: we do not agree with that position.

The decisions of the Security Council and the
African Union must be implemented. The use of force
to stabilize the situation in Darfur will lead to an
impasse. The Russian Federation has always believed
that any Security Council decision pertaining to
peacekeeping must take into account the views of the
host Government. Unfortunately, the hastily adopted
resolution 1706 (2006) - which was adopted without
ongoing consultations with the Government of the
Sudan and on which Russia abstained while supporting
it in substance - has led to a counter-productive
heightening of emotions.

Russia has adopted a position of principle with
regard to the desirability of employing United Nations
forces and resources in Darfur in order to achieve
lasting peace there. It must be done on the basis of
cooperation with the leadership of the Sudan and in
close consultation with the African Union, the League
of Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. Such cooperation must be based on the
Secretary-General's proposal, namely, a gradual
approach to involving the United Nations in the affairs
of Darfur, the basic elements of which are the speedy
and substantial reinforcement of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan and its eventual transfer to
United Nations leadership.

Today's meeting provides an opportunity for
first-hand assessments. We welcome the overall
positive attitude of the leadership of the African Union.
We hope that the Government of the Sudan will
establish full-scale cooperation with the African Union
and its Mission in Darfur. Despite the well-known
problems of which we are aware, it is playing an
important stabilizing role there. It is also one of the
guarantors preventing the resumption of large-scale
bloodshed. In that regard, we believe it would be
desirable to bring about the extension of the mandate
of the African Union Mission to the end of the year.
We are convinced that there are still real chances
to continue the search for a peaceful resolution to the
problem of Darfur. The Security Council must continue
to lend political support to efforts in that regard; it
should use its authority to strengthen the dialogue
among the African Union, the United Nations and the
Sudanese leadership. There is no alternative to
continuing that dialogue and bringing it to a successful
outcome. Russia will continue to do everything it can
to make progress in that regard, including through
contacts with the Sudan.

In conclusion, I too would like, on this
anniversary of the terrorist attack against New York, to
express my solidarity and support to the delegation of
the United States to the United Nations, as well as to
the entire American people.

