Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, we would like to welcome Mr. Jan Kubis,
whom we thank for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/535). We would also like to
thank Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

I have four comments. First, we hope that the

year 2014 will see the holding of credible presidential
elections that will be accepted by all and conducive to
providing viable and sustainable solutions to the social,
economic and political problems of Afghanistan. As
Mr. Kubis pointed out to us, we cannot underestimate
the importance of the elections for the future of the
country. They constitute the best basis for establishing
internal legitimacy. They are key to maintaining
international commitments. They confer on Afghans a
feeling of ownership with regard to their democracy.
They also test the viability of a peaceful transfer of
power between the leaders of the country and ensure
that the democratic process is accountable to the
Afghan population.

We pay tribute to the authorities of the country
for the recent progress they have made in their
preparations for elections, which seem to be moving
in the right direction, particularly with the adoption
of the legislative electoral framework and the recent
appointment of the commissioners of the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. Nevertheless, we must
express our disappointment at the fact that the
legislation adopted has reduced the quota for women's
representation from 25 per cent to 20 per cent.

That leads me to my second point. We continue to
be concerned at issues relating to the protection and
representation of women. The recent attack in Helmand
province against a senior police officer as part ofa trend
of violence against women officers in high-ranking
positions is alarming. We condemn those attacks,
particularly at a time when the Afghan Government is
assuming full responsibility for security throughout the
country. For that reason, it is important that we firmly
defend human rights and that the Government redouble
its efforts to ensure the participation of women in the
electoral and reconciliation processes, and that they
continue to join the Afghan armed forces in order to
promote trust among the population.

Thirdly, I would like to refer to the security situation
in the country. On the one hand, we welcome the
completion of the transfer of security functions to the
Afghans. At the same time, however, we note the upsurge
in terrorist attacks and we regret the new statistics
according to which the number of civilian casualties
continues to rise. In addition, two predominant factors
are undermining security efforts and will persist after
2014. I refer to international terrorism, on the one hand,
and to drug trafficking, on the other. The ongoing
support of the international community for the Afghan
security forces and the strengthening of cross-border
cooperation will be indispensable to eradicating those
phenomena.

Finally, in July, we had the opportunity to hear
an informative briefing from the Deputy Secretary-
General on his visit to Afghanistan. That high-level
visit from the Organization seemed to us to be timely
and relevant. We associate ourselves with the key
message delivered by Mr. Jan Eliasson during his visit,
encouraging all Afghans to preserve the progress made
to date and to continue to work for peace, development
and human rights.

In that regard, the United Nations is playing a
fundamental role in Afghanistan, particularly at the
critical juncture of the transition and in the elections
to be held next year. Guatemala will continue to
support a robust United Nations presence to ensure
that Afghanistan will be able, with the support of the
international community, to successfully face the year
2014 and the challenges that will follow.

