Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First of all, I should like to thank the Panel
of Experts concerning Sierra Leone for its report and
Ambassador Chowdhury, the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1132 (1997), for introducing it.

The Chinese delegation has carefully studied the
Panel's report and believes that it is comprehensive and
is helpful in our further understanding the links
between the illegal diamond trade and armed conflict,
as well as in assessing the implementation by the
countries concerned of Security Council resolutions.
The report contains many concrete recommendations,
some of which are quite inspiring. We should like to
express our appreciation to the Panel for the tireless
efforts it has made under the leadership of Ambassador
Chowdhury.

We have learned from the report that serious
violations of Security Council resolutions are taking
place in the region at present. The illegal diamond
trade still stands out as a problem, and it has become an
important source of income for the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) in maintaining and promoting its
military ambitions. Furthermore, small arms are
everywhere and are easily available to both rebels and
criminal elements. We also learned that some countries
are directly participating in the trade or are allowing
their territories to be used in the providing of arms to
Sierra Leone. This situation is one of the most
significant reasons why the peace process in Sierra
Leone is at such a difficult stage, unable to make
progress.

Today, long after the Security Council resolutions
were adopted, the fact that the situation remains
unresolved is indeed a source of concern and a point
worthy of our consideration. We believe that the most
urgent task before us is to take concrete measures to
effectively curb the illegal diamond trade and the illicit
flows of and trafficking in arms so as to reduce the
negative effect of these two phenomena on peace in
Sierra Leone.

On one hand, the Security Council and the
international community need to work harder for peace
and to urge the parties in Sierra Leone to effectively
implement the agreements already reached. On the
other hand, it is necessary to take decisive measures to
cut off outside support for the RUF so that it will not
entertain any illusions of expanding spheres of
influence by military means. In this regard, all
countries need to cooperate and coordinate. Many good
recommendations have been put forward by the Panel
in this regard, and we need to consider and implement
them. We also believe, however, that any sanctions
imposed will have to be well targeted. We must fully
consider and avoid all possible negative humanitarian
effects resulting from sanctions. The sanctions must
also have a time limit.

The conflict in Sierra Leone has a direct bearing
on the stability of neighbouring countries, as well as on
peace and security in the region. We must have a
comprehensive approach. This problem needs to be
considered and approached in a regional context.
Sanctions are not the only means available, and are
certainly not the best means.

The Security Council must play an important role
in seeking a comprehensive settlement. In the interest
of regional peace and stability, we urge the countries
concerned to abide strictly by Security Council
resolutions so as to promote an early and peaceful
resolution ofthe issue.

We also appreciate the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
trying to stabilize the regional situation, and we
welcome its continued role in this regard. We also look
forward to the ECOWAS briefing to be made in a few
days. We hope that the Security Council will strengthen
its close cooperation with ECOWAS in this regard in
order to promote the peace process in the region.

