Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to convene this important
debate. I would also like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and
Mr. Amano for their very enlightening briefings at the
beginning of our meeting.

As the international security environment continues
to deteriorate and the nuclear threat is making a forceful
reappearance, it is crucial to preserve the integrity of
existing non-proliferation norms and to consolidate
a multilateral, rules-based order. As President of the
Republic Emmanuel Macron recalled in this Chamber
last September (see S/PV.8362), it is important to
reaffirm unambiguously the essential nature of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) for international security. The NPT remains the
cornerstone of global strategic stability. It represents
an irreplaceable bulwark against the risk of nuclear
proliferation. Fifty years after its signing, the Treaty is
an undeniable success for three reasons.

First, since 1968 the NPT has led a number of States
in Europe, Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Pacific
to abandon their nuclear weapons. Only a few States
have developed arsenals outside the NPT. Secondly,
the NPT has enabled the peaceful development of
nuclear energy under the auspices of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Today, nuclear energy
is an important source of low-carbon electricity for
some 50 States. Non-energy applications of nuclear
technology are even more widespread. Finally, the NPT
has led to drastic reductions - on the order of 80 per
cent - in nuclear arsenals from the levels seen during
the Cold War.

That success has not been achieved without crises
along the way. Clandestine nuclear facilities and
activities, which were not declared to the IAEA, were
discovered first in Iraq and then in North Korea, Libya,
Iran and Syria. Non-state clandestine networks, in
particular the Abdul Qadeer Khan Network, played an
important role in that series of crises. The involvement
of the Security Council, the perseverance of its
members, the determination of everyone and the work
of the IAEA made it possible to overcome them, with
the notable exception of that of North Korea, despite
the recent decrease in tensions. In most cases, those
results were achieved diplomatically. The NPT has
survived despite that succession of shocks because its
States parties have remained determined to preserve it.

Accordingly, despite a risky environment,
safeguarding the NPT is more essential than ever. It is
more essential than ever because the threat posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery has not disappeared. It is essential
because the reduction in the American and Russian
arsenals, by far the most massive, remains in place.
The expectation for nuclear disarmament remains
high in international opinion, which has led some to
favour an exclusively declaratory approach by seeking
a ban on nuclear weapons, while disarmament cannot
be decreed. Only concrete actions count. Finally,
safeguarding the NPT is essential because energy
needs are constantly increasing all over the world and
the fight against carbon dioxide (C02) emissions also
involves nuclear energy, which has made it possible for
France, for example, to be below the world average for
carbon dioxide CO2 production per capita.

How, then, can we consolidate the NPT, and
what should our collective road map be? Above all,
the balance of the three pillars of the NPT must be
respected. As mentioned by several speakers, it is a
legitimate expectation of everyone. First, we must adopt
a firm and united response to nuclear proliferation,
with the highest priority necessarily being resolving
the North Korean crisis. The North Korean nuclear and
ballistic threat remains intolerable. NPT States parties
must make clear their expectations of North Korea.
The latter must implement the complete, verifiable
and irreversible dismantling of its nuclear and ballistic
programmes in accordance with the resolutions of the
Council. At that point, the sanctions can be lifted.

With regard to Iran, our objective in the nuclear
field is twofold: preserve the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and come to an agreement on how to oversee
Iran's nuclear programme for the long term. There is
no way we will accept Iran acquiring nuclear weapons.
I would add that agreement will have to be reached to
reduce the threat of Iran's missile programme, which is
only growing despite the Security Council's calls.

Beyond crises, we will continue to rely on the
IAEA. France hopes that States that have not yet done
so will be able to accede to the additional protocol. And
because the threat of nuclear or radiological terrorism is
real, all measures in support of resolution 1540 (2004)
must be strengthened.

Moreover, for the future, we must promote
progressive nuclear disarmament. The NPT was
conceived 50 years ago when the role of nuclear
deterrence was recognized - a role that remains in
several regions of the world. Yet France wants all States
to commit themselves to creating the conditions for a
world without nuclear weapons, with undiminished
security for all. That is also consistent with the goal of
general and complete disarmament set out in article VI
of the Treaty.

Accordingly, in terms of concrete actions, we can
propose several. First, the United States and Russia,
which still hold nearly 90 per cent of the nuclear
arsenals, must continue their concerted efforts to reduce
them. Secondly, the negotiation in the Conference
on Disarmament of a treaty banning the production
of fissile material is essential to exclude the risk of a
resumption of the arms race. It is an essential step on
the road to a world without nuclear weapons. Thirdly,
the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty remains essential. It is the necessary
key to preventing new weapons from being designed.
We call on all the States concerned to sign and ratify this
instrument and to support the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty Organization. Fourthly, work on the
verification of nuclear disarmament is also important
for confidence-building, and it is worth extending.
Fifthly, the reduction of strategic risks associated
with nuclear weapons is based on the transparency
of nuclear doctrines, dialogue between political and
military leaders, crisis communication instruments and
reassurance measures. Much has been done since the
birth of deterrence; those efforts must continue.

In conclusion, let me say a few words on civil
nuclear power, which must be pursued in the best
conditions of safety and security. Through numerous
partnerships, France supports countries that wish to
embark on this path or develop it. France's voluntary
contribution to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund
will be maintained in this regard.

As Council members will have understood,
France will continue to work to ensure that the main
equilibrium of our nuclear non-proliferation system is
maintained and that we are able to strengthen it with
new binding measures. We are at the disposal of all
those who wish to embark on this path in good faith.

