Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Madam President, my delegation wishes
to congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We wish
you every success and pledge our cooperation. I would
like also thank and congratulate the delegation of the
United Kingdom and Ambassador Rycroft for having
led the Council in March.

At the outset, Bolivia offers its most sincere
condolences to the people and the Government of the
Russian Federation for yesterday's terrorist attack in
Saint Petersburg. As stated by President Evo Morales
Ayma, Bolivia emphatically condemns that cowardly
terrorist act, which claimed the lives of many and
injured dozens. We convey our sympathy to the families
of the deceased and wish the injured a speedy recovery.

My delegation warmly welcomes the appointment
of Mr. Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo as Joint Special
Representative for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the
African Union-United Nations Joint Chief Mediator.
We have witnessed the leadership and professionalism
of Ambassador Mamabolo, not only as his country's
Permanent Representative to the United Nations but
also when he was President of the Group of 77 and
China in this Organization.

I should like to make the following brief comments.

Bolivia welcomes the good news that the situation
in Darfur has taken a positive turn. As the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/20l7/250) indicates, there
have been no serious conflicts over the past three
months and hostilities in the Jebel Marra region have
diminished considerably. We welcome the fact that the
Government of the Sudan, the signatory movements
to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as well as
non-signatory movements have all upheld the ceasefire.
We urge the leaders of the non-signatory movements,
especially the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction, to join the negotiations under way and work
on a formal agreement that shows their commitment to
stability and peace in Darfur.

In that connection, we encourage the efforts of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
represented by former Presidents Thabo Mbeki and
Abdulsalami Abubakar, to advance the peace process
in Darfur. In that regard, we also take note of the steps
taken by the Presidents of Uganda and Chad to foster
dialogue among the parties. Regional cooperation is
fundamental to the political process.

Similarly, we would like to highlight the decrease in
intercommunal violence. We recognize the efforts of the
Government and UNAMID to promote understanding
and reconciliation in order to reduce tensions between
members of those communities. Nevertheless, despite
such improvements, the situation of internally
displaced persons remains a great concern. According
to the Secretary-General's report, their number has not
decreased. There are approximately 2.6 million people
exposed to some form of violence, of which women
and children are the most vulnerable and the most
seriously affected.

We must support the plan of the Government of
the Sudan for the voluntary resettlement of internally
displaced persons. In that connection, we trust that the
Government, consistent with the progress it has shown,
will ensure the necessary support so that UNAMID
can freely carry out its mandate of guaranteeing the
necessary access to humanitarian actors so that they
can verify and deliver humanitarian assistance.

As for the exit strategy and the transfer of
UNAMID tasks to the United Nations country team, we
welcome the efforts of the joint working group, whose
recommendations, we believe, can be key in the joint
African Union-United Nations report on the strategic
review of UNAMID, to be submitted in May.

We also highlight the Sudanese Government's
solidarity in alleviating the humanitarian crisis in South
Sudan by opening up a humanitarian aid corridor from
central Sudan to northern South Sudan, particularly in
the areas of greatest conflict, such as Upper Nile and
Bahr El Ghazal states.

Finally, my delegation pledges its support to the
work of UNAMID and the United Nations country team
with a View to achieving the main goal of lasting and
sustainable peace in Darfur. We reiterate that the work
and efforts of the Council must respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan.

