Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic):
It gives me pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am confident that your experience and
wisdom will enable the Council's work to proceed in the
best possible manner. I also congratulate
Ambassador Kovanda of the Czech Republic on the way
in which he guided the work of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting to discuss a very
serious issue which, unless dealt with appropriately, will
have grave implications for international peace and
security. The city of Holy Jerusalem has a special
religious and historic significance for the Islamic,
Christian and Arab worlds alike. It is, moreover, part of
the Arab territories occupied in 1967. Hence, any change
in its identity, legal status or demographic composition
would constitute disregard for the feelings of the Arab
and Islamic nations, defiance of international law, and a
Violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. The Council
should therefore address this matter by adopting an
appropriate resolution to put an end to the attempts by the
Israeli occupying authorities to alter the identity of the
Holy City.

The facts and merits of the attempts and actions by
the Israeli occupying authorities to confiscate land and
build settlements, aimed at uprooting the Palestinian
presence from the Holy City, are now clear to one and
all; there is no room for argument or controversy. They
place upon the Security Council the responsibility to
adopt a resolution affirming the unlawfulness of these
attempts to confiscate lands in the Holy City and obliging
the occupying authorities to rescind their decisions in that
connection, to halt all planned settlement programmes, to
end the closure of Holy Jerusalem, and to cease all Israeli
excavations that imperil the foundations and structure of
the Al-Aqsa mosque.

The Arab and Islamic worlds and all other peace-
loving peoples expect the Council now to assume its
Charter role and to restore the rights of a people, thus
sparing the region and the world a new conflict that
would prove no less bitter than the conflicts of the past.
Any delay or reluctance on the part of the Security
Council in adopting a fair resolution deterring the
aggressor could only weaken the Council's credibility; it

 

would do nothing to further the Charter purpose of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

