Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for convening today's
meeting. Human rights are universal. As Governments,
we are all obliged to promote and protect them. As
former Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson often
said - and I apologize for repeating something that we
have all heard so many times -

"There is no peace without development, no
development without peace and neither peace nor
development without respect for human rights".

As a tribute to him and a reminder to all of us, it is
sometimes useful to go back to the preamble of
this fantastic, inspiring book. Our founders were
"determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war". We repeat that here very often, but let
us not forget that the text goes on

"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and ofnations large
and small, and to promote social progress and
better standards of life in large freedom".

I could end there, but I do have a few more things to say.

First, the Human Rights Council is - as has
been said here today - at the heart of the United
Nations human rights architecture and deserves our
full engagement. But human rights are also at the
core of the Security Council's work. We see that in
our discussions almost every day. Human rights have
always played a role in its work. However, we should
give greater attention and consideration to how they
can be further integrated. The inherent link between
the protection and promotion of human rights and
the maintenance of international peace and security
is clear and embodied in the Charter. Violations and
abuses of human rights - civil and political as well
as economic, social and cultural - can be drivers of
conflict. Conversely, the respect for and protection of
human rights contribute to addressing the root causes
and drivers of instability, thereby helping to prevent
and resolve conflicts and sustain peace.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing. We fully support his commitment to human
rights as an intrinsic part of the work of the United
Nations across all its pillars. We fully agree that human
rights are integral to successfully delivering on both
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
resolution 2282 (2016). We are encouraged by the
concrete measures that he has put in place that are
aimed at strengthening the capacity of the system of
the United Nations to detect and respond early to signs
of looming crisis. In this regard, the Human Rights
Up Front initiative is a useful example of an approach
that cuts across the three pillars to deliver early and
contextualized analysis focused on prevention.

The Security Council's approach to human rights
has evolved over time. Over the past 10 years, we have
seen a positive trend, with significant growth in human
rights functions within peace operations. Human rights
components are now central to almost all mandates
of peace operations, which enhance their quality and
effectiveness. That includes capacity-building for
host nations and reporting to the Security Council. In
February, Uruguay, Senegal and Sweden organized an
Arria-formula meeting on human rights components in
peace operations in order to learn from the experience to
date and to discuss how to further strengthen this work.

Another positive development has been briefings
from the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) on particular human rights situations.
In addition, the Council has addressed human rights in
relation to both thematic and country-specific concerns.

Improved cooperation with regional organizations,
such as the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, has contributed
and can further contribute to a greater emphasis on
human rights within the Council, including in peace
operations. These organizations have clear objectives
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, not least as part of efforts for
preventing conflicts. However, even ifthese are positive
trends, then it is clear that we still need to do better.

Human rights are relevant to the work of the
Security Council across all three phases of the conflict
cycle: before, during and after. We need to step up in
all three phases.

First, the primary responsibility for protecting the
human rights of their populations lies with States. A
failure to do so erodes trust within society and increases
fear, suspicion and exclusion, sowing the seeds of
instability and conflict. Some ofthe recurring causes of
armed conflict relate to land ownership, language rights
and minority rights. Monitoring respect for all human
rights - civil and political rights, as well as economic,
social and cultural rights - must be an integral part of
prevention. Responding early to violations and abuses
of human rights can effectively prevent conflicts before
they become a threat to regional and international peace
and security.

Secondly, during conflicts, respect for international
law, including human rights law and international
humanitarian law, must be upheld. The trend is
unfortunately the complete opposite. The correlation
between conflict and discrimination against women has
been established, making upholding women's human
rights a security concern. Monitoring and reporting of
all human rights during conflicts are crucial, including
for the protection of civilians. schools and hospitals.

Human rights components must be standard in
all peace operations. The protection and promotion of
human rights should be a whole-of-mission approach.
The integration of human rights into all aspects of
peace operations, as well as in reports by the Secretary-
General, should be strengthened. Human rights
mandates decided upon by the Security Council must
be adequately and sustainably funded.

Finally, human rights are essential for consolidating
peace when emerging from conflict. Building
sustainable and peaceful societies requires a
comprehensive approach that brings together peace and
security, sustainable development, gender equality and
human rights. Just as a lack of respect for human rights
can be a spur to conflict, a comprehensive human rights
framework that ensures that the rights of all individuals
and communities within a society are recognized and
respected is critical to building sustainable peace. The
United Nations, including peacekeeping operations,
should better support efforts to strengthen national
capacities, including on the rule of law. Ending
impunity is also of key importance for reconciliation.
Cultural impunity is a terrible trend.

The importance of ensuring accountability for
human rights abuses and violations is relevant in all
three phases. The Security Council must do better.
There are numerous examples of where grave human
rights violations have occurred and where early action
by the Security Council could have made a difference.
The failure to act fails the victims and undermines the
legitimacy of the Council. We must also not forget the
important role played by the International Criminal
Court in this regard.

The Human Rights Council is the main United
Nations human rights body. We absolutely agree with
that. That should continue to be the case, and the
Human Rights Council needs to have our full support in
delivering on its mandate. It is equally clear that human
rights are a critical aspect of the Security Council's
mandate to maintain international peace and security.
These are mutually reinforcing structures.

The mechanisms and special procedures of the
OHCHR and the Human Rights Council's are an
independent and reliable source of information that the
Security Council should make better use of in its work
by, inter alia, inviting them to regularly briefthe Council
on urgent human rights related matters - before,
during and after conflicts. Early warning mechanisms
and relevant and independent information from the
ground is crucial in order for the Security Council to
effectively assess, prevent and respond to conflicts.

Briefings by the Secretariat to the Council should
always include human rights as part of broader conflict
analysis, drawing on the whole of the United Nations
system to support the Council's decision-making.

Speaking in Geneva earlier this year, the Secretary-
General told the Human Rights Council that "perhaps
the best prevention tool we have is the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the treaties that derive
from it". If we are to fully live up to our responsibility
to prevent conflict and maintain peace, human rights
must be at the core of our business. We must and we
can do better.

