Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic ofthe Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, Mr. President,
as the Jordanian presidency of the Security Council comes
to an end, to express to you the pleasure of my delegation
at seeing you presiding over this public meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, particularly on the final report of

the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2014/42, annex).

As the month of January comes to an end,
my delegation welcomes the fact that the work of
the Security Council is being conducted by the
representative of Jordan, a country with which my
country shares excellent relations marked by mutual
esteem and consideration. I should like to take this
opportunity to fulfil a most agreeable duty, that of
congratulating you, Sir, most warmly, speaking both
for myself and for my delegation, on the work carried
out during your presidency of the Security Council.

I would like, first ofall, on behalfofthe Government
and the entire people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to thank the Group of Experts, which, as was
the case two years ago, has once again produced an
acceptable final report. It is a report that highlights the
repeated patterns of two neighbouring countries used
to swimming against the current with respect to the
precepts of peace proclaimed by the United Nations, the
African Union and subregional organizations to which
they claim to belong and which persist unabashedly
in destabilizing the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In that regard, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo wishes to recall that the violations listed in the
final report before the Council have not been identified
by an anonymous organization or one without a
mandate or one merely trying to attract the attention
of the international community for its own sake. Those
serious violations of the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions and the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region have been observed and
documented by a team oftrustworthy persons appointed
by the Security Council on the basis of their skills and
expertise. That is why my Government welcomes the
fact that the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, has carefully considered the
final report of the Group of Experts, in line with its
mandate to monitor compliance with sanctions.

My delegation would like to draw the attention
of the Security Council to the report of the Group of
Experts and the credible information contained in the
report (S/2013/773) of the Secretary-General that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mr. Martin Kobler,
submitted to Council members on 13 January 2014 (see S/PV.7094). The two reports detail the resurgence of
the defunct Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23) and the
ongoing support of Rwanda and Uganda for that former
terrorist group.

The final report of the Group of Experts clearly
establishes the fact that the former M-23 rebels
continue to recruit members in Rwanda despite their
defeat in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It also confirms that the M-23 has received
continued support from Rwandan territory. Finally, the
Group of Experts confirms the fact that it had received
credible information to the effect that M-23 leaders
could move freely in Uganda and travel outside that
country. They reported the case of an M-23 leader who
went to Europe from Uganda. Moreover, the report of
the Secretary-General sets forth credible information
according to which the M-23 has continued to recruit
members after the statements declaring the end of
hostilities made in Nairobi in December and has once
again become active in Ituri. That information was
also confirmed by Mr. Kobler in his statement to the
Council on 13 January 2014.

My delegation notes that, despite the renewed
activity of the M-23 launched from Rwandan and
Ugandan territory - two countries that are signatories
of the Framework agreement and hosts former M-23
combatants - the report of the Panel of Experts
unfortunately does not contain a single recommendation
on the resurgence of the M-23, neither with respect to
its leaders nor with respect to Rwanda and Uganda,
which continue to violate their commitments under the
Framework agreement.

In its report, the Group of Experts also describes
allegations whereby the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) cooperate to a certain
extent with the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du
Rwanda (FDLR), to which it supplies weapons. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is serious about
peace. We wish to live peaceably within our borders,
but we also wish to see peace for all the countries of the
region. It is from that point of view, therefore, that my
Government would like to have some avenues of inquiry
and specific intelligence as to the alleged collaboration
between the FARDC and the FDLR, in order to enable
it to begin investigations and establish responsibility
with a view to taking the resulting necessary measures.
Moreover, my Government is aware that the matter
of the FDLR is one of the pretexts most frequently
used by Rwanda to destabilize the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We wish to reassure
the Security Council that the settlement of the issue
remains a priority for my Government, even after the
defeat of M-23.

That resolve is emphasized in the report that my
Government sent to the Security Council under cover of
a letter dated 16 January 2014, in which my delegation
reminded the Council of the efforts of the joint military
operations that the armies of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda had carried out several
years earlier, as well as the joint operations that were
carried out between the FARDC and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo (MONUC) in 2004 and 2005, the Kimia I and
Kimia II Operations, in 2008 and 2009, respectively,
carried out with the support of MONUC, the Amani
Leo Operation, carried out with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
from 2010 to 2012, and the active involvement, first, of
MONUC, and then of MONUSCO, in the repatriation to
their countries of origin of FDLR members who chose
to participate in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.

It was therefore in good faith that the Congolese
authorities committed themselves, together with the
Rwandans, to continue to hunt the FDLR. And it is in
good faith that the Congolese army, which defeated
the M-23, undertakes to continue its efforts in that
direction. The Democratic Republic of the Congo,
whose civilian population is the only one in the region
since the Rwandan genocide to have to pay the heavy
price of the recurrent FDLR attacks, has no interest
in cooperating in any way whatsoever with hostile
Rwandan forces.

To conclude this part of my statement, it is
appropriate to point out that, in addition to the military
solution to the FDLR issue, my Government wishes to
remind the Security Council of the recommendation
made at the most recent joint summit of the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held on
4 November 2013 in Pretoria, which called on the
members of those two organizations to work for the
repatriation of hostile forces to their countries of origin.
It is against that backdrop that my Government calls
on Rwanda to agree to the repatriation of the FDLR to
their country of origin, Rwanda. The same applies to
other neighbouring countries.

In addition to what I have stated here, the report
also denounces and documents the many incursions of
the Rwandan army into Congolese territory in violation
of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of my country. Such an attitude constitutes
an act of aggression, which must be acknowledged and
condemned by the Security Council pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Rwanda's attitude in that regard, highlighted
by a United Nations Group of Experts operating under a
mandate set out by a binding resolution, constitutes an
illegitimate use of force against the territorial integrity
and political independence of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, it contravenes the principles of
peaceful coexistence, international humanitarian law,
the protection of human rights and the peremptory
norms of international law.

As I address the issue of consecutive sanctions
violations of the arms embargo, allow me also to recall
the sanctions imposed on certain M-23 leaders last year.
It is appropriate to note that sanctions are useful only
when they have a direct impact. In other words, they
have to demonstrate their effectiveness by achieving
the designated goal. The sanctions announced by the
United States Department of the Treasury and by the
United Nations last year fall far short in addressing
all the conclusions of the Group of Experts, which,
in addition to the M-23 rebels, has clearly implicated
Rwanda and Uganda, the host countries helping them
to reorganize in order to perpetuate instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In spite of the overwhelming evidence reported by
MONUSCO and the Group of Experts, Rwanda - as
always - denies the facts brought before it, unable to
refute even a single fact overwhelmingly implicating
it in the destabilization of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Likewise, that country, which is also a
member of the Security Council, continues to refuse to
implement the sanctions on which it has voted. That is
especially clear in the case of the leaders of the former
M-23 who have long remained on the current list of
persons targeted by sanctions imposed by the United
Nations, the European Union and the United States, and
who have been protected by Rwanda, where they have
found shelter.

In July 2013, my Government formally requested
the extradition of four M-23 leaders in Rwanda, to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, namely, Innocent
Zimurinda, Baudouin Ngaruye, Eric Badege and Jean-
Marie Runiga Lugerero. Rwanda has never responded
to my Government's request. It is incumbent upon the
Council to require those countries, and Uganda, to
cooperate in arresting and transferring the criminals
to the appropriate international and Congolese judicial
bodies.

My Government again thanks the entire international
community for having clearly reported, through the
Group of Experts, Rwanda's involvement in destabilizing
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I request that the Council account for all of the
consequences arising from the Violation by Rwanda and
Uganda of the Council's own resolutions regarding the
arms embargo and the sanctions regime.
The Council is aware of human, material,
testimonial and documentary evidence of Rwanda's
aggression. Faced with this tragedy, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, along with the
entire Congolese people and the rest of the international
community, expect the Council to take a firm and
unequivocal stand in line with the implementation of
sanctions. In order to be credible and effective, sanctions
must be carefully targeted and vigorously enforced.
We firmly believe that sanctions will enable the swift
restoration of peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and throughout the region. They will also prevent
the continuing illegal exploitation of natural resources
and other wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, against the backdrop of rebellions supported by
external Powers.

With respect to resolution 2136 (2014), which
the Council just adopted, everyone is familiar with
the practice established by the Council regarding
the drafting of such a resolution. Nevertheless, it
seems to us that the method followed in drafting
the current resolution did not respect such practice.
The resolution is based on the report of the Group of
Experts and concerns the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It involves obligations on the
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all
of its people. We believe that all of the explanations
provided regarding the FDLR could have been included
in another resolution on Rwanda on the occasion of
the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide,
which was committed by Rwandans against Rwandans,
on Rwanda territory - a genocide in which the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was never involved,
either closely or from a distance. On the other hand,
all of the contents of the original text upon which basis
the Council should have expressed its concern about
reports indicating the resumption of the M-23's military
activities - namely, recruitment - were simply set
aside, perhaps to please Rwanda.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to take
this opportunity to especially thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki- moon for his personal involvement in resolving
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Equally, thanks also go to Her Excellency Mrs. Mary
Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa, for her remarkable
efforts in carrying out the important mission entrusted
to her by the Secretary-General.

I cannot forget the positive work of MONUSCO,
headed by Mr. Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whose courage and determination I commend,
as well as the support of the MONUSCO Intervention
Brigade to the FARDC. Finally, I cannot sufficiently
thank the members of the Security Council for the
continued valuable initiatives taken to re-establish
peace in my country.

