Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency for this month and assure you that
you will always have the Russian Federation's full
support and assistance. I would also like to congratulate
Bolivia on its successful conclusion of the presidency
of the Council for the month of October.

I would first like to say a few words about the
situation in Libya in general. Sadly, there are no signs
that it is improving. The country is divided into spheres
of influence. The international community should
focus its efforts on uniting it. Unfortunately, various
external actors continue to place their own interests in
Libya above the goal of a political settlement.

We take note of the sixteenth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the investigation of the Libya dossier, although
unfortunately we have seen no information in it about
the investigation itself- that is, about the progress of
the investigation. We have repeatedly brought up the
ICC's selective approach to this issue, and the report is
yet another confirmation of that. For example, the report
mentions the recent escalation of violence in Tripoli,
in which civilians died, yet it simply records the fact
that it happened. Not a single armed group is named as
responsible for this dangerous outbreak of hostilities.
For some reason the Prosecutor was not interested
in investigating the incident in which terrorists blew
up two cars near a crowded mosque either. And each
successive report dwells on the reports of the activity
of the Libyan National Army in Derna.

Of course, the interest in aspects of the migration
issue in the context of the situation in Libya is
understandable. But there is something one-sided about
the ICC's view of these problems. We would like to
point out that it is criminal organizations, firmly based
in migrants' countries of destination and chiefly in
Europe, that are getting rich off the illegal business of
transporting those migrants, while that key aspect is
missing from the Prosecutor's report for some reason.

In paragraph 25 of the report, which we read
carefully, we did note one sensible assessment,
which is that the Council's referral of the situation
in Libya to the ICC may not prove successful. In that
connection - and we spoke about this at the previous
meeting (see S/PV.8250) - our delegation is fully
resolved to provide members with every assistance
in ensuring that the Council does not repeat this
unfortunate experiment. In principle, therefore, given
the Court's noticeably shaky reputation in the eyes of
many States Members ofthe United Nations, attested to
by the debate in the General Assembly on 29 October
(see A/73/PV.27) - and as my colleague from the
Netherlands correctly remarked when she said that the
investigations "are not quick enough", we believe that
we can and should consider changing the frequency of
the ICC's briefings to the Council.

