I thank Estonia for convening today's important open debate, and I am grateful to you, Madam President, for your efforts to make the Security Council more open and transparent during your country's presidency. Canada welcomes the report of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366). I could not agree more with the Secretary-General's appeal for political will to prioritize the protection of civilians and to ensure accountability. He has our full support. In two days, the world will mark the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. They are the most visible manifestation of the collective commitment of the United Nations to protect civilians and pursue peace in times of conflict. Canada is particularly proud to support and empower women in peacekeeping, including through the innovative Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations. We wholeheartedly thank the civilian, military and police peacekeepers around the world for their service and great sacrifice. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is a global threat that does not recognize borders. The virus continues to claim lives and livelihoods all around the world. We know that civilians are already at disproportionate risk in times of conflict and humanitarian strife. These risks will only be exacerbated by COVID-19 and subsequent measures to respond to the pandemic. This is why Canada has mobilized 59 countries to support the Secretary- General's appeal for a global ceasefire. This call remains the right call, even if the Security Council has failed to support the appeal. This is why we are leveraging our role as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission to put the needs of fragile and conflict-affected countries facing COVID-19 at the top of the agenda. It is also why we have committed $87 million in humanitarian assistance to meeting the needs of the most vulnerable people affected by COVID-19. Our support to trusted partners that are responding to the global COVID-19 appeals will reach civilians around the world based on needs, including in countries such as Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic, as well as Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. Upholding the rights and dignity of the most vulnerable civilians in these trying times is not an optional endeavour. This is because no one will be safe until everyone is safe. Building back better means ensuring that everyone is safe, everywhere. There is no denying that COVID-19 has brought about new challenges, including for the protection of civilians. Yet we should not lose sight of the suffering experienced by civilians in conflicts that persisted long before this pandemic began, or of our shortcomings in addressing these challenges. Parties to conflict continue to perpetrate unlawful, indiscriminate and targeted attacks against civilians, humanitarian and medical workers, hospitals and schools. Children suffer grave violations, including recruitment and use as child soldiers. Rape continues to be used as a weapon of war. Women and girls face sexual and gender-based violence. Overtasked and underresourced United Nations peacekeepers struggle to protect civilians. These trends are painfully clear in the Secretary-General's report, and they must serve as a wake-up call. The good news is that we have the tools at our disposal to address these egregious violations and chronic protection challenges. What we need is the political will. Canada will bring this political will to bear if elected to the Security Council for the period 2021-2022, just as we did when we first placed the protection of civilians in armed conflict on the Council's agenda back in 1999. We will work tirelessly to uphold the rules-based international order and to advocate for scrupulous adherence to international humanitarian law, international human rights law and international refugee law. We will push for the full and effective implementation of Security Council resolutions on the protection of civilians, and we will build bridges across different agendas, such as those on children and armed conflict and on women and peace and security - two other issues that Canada is proud to have helped pioneer. Answering the call of the Secretary-General's report, we will spare no effort in pursuing accountability for violations against civilians, including through mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court. We believe that it is our collective responsibility to adapt and respond to new threats and challenges that cause or exacerbate conflict and imperil the lives and livelihoods of civilians. As warfare continues to evolve, and with threats such as climate change knocking at the Council's door, there is no time to wait. One issue that Canada firmly believes must be explored further is the link between economic security, conflict and peace. This is particularly relevant in countries undergoing fragile or nascent transitions, where economic insecurity, including limited access to economic opportunity, risks reversing peace gains or exacerbating drivers of conflict. If we are fortunate enough to be elected to the Security Council for the 2021-2022 term, Canada will call attention to the vital links between sustainable and inclusive economic growth, job creation, conflict prevention and peace and security, while fully considering the unique needs of civilians and ensuring our responses are gender- and conflict-sensitive. Just as more than 20 years ago, we remain principled in our approach and unwavering in our advocacy to uphold and advance the protection of civilians agenda. We use our voice for good, and we do so in true partnership with others. This is the spirit and intent of our bid for a non-permanent seat on the Council, and what drives our multilateral engagement.
