Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation thanks
the acting Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Carolyn
McAskie, for her briefing on the deplorable
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
the most mineral-rich country in Africa, yet it has the
worst humanitarian situation in the world. Indeed,
Ms. McAskie's briefing only confirmed our worst fears
about the immense suffering of the Congolese people
as a result of the senseless war of aggression. My
delegation strongly deplores the current state of affairs
and the targeting of civilians.

Today's meeting affords us an opportunity to
reflect on the fate of those Congolese women, men and
children who continue to be uprooted from their homes
or who are killed and maimed, in addition to the
women who are rape victims. In our view, our
objective should be to address their situation by
helping to put an end to this suffering. In order to do
that, we must address the causes of the situation, which
is the aggression of Uganda and Rwanda against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We all have a responsibility to ensure that
Congolese civilians live in dignity, like those in any
other nation on earth. We are particularly concerned
about the civilians in the eastern part of the country.
The report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
shows a clear but sad picture of the humanitarian
situation, especially in the eastern part of the country.
At a closed briefing for Council members last month,
Mr. Garreton, in explaining the human rights and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, stated that in the east of the country there is
no right to life. In our view, that sums it all up.
Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, in particular the deliberate targeting
of civilians and their communities in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, must stop. The
Security Council must do more to end the culture of
impunity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially in the occupied eastern part of the country.

The war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has implications beyond that country's borders. It has
devastating implications beyond the central African
region. This is evident from the briefing we just heard:
there are thousands of internally displaced persons, and
so many neighbouring countries are affected by the
refugee flow. These generous neighbours have to carry
an extra burden of hosting thousands of refugees. Some
of them are least developed countries, while others
have just emerged from conflict themselves and are
making efforts to reconstruct their economies. Worse
still, the situation could have serious repercussions for
the rest of the African continent.

As I listened to the briefing by Ms. McAskie,
I could not help but recall the briefings we heard from
the women of Sierra Leone and Somalia during the
preparations for the meeting on women and peace and
security. Their experience could surely apply to any
women and children in a conflict situation. The raging
war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo thus
vividly underscores the fact that women remain the
worst affected of all groups in the avoidable conflict in
that country.

Apart from being killed, wounded or maimed
permanently, women are subjected to all other forms of
atrocities of war. Soldiers prey upon them, they are
humiliated by being raped, sometimes in the presence
of their husbands or children, and as a result of being
raped they have a high risk of contracting HIV/AIDS.
The burying alive of 15 Congolese women in South
Kivu is still fresh in our memories. We are still
awaiting and demand the findings of the investigation
into this barbaric act.

The international community - and in particular
the Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security - cannot and should not allow continued
mass displacements and major breaches of international
humanitarian law to persist with impunity. The
perpetrators of such crimes should be held responsible
for their actions.

I should here like to emphasize the
complementarity of action by the Security Council and
by the humanitarian agencies in the field. It is clear
that one cannot meet humanitarian needs while failing
to address what caused the needs in the first place. In
her last briefing to the Security Council, the outgoing
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata,
made concrete and forward-looking proposals to this
end. We in the Council must therefore exercise the
necessary political will to address the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo if the humanitarian
agencies are to effectively bring long-term relief to the
suffering masses.

The ongoing fighting is a great source of concern
to my delegation, as it is not only a violation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, but is contributing
immensely to the displacement of innocent civilians.
Clearly, the parties engaged in the current fighting are
taking advantage of the minimal presence of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the country. We
have no doubt that the presence of MONUC on the
ground will act as a deterrent, that it will improve the
humanitarian situation and thus prevent further loss of
life, displacement and misery. We are heartened by the
outcome of the second Maputo summit. It is our hope
that the United Nations, and especially the Security
Council, will not be found wanting again this time.

My delegation is grateful to all humanitarian
agencies and organizations that are providing much-
needed relief under difficult conditions. The safety and
security of humanitarian workers providing that much-
needed relief are therefore paramount. We are also
grateful to those donor countries that have been
providing resources for assistance to the Congolese
refugees and internally displaced persons. We also wish
to express our thanks to the European Union for its
continued support for the needy people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, we call on the donor community to
respond generously to the forthcoming inter-agency
appeal for 2001.

It would be remiss of me to end my remarks
without expressing my delegation's thanks and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
scheduled this meeting. Since 1960, when that gallant
son of Africa, Patrice Lumumba, was assassinated, the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
never enjoyed social and economic prosperity. For 37
years, they lived under the rule of the most brutal
dictator, only to find themselves and their country
being attacked and besieged. The Security Council
must not and cannot abandon the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The illegal
exploitation of the mineral wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should not take precedence over
the dignity and humanity of the Congolese people.

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, must stay the course, fulfilling its
responsibility in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

