Ms. Johnson: Mr. President, I wish to thank you
for the opportunity to present to the Council the first
quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
(S/2011/678). I will highlight key observations of the
report and update the Council on key developments in
South Sudan since its publication early this month.

In the first four months of the Mission's
deployment and South Sudan's independence, it is
clear that there are huge expectations from both within
and outside of South Sudan for its transition into a
stable democracy. The challenges are even greater.
Even with the best of intentions from its
leadership to ensure that priorities and spending
decisions are aligned with the needs of its citizens, the
Government of South Sudan will need all the support it
can get. Here, the international community and
UNMISS must quickly mobilize the political will,
resources and capacities to capitalize on the
momentum from independence to enable this transition
to take place.

As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General before the Council today, the Government of
South Sudan and UNMISS have both been in start-up
mode in these first four months. There have been some
notable achievements during this challenging period.

The first such achievement was the rapid
response of UNMISS to the unfolding crisis in Jonglei
state, which was possible, in part, thanks to the transfer
of assets from the former United Nations Mission in
the Sudan. We are encouraged by the assessment made
by the affected communities indicating that the rapid
response to the crisis helped prevent significant
retaliation attacks and a further escalation of violence.

Also encouraging have been the first steps taken
by the Government of South Sudan to develop broader
and more representative Government institutions and a
legislature, and to achieve tangible progress towards
objectives set for its first 100 days. Still, concerns
remain as to how the Government will address the key
challenges of the transitional period in the areas of
governance, corruption and political inclusiveness.

President Salva Kiir Mayardit's commitment to
enacting five bills related to public financial
management and accountability has been well received.
The next couple of months will gauge whether the
1 December deadline is met and meaningful delivery
can begin to take place. The Government's consultation
with political parties in the drafting of key legislation
has instilled increased confidence in the Government's
express commitment to principles of political
pluralism. However, the upcoming constitutional
review process will be the critical test in this regard.

The most significant threat to civilians during the
reporting period was faced in Jonglei state. Here,
UNMISS mobilized its assets quickly to respond with a
multifaceted approach of monitoring and early warning
civilian assessments, daily air patrols and long-range
ground patrols for deterrence, local reconciliation
initiatives and political good offices. The
11-59366
Government's support for conflict mitigation initiatives
involving civil society and traditional leaders in
J onglei is noteworthy.

The Government has also made significant strides
to neutralize internal security threats through the
integration of rebel militia groups. Yet, a few remain
outside of these processes, with an impact on security
in Unity and Upper Nile states, as we have also seen
with recent events. The prevalence of small arms from
these groups is believed to have increased the scale of
intercommunal violence, as witnessed in J onglei state.

UNMISS has a key supporting role to play in the
protection of civilians, but the Government retains
ultimate responsibility. The efforts of UNMISS to
strengthen the capacity of national security organs to
deliver security and the rule of law will bolster the
Government's ability to protect its own citizens. There
is an urgent need to transform and professionalize
these institutions in order to meet minimal
international standards. This will be by far the most
important factor in strengthening respect for human
rights in South Sudan.

We are working closely with the Republic of
South Sudan to ensure full coordination and
unhindered ability to implement resolution 1996
(2011). On 30 September, I presented the mandate to
the newly-formed Government. Subsequently, the
Cabinet and National Security Committee met and
agreed to endorse the mandate. A joint UNMISS-
Government mechanism was established, co-chaired by
Vice-President Riek Machar and myself, comprised of
10 ministers, the representatives of four commissioners
and representatives from the Mission. The group was
formed to strengthen cooperation on mandate
implementation, achieve peace and security objectives,
and raise awareness about the UNMISS mandate. This
is an important step in assisting UNMISS in achieving
the objectives of the resolution.

On 10 November, we convened our first meeting.
We discussed the road map for UNMISS-Government
collaboration on important mandate areas: the
protection of civilians, including the military concept
of operations and threat analysis; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; peacebuilding;
political milestones, especially the constitutional
review; and human rights. Meetings are scheduled to
take place regularly, during which we will focus on
11-59366
each one of these issues, as well as other elements of
the mandate.

The group will oversee nationwide awareness-
raising about the mandate of the Mission and the
status-of-forces agreement. In that respect, I was
invited to brief all 10 state Governors, in the presence
of the National Legislature, at the opening session of
the Governors' forum on Monday. Following my
presentation, the Vice-President welcomed the role
played by UMISS and urged all officials to study and
comply with the mandate. He also said that
Government actors at every level are responsible for
ensuring that no violations of the status-of-forces
agreement occur.

In my meeting with the Ministers last week, I
discussed the distressing number and scale of
violations of the status-of-forces agreement, and agreed
that this UNMISS-Government mechanism would be
used as a way to ensure that violations are investigated,
perpetrators held accountable, and all authorities fully
briefed on the status-of-forces agreement to prevent
future incidents.

In addition to the incidents already reported, I am
disappointed to report that, on 11 November, the Sudan
People's Liberation Army detained an UNMISS
helicopter in Eastern Equatoria state for six hours,
under threat of force. Such actions are unacceptable
and greatly undermine our operations to support peace
and security in the nation.

Mindful of the challenges that lie ahead for South
Sudan, as outlined earlier and in the report of the
Secretary-General, one should not minimize its key
assets in meeting the challenges posed by the political
will of its leadership, the hopes and aspirations of its
people, and the resolute commitment of the
international community, including the Council, to
supporting South Sudan's peaceful and democratic
transition.

UNMISS stands ready to support the Government
of South Sudan in meeting these challenges and is
moving forward to fill critical capacity gaps, especially
in the areas of human rights and the rule of law, where
the Mission has a robust mandate and where there is
limited institutional capacity. In the coming months, as
the Mission builds capacity and transitions out of start-
up mode, I and my team will work closely with the
new Republic towards accomplishing these objectives.
3
I plan to continue my visits to all 10 states of
South Sudan, as well as to travel to all of its
neighbouring capitals, in line with my mandate to
support South Sudan's regional relations. If sustainable
peace and stability are to prevail in South Sudan, good
relations with its neighbours are essential.

As Council members know, the mandate of
UNMISS covers the Republic of South Sudan. It does
not cover border monitoring or, more broadly, the
relationship between the Republic of the Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan. From the perspective of
peace and stability in South Sudan, we know that the
country is dependent on good relations with its
neighbours, and first and foremost its neighbour to the
north, the Republic of the Sudan.

For this reason, we are very concerned about the
heightened rhetoric on both sides, with accusations and
counter-accusations leading to the further escalation of
tensions between the two countries. As Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in South
Sudan, I met yesterday with President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and conveyed the need for the Government to
tone down its rhetoric. For more detail on recent events
and relations with Sudan, such as verification of the
bombings in Yida and the Guffa area, I now refer to
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing to
the Security Council.

