Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, for their briefings and
for their excellent work to achieve and implement the
agreements reached in Stockholm. We also deeply
appreciate retired Major General Cammaert's work
in establishing the Redeployment Coordination
Committee in Al-Hudaydah, which is an essential
element in implementing the Stockholm Agreement,
and the work of the Resident Coordinator in Yemen,
Ms. Lise Grande, to amplify the message of the
enormous and critical humanitarian needs of Yemenis
on the ground.

The Secretary-General's 7 January report
(S/2019/11) on the status of implementation of
resolution 2451 (2018) notes the important progress
made to date, particularly the swift establishment ofthe
Redeployment Coordination Committee, demonstrating
the parties' desire to turn the page. It is significant
that the Republic of Yemen Government and Houthi
representatives have shown a willingness to forge a
political settlement, and we stand by the Secretary-
General's assertion that we should not take for granted
that progress in trying to bring to a conclusion years of
war, suffering and hunger.

But if we share the Secretary-General's measured
optimism, we also share his concerns regarding the
complexity of the task ahead. In particular, despite
those promising efforts, the situation on the ground
for millions of Yemenis remains dire. According
to a report from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs issued just Monday, prices of
basic commodities, including food and petrol, are up
137 per cent and 261 per cent, respectively. There has
been only one containerized shipment to Al-Hudaydah
since 2017, as we heard this morning, and all parties
need to lift the wide range of bureaucratic obstacles
that stand in the way of delivering assistance.

We are concerned by the World Food Programme's
reports of Houthi food aid diversion and call for a
thorough investigation to identify and hold accountable
those responsible for this shameful theft. Interference
with United Nations relief efforts can only prolong
the misery of Yemeni citizens. We call on all sides to
ensure that food aid reaches those who need it most.
We also call on all parties to fully honour the ceasefire
in Al-Hudaydah and to ensure that the redeployments
agreed to in Sweden proceed in due course. Credible
redeployments are critical to sustaining peace in
Al-Hudaydah and to restoring a functioning port to
the country.

We, and indeed the Council, have long held that
only a political solution will lead to the sustained and
stable peace that the people of Yemen deserve. In that
regard, the United States will continue to strongly
support the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths.

Finally, we express our appreciation to the United
Kingdom for its leadership in crafting the resolutions
needed to affirm the Council's support for the agreement
reached in Sweden and, now, to establish a United
Nations mission in Al-Hudaydah. The United States
will do its utmost to ensure that all United Nations
efforts, including those to oversee the ceasefire, are
successful and contribute to a peaceful solution, which
is long overdue.

