The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Singapore for his kind words
addressed to me and to members of my delegation.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Tunisia.

At the outset, I should like to express our
condolences to President Kabila for the loss of his late
father, Laurent-Desire Kabila, one of the first African
militants of freedom and dignity for his people and for
the countries of Africa. Tunisia, which has made
African issues a priority of its foreign policy, welcomes
this opportunity to hear him speak before the Council
and to exchange views on the present and future of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and the potential for
peace, security and stability in the Great Lakes region.

As a member of the Security Council, Tunisia
insists on the need to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, independence and control of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo over its natural resources. The
pillage of these resources, the property of the brotherly
Congolese people, must stop. The people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has suffered and
continues to suffer under the scourge of war and its
negative consequences. They look forward to a better
future of peace, security, stability and prosperity, as
well as to the solidarity and support of the international
community.

Tunisia is resolved and happy to stand with
President Kabila and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at this critical time in their
history. We believe that there is no alternative to a
peaceful settlement of the dispute in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement is the best framework, accepted by all
parties, for fulfilling that objective.

Tunisia endorses and encourages any initiative or
step of President Kabila towards dialogue and national
reconciliation. We would also endorse any initiative he
might take towards dialogue, reconciliation and
cooperation with neighbouring States, within the
framework of mutual respect by all States for their
independence and territorial integrity. All parties have
expressed their willingness to move towards peace. We
look forward to all parties' taking practical steps
towards that objective. We believe that conditions are
ripe for a new momentum in the peace process in
which all parties would participate through immediate
action to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and the
deployment of the second phase of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC).

We look forward to enabling MONUC to deploy
as soon as possible, reflecting the intention of the
international community to assume its responsibility
for the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The critical situation there and in the region
calls for the firm resolve of the international
community to help all parties to build a solid and
lasting peace in the region, leading to prosperity,
solidarity, stability, cooperation and development for
the entire African continent.

In conclusion, I offer my best wishes to President
Kabila as he leads the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo towards peace, security,
stability and prosperity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on Major General Joseph Kabila, President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to respond,
if he so wishes, to the comments of the members of the
Security Council.

