Mr. Grauls (Belgium): Allow me to highlight the
main elements contained in my report prepared for the
Council. The comprehensive version is being
distributed and will be made accessible on the
Committee's website.

Since the adoption of resolution of 1822 (2008)
on 30 June 2008, the Committee has focused its efforts
on implementing those provisions contained in the
resolution pertaining to the Committee and its work.
Today, I would like to outline the progress which has
been made so far in a number of areas which are
considered essential for achieving further progress in
the work of the Committee and in continuing to ensure
that fair and clear procedures exist for placing
individuals and entities on the consolidated list and for
removing them, as well as for granting humanitarian
exemptions.

As directed by this Council, the Committee has
over the past months been working, as a matter of
priority, on reviewing its guidelines. In addition to the
technical updates, the Committee has also made a
thorough analysis of its guidelines. Several sections
have been restructured and new provisions have been
added. A new section detailing the procedure for the
consideration of requests for exemptions from the
travel ban was approved by the Committee on 2
September 2008. The updated version of the guidelines
will be made accessible on the Committee's website in
the coming weeks.

Over the past few months, the Committee and the
Monitoring Team have devoted great attention to the
concrete modalities for the implementation of two new
mechanisms introduced by resolution 1822 (2008). I
am referring here, on the one hand, to the review, by
30 June 2010, of all the names on the consolidated list
at the time of the adoption of the resolution and, on the
other hand, to the posting on the Committee's website
of the narrative summary of reasons for listing for all
entities on the list.

In paragraph 25 of resolution 1822 (2008), the
Council directed the Committee:

"to conduct a review of all names on the
Consolidated List at the date of adoption of this
resolution by 30 June 2010 in which the relevant
names are circulated to the designating States and
States of residence and/or citizenship, where
known, pursuant to the procedures set forth in the
Committee guidelines, in order to ensure the
Consolidated List is as updated and accurate as
possible and to confirm that listing remains
appropriate."

Upon completion of that review, the Committee has
been directed "to conduct an annual review of all
names on the Consolidated List that have not been
reviewed in three or more years" (para. 26).

It is worth recalling that the one-time
comprehensive review, to be conducted by the end of

June 2010, relates to 491 names on the Consolidated
List. In order to make this first-ever exercise
meaningful, careful preparation is essential. The way
the review is organized and planned is key for its
success. That process will be one of the ongoing
priorities in the Committee's work in the months to
come.

In paragraph 13 of resolution 1822 (2008), the
Council directed the Committee, with the assistance of
the Monitoring Team and in coordination with the
relevant designating States, to make accessible on the
Committee's website a narrative summary of reasons
for listing for each entry on the consolidated list. That
task is also considered by the Committee to be an
utmost priority and will play a role equally important
as that of the review outlined above. The Committee is
currently developing the concrete modalities for that
exercise. Following the ruling of the European Court of
Justice in the Qadi and Barakaat cases on 3 September
2008, and at the request of the presidency of the
European Union, the Committee provided on
21 October 2008, on a non-precedent basis, the
narrative summaries of reasons for listing for Mr. Yasin
Abdullah Ezzedine Qadi and Barakaat International
Foundation.

Given the number of names concerned, one
should allow a sufficient amount of time for the full
implementation of the two exercises. The cooperation
of the designating States, as well as of the States of
residence and nationality, will be critical in that
endeavour.

Improving the quality of the Consolidated List
remains central to the work of the Committee. As of
today, the Consolidated List comprises 503 names.
Since the last briefing, on 6 May 2008 (see S/PV.5886),
21 individuals and one entity associated with Al-Qaida
have been added to the list, and two individuals have
been de-listed, one following a submission through the
Focal Point. The Committee has also made
improvements to the existing identifying information
of 44 individuals and three entities. On behalf of the
Committee, I would like to thank all Member States
that have contributed to this process, as it is our
collective responsibility to have a dynamic and
constantly updated list in order to effectively address
the evolution of the threat posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban.
08-59882

With a view to ensuring the greatest transparency
and to reflecting the new provisions contained in
resolution 1822 (2008), the Committee has conducted a
comprehensive update of its website, including the fact
sheets providing information on the Committee's
procedures. The Committee also agreed on a number of
changes to its website aimed at further improving its
user-friendliness. Moreover, the Committee has been
working on developing explanation of terms papers for
each of the three measures set out in paragraph 1 of
resolution 1822 (2008), namely, the assets freeze, the
travel ban and the arms embargo. The explanation of
terms paper on the arms embargo has been revised and
has been posted on the Committee's website, and the
one on the travel ban, approved in September, will be
made available on the Committee's website once the
new guidelines are issued. The explanation of terms
paper on the assets freeze is currently in the process of
being finalized. The Committee believes that the
updated and further enhanced website will assist
Member States in effectively implementing the
sanctions.

The Committee continues to value greatly its
cooperation and interaction with Member States and
international and regional organizations, and enhancing
the outreach efforts remains, therefore, an overall
objective of the Committee. Over the past six months,
the Monitoring Team has provided the Committee with
detailed reports on country visits, sanctions workshops
and participation in several international seminars and
other forums. Such trips offer an opportunity to explain
in detail the work of the Committee and the Team, to
answer questions concerning implementation and to
discuss the objectives and mechanics of the sanctions
regime and increase its impact. That has been
particularly important in the light of the extensive
debate about the fairness of the Committee's
procedures.

The Committee has also continued to develop its
cooperation with international organizations.
INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special
Notices for entities included in the consolidated list are
now available, in addition to the notices for individuals
developed since 2005. In July 2008, the Committee
approved an information package for transmission to
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations. The package outlines in brief the
activities and mandate of the Committee.

In my capacity as Chairman of the Committee, I
gave a briefing to interested Member States on 21 July
2008, where I had the opportunity to update the
broader membership on our work, as well as to
highlight the main provisions of the newly adopted
resolution 1822 (2008). I intend to hold another open
briefing next month.

On 20 October, the Committee met with
Mr. Martin Scheinin, Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism. We
had a constructive exchange of views on issues related
to the fairness and clearness of the procedures, in
particular as far as listing and de-listing are concerned.

I would like to take this opportunity to stress that
the Committee welcomes the Council's encouragement
in paragraph 30 of resolution 1822 (2008) for Member
States to send representatives to meet the Committee
for more in-depth discussion of relevant issues or for
voluntary briefings on their efforts to implement the
sanctions measures. The Committee looks forward to
continuing its cooperation and dialogue with all
Member States.

Allow me to conclude by saying that the
Committee is committed to assisting Member States by
responding to their requests, as well as by continuing
to ensure that fair and clear procedures exist, as guided
by the Security Council. In resolution 1822 (2008), the
Council entrusted the Committee with additional
responsibilities in that regard, and I can assure you that
the Committee is doing its utmost to implement the
relevant provisions in a timely and efficient manner.
The continued cooperation of all Member States will
also be crucial in achieving our common and overall
objective, that is to say, to counter and prevent terrorist
acts.

