Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Yesterday the Israeli Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Shimon Peres, and
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, Ambassador Al-Kidwa, separately briefed the
Council on the latest developments in the Palestinian-
Israeli situation and presented their respective views.
Today, at the request of some of the Council members,
the President organized this open debate. This has
positive significance for the United Nations efforts to
promote the peace process in the Middle East.

At present, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
continues. It has not only aggravated the suffering of
civilians and deepened hatred and hostility on both
sides, it has also brought grave consequences for the
peace process and regional security in the Middle East.
If this situation is allowed to continue, the Palestinian
and Israeli efforts, as well as the efforts made by the
international community, which have yielded good
results, might come to nothing.

The Council has been following the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict and the peace process in the Middle
East. In order to restore and maintain peace and
security in the Middle East, the Council has made
many positive efforts. The proposal to send an observer
mission to the ground has received wide support. The
proposed observer mission is intended to ease and
pacify the ongoing violence, which is in the interest of
both parties. It must be pointed out that the
understanding, cooperation and support of the Israeli
side will be essential for the smooth deployment of the
observer mission and its subsequent successful
implementation of its mandate.

We continue to hope that the Israeli side will
consider positively this proposal. At the same time, we
also hope that the Secretary-General will continue to
play a positive role in maintaining close contacts with
both sides and will urge both sides to exercise restraint,
demonstrate flexibility and seek solutions that are
acceptable to both sides to stop the violence and
resume peace talks.

We have noted that the new Israeli Government
has indicated that achieving peace has become a central
task and it has particularly emphasized that peace
should be achieved with words instead of bullets. The
leaders of both sides have recently indicated their wish
to resume peace talks, and this has provided a fresh
opportunity to restore the peace process. This
opportunity must be seized, for it could easily be
missed. We hope that both parties will consider their
long-term interests, make sound judgements about the
general climate, seize the opportunity and translate
their positive political will into concrete actions as
early as possible.
China has consistently, positively and actively
supported the peace process in the Middle East. We
strongly believe that achieving peace and stability in
the Middle East is a common aspiration of the people
of the region. It is in the fundamental interest of all the
countries of the region. It is also in the interest of the
international community, including China.

The peace process in the Middle East has now
entered a very critical period. The immediate priority is
for Palestine and Israel to stop the violence and resume
peace talks. The relevant United Nations resolutions on
the Middle East, particularly resolution 242 (1967) and
resolution 338 (1973), which were adopted
unanimously by the Security Council, and the land-for-
peace principle, which has been universally recognized
by the international community, are the basic
guidelines for achieving peace. It is imperative that the
parties concerned implement fully and effectively the
agreements concluded and commitments undertaken.
This is a realistic way to stop the violence and get the
Middle East peace process out of its present deadlock.
China is ready to work with the international
community and will, as always, contribute its own
efforts towards the achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East at an early
date.

