Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
today's briefers for their very informative interventions.

I would also like to commend the South African
presidency for having organized this timely debate
aimed at addressing the role of youth in peace
processes. Since this is the first official meeting under
your presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate
South Africa on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for October and wish you success in
carrying out your work. I would also like to commend
the Russian delegation for its excellent management of
the work of the Council during September.

Building a conflict-free Africa is an ambitious
yet essential goal to ensure the security, integrity
and prosperity of the African continent and to lay a
solid foundation for inclusive growth and sustainable
development, as outlined in Agenda 2063 of the
African Union. We heartily support the Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative and welcome today's debate
as clear evidence of the African Union's consistent
determination to rid Africa of conflicts. Let me
now focus on some crucial elements that we find
particularly important.

First and foremost, we recognize the importance
and vital role of young women and men in efforts to
maintain and promote peace and security, as well as
to prevent conflicts and resolve them. We believe
that durable peace is not possible if inclusiveness and
women's and youth participation in peace processes
and political life are not ensured.

The ground-breaking resolution on youth and
peace and security (resolution 2250 (2015)) was an
important step in recognizing the needs and potential
of the youth in preventing and resolving conflicts. It
affirmed the important role the youth can play as a key
aspect of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.

Secondly, we should encourage youth leadership
in peacebuilding and support young people's quest
to become active agents of positive change, peace
and reconciliation. We support the Gender and Youth
Promotion Initiative of the Peacebuilding Fund, as
an expression of the Fund's commitment to inclusive
peacebuilding by strengthening the participation of
young women and young men within existing prevention
and peacebuilding initiatives.

Thirdly, the empowerment and participation of
young women and men are indispensable for enhancing
inclusivity and equality in our societies. Young
people are the cornerstone of sustainable development
and lasting peace. They do not need merely quality
education, vocational training, skills development and
access to digital technologies and services, but also
decent employment and entrepreneurship opportunities.

The most constructive way to empower young
people and ensure that they do not become radicalized
is to offer them credible and constructive ways to
contribute to the development of their communities.
If young people remain excluded from national and
international efforts aimed at building peace, then
instability and extremism will continue to pose serious
threats to our societies.

Conflicts in Africa are complex, and so too are their
root causes, ranging from social, political and economic
inequality to unemployment, lack of education, in
particular among young women and girls, as well as
historical patterns of conflict over the control of natural
resources. All of the them must be addressed in order
to secure durable peace on the continent. Tackling the
root causes of conflict requires ownership by African
Governments and local communities and support from
the international community.

In conclusion, let me stress that, if we are serious
about ensuring long-lasting peace on the African
continent, there is simply no alternative for investing
in young people, while giving them a voice in all
relevant decision-making processes and building solid
partnerships, with the youth as a bridge to a more
peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world.

