Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Permit me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. Your well-known diplomatic skills and
experience and, in particular, your great sense of humour
assure my delegation that, this month at least, the Council
will be in excellent hands and that we shall have a quiet
Christmas, for which we thank you in advance.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby and all the other members of
the delegation of Oman for their effective stewardship of
the Council's affairs during the month of November.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report on the situation in Rwanda,
including the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR). We are happy to note
that a climate of relative security and stability continues
to prevail in Rwanda and that some improvements in the
socio-economic sectors have occurred. Another positive

 

and significant development is in the area of justice, where
the first effective steps towards revival of the national
judicial system have occurred, with the appointment of the
Supreme Court on 17 October.

None the less, we remain concerned about the tense
security situation, particularly along the borders. The
continued infiltrations of armed persons from the refugee
camps in countries neighbouring Rwanda, particularly Zaire,
are largely responsible for this situation. We hope that the
International Commission of Inquiry investigating reports of
military training and illegal arms transfers will complete its
work soon and that its findings will enable the Security
Council to find ways of addressing the problems.

My delegation agrees that a return to stability, security
and harmony in Rwanda is largely dependent on national
reconciliation. This process can be facilitated only if
conditions conducive to the return of the approximately 1.6
million refugees currently residing precariously outside
Rwanda are created and if those suspected of involvement
in last year's genocide are brought to justice. We know that
the Government of Rwanda has been doing its best, within
its very limited resources, to create those conditions.
However, the Government cannot do it alone. We therefore
urge the international community to provide the necessary
support and assistance.

Concerning the problem of the Rwandan refugees, my
country believes that repatriation must be voluntary, safe
and orderly. This inevitably has a regional dimension. In
this connection, our hope is that the impetus generated by
the Cairo Conference, under the auspices of President
Carter, will not be allowed to dissipate and that all
concerned will indeed implement faithfully and promptly
the agreements and commitments registered at that
Conference.

None the less, it is the View of my delegation that the
Cairo Conference, useful as it was, cannot be a substitute
for a United Nations conference co-sponsored by the
Organization of African Unity. We therefore request the
Secretary-General to continue his consultations with the
countries of the region in order to find a basis for the
holding of such an important and useful conference.

With regard to the International Tribunal for Rwanda,
we hope that it will soon overcome its remaining
administrative and procedural problems so that it can
contribute to the process of national reconciliation. This is
why we are particularly encouraged by the news, which we
heard this morning, that the Tribunal has already handed

 

down its first indictments. We therefore thank those
countries that have contributed investigators for the
Prosecutor's Office.

With respect to UNAMIR, we believe that it has
discharged effectively the tasks and duties assigned to it.
My country is happy to have contributed troops to
UNAMIR. The concern of the Government of Rwanda
that the existing mandate of UNAMIR is not well suited
to the current needs of the Government and people for
reconstruction, rehabilitation and rebuilding has much
merit. My delegation sympathizes with this view, which
was taken by the Rwandan Government not lightly but,
rather, as the result of a thorough assessment of the
situation on the ground. We respect the position taken by
the Government of Rwanda in its sovereign decision.

None the less, given the efforts that were exerted to
ensure the second deployment of UNAMIR last year, and
on the basis of our conviction that even in this relatively
improved security climate UNAMIR still has useful
contributions to make to improving the overall situation
in Rwanda, we certainly do not want UNAMIR' s mandate
to be terminated abruptly. We are therefore happy to note
that it has been possible, in this draft resolution, to find
a basis for the renewal and continuation of UNAMIR,
with a mandate that is appropriate to the current realities
in Rwanda.

We thank the Government of Rwanda for having
demonstrated such flexibility and understanding of the
views and sentiments not only of the friends of Rwanda,
but also of members of the international community as a
whole that are willingly committed to doing something
positive and right for Rwanda at this time of national
difficulty.

There is no doubt that what the Government and
people of Rwanda now need most is economic and
financial assistance for reconstruction, rehabilitation and
rebuilding. UNAMIR will not be able to deliver assistance
in those concrete forms - at least, not directly - but it
could help create and contribute to something that is
intangible and unquantifiable, yet very essential: a climate
conducive to the provision not only of assistance but also
of reassurance for the refugees.

My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution. We shall do so, however, on the
understanding that, even when UNAMIR's mandate
expires on 8 March 1996, the continued presence of the
United Nations, as stated by the Secretary-General in

 

paragraph 51 of his report, will be necessary. In this
connection, we shall support the continuation of the good
offices mission of the Secretary-General, headed by his
Special Representative.

Let me, finally, appeal to all members of the
international community to see to it that the end of
UNAMIR's mandate in March 1996 is not used as a pretext
to curtail worthwhile and badly needed financial and
material assistance to the Government and the people of
Rwanda. There should be life for the United Nations in
Rwanda after the departure of UNAMIR. Even as they take
their destiny into their own hands, Rwandans of all
persuasions will still need our help for a very long time to
come.

