Mr. Omaar (Somalia): Allow me to take this
opportunity to thank, first and foremost, the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and the United Nations
as a whole for organizing the donors' conference in
Brussels on 23 April, and the international community
and the donor organizations for the pledges and
commitments that were made and fulfilled at that
event.

Secondly, allow me to also take the opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for the report
(S/2009/210) that is before us today. We welcome this
report. We believe that it outlines in a clear format the
basic structure and partnership between the Somali
Government and the international community for the
peace and stability of Somalia, which are the desire
and the goal that have been sought for the past
20 years.

If I may return to that, I think this is the first
occasion upon which the international community and
Somalia have established an effective basis for
stabilizing Somalia and for establishing the rule of law.
The rule of law was the basis of the agreement that was
reached in Djibouti, and the central parameter and the
backbone of that policy is peace. This is what we have
sought. It was the basis on which the President was
elected, the cabinet named and the ministers
authorized. I am pleased to confirm that the Somali
people in all parts of the country, be it in the North, in
Central Somalia or in the South, have not only
welcomed, but in essence have seen this as what they
have lacked and have been looking for.

We therefore welcome the report and we are fully
ready, willing and able to work with the Secretary-
General, the United Nations and its agencies to
implement these proposals for the empowerment of the
Somali security forces, the capacity-building of the
institutions of governance and the expanded ability of
the African Union Mission in Somalia. We are
committed and ready to move ahead.

I would, on this occasion, however, like to take a
moment to speak on current events, as matters are
developing on the ground. I personally left Mogadishu
on Friday afternoon, and these events started on
Wednesday evening. The Government and the
President, as confirmed by the council of religious
elders, have been ready, are ready and will be ready for
a ceasefire and negotiations to implement peace.

We have never missed any opportunity to
encourage any party, whether in the country or outside,
not to remain outside the process or unengaged by us.
With regard to the current leadership of the opposition,
Hizbul Islam and Mr. Hassan Dahir Aweys, we have
sought every opportunity, including in the past three
days, to make personal contact with him to find out
what it will take to stop the bloodshed. That is our only
requirement: stop the bloodshed and let us talk. Our
door is open. We are not setting preconditions.

Our difficulty, throughout these past three
months, has been that we cannot get an answer. Since
the election of the President on 30 January, we have
sought out Mr. Aweys and Hizbul Islam. We have gone
to every part of the globe, and we have offered our
table and our hand for that purpose. But if we cannot
get a response, we are left in silence. With all that we
see happening today in Mogadishu - with all the
bombings and firefights that are going on - the only
reply that we have received has been this past week.

Yet, our commitment is the commitment that we
made to the international community, the Secretary-
General and the Security Council, that we support the
rule of law, the re-establishment of the State
institutions, good-neighbourliness with our
neighbouring countries in the subregion, respect for
human rights, structured and implemented by the
organs of the State, and respect for all faiths, which is
the basis of sharia law. Sharia respects every faith and
there is no compulsion in faith. That is the way that we
have implemented it. So we remain committed to that
programme, and we will not be dislodged.

The issue, though, remains what answer can we
expect and what answer can the world expect from the
opposition. We have sought to engage at every
opportunity, but we have no clarity either on their
requirements locally or on their proposals
internationally. The Somali people, whom I represent

here today, are not willing to give up or to miss the
opportunity that is here today. We will do whatever
needs to be done. We ask for the Council's assistance,
as it has pledged to give us the resources, the support
and the partnership that we previously enjoyed, so that
the turmoil in Somalia, both on land and in
international waters, can be addressed and we can
contribute to resolving the problems offshore in the
high seas.

