Mr. Alkatiri: Allow me to address my very first
words to the United Nations Organization and to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and to present, on
behalf of the Second Transitional Government of East
Timor, our wholehearted congratulations on being
awarded the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize.

The awarding of this prestigious prize is the
acknowledgement of the new role that the United
Nations decided to take up and of the reformist stance
taken by Secretary-General Annan since 1997. Despite
the original aims in establishing this Organization - to
prevent war and consolidate world peace - we all
know that in the past, wrong political decisions were
made and a huge price in human lives has been paid.

The responsibility borne by the United Nations in
some countries with peace missions - for example, in
East Timor - demands a careful and unbiased look
into the past so as to avoid repetition of the same
mistakes. We believe in and share the United Nations
ideals and the sense of justice of its Member States.
For this reason, for over two decades we have
tenaciously worked with the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Decolonization Committee and
the Human Rights Commission.
During the 24 years of illegal Indonesian
occupation, and despite Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, genocide was perpetrated in East
Timor, resulting in the loss of more than 200,000 lives.
However, after this sad and most unfortunate time of
our history, including 1999, the Security Council did
hear the cries of the children, mothers, men, women
and elderly of our country.

As an East Timorese, I am pleased to recall that
in 1997, when Kofi Annan became Secretary-General,
a new impetus was given to the quest for a just,
peaceful and lasting solution for the East Timorese
cause. The courage of our people, together with the
total commitment of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor (UNAMET) to the United Nations ideals
and high standard of professionalism, was a formula
that led to success.

The 30 August 1999 referendum was an act of
self-determination, with overwhelming participation by
our people that went far beyond the expectations of the
international community. In our View, this act of self-
determination is the democratic foundation that will
henceforth configure our independence. In its
commitment to this democratic founding act, the
United Nations has committed itself to building the
democratic institutions and processes that the people of
East Timor have also honoured and have been
committed to at all stages.

The outcome of the referendum speaks for itself,
and as a result the people of East Timor have expressed
their clear wish to begin a transition process towards
independence under the authority of the United
Nations. The brutal destruction of property and loss of
human life that followed the announcements of the
referendum's results necessitated a military
intervention by the International Force in East Timor
(INTERFET) to enforce security and avert a threat to
peace and security.

The Security Council adopted resolution 1272
(1999), which established the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and, in an act without precedent, endowed the United
Nations with the overall responsibility for the
administration of East Timor. This mandate gave
extensive authority to the Transitional Administration
to act as the government of East Timor with all the
powers to exercise legislative and executive authority,
including the administration of justice.

At that time, our dear friend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira
de Mello, was handed the Herculean task of
establishing a government from scratch. The mandate
of UNTAET was indeed comprehensive and consisted
essentially of elements that included peacekeeping,
establishing an effective administration, supporting
capacity-building for self-governance, and the
development of democratic institutions.

Despite the achievements of UNTAET to date, its
mandate is yet to be fully accomplished. The building
of critical institutions for the new State, capacity-
building and functional preparedness of the East
Timorese are ultimate goals that are still to be
achieved.

For the people of East Timor, the priority is to
continue the process of institution-building in order for
UNTAET to effectively and systematically transfer its
administrative functions to an independent East
Timorese Government. The smooth and gradual
transfer of these administrative functions will ensure
that the United Nations is continuing in an indirect way
to foster and fortify peace-building and stability -
something we, the East Timorese, cherish and believe
the Security Council itself upholds. To this end, we
would request that the Security Council maintain as far
as possible the current United Nations civilian staffing
component until the end of the transition and enter into
dialogue with our Government before the end of the
Transitional Administration on the post-independence
staffing component.

It will be recalled that, following the 30 August
2001 elections, the United Nations took the decisive
and progressive step of setting up the legislative and
executive arms of the State through the swearing in of
members of the Constituent Assembly and the
appointment of the members of the Council of
Ministers. Within the next 60 days, we expect the
Constituent Assembly of East Timor to complete the
drafting of the country's constitution.

At this juncture, it is my greatest pleasure to
announce to this body that the Constituent Assembly of
East Timor has reached a consensus to recommend that
the date ofindependence be 20 May 2002.

The people of East Timor consider that success
can be achieved only if the viability of the State of East
Timor is guaranteed well beyond UNTAET's existing
mandate. It is for this reason, among other, poignant
ones, that we consider it of utmost importance that this
Council pays special attention to institution-building
and the gradual transfer of administrative functions to
our civil servants under phased and flexible
arrangements. Accordingly, we request the Security
Council to provide us with the necessary human,
material and financial resources, which will
demonstrate the success of the United Nations and the
international community. This success should translate
into the entrenchment of the democratic State, with all
the requisite and functional institutions that will ensure
the prevalence of the rule of law.

We are certain that this success will be
sustainable only if the United Nations guarantees
assistance through its mandatory assessed contributions
to continue to support critical civilian posts in the
follow-on mission. We have assessed the experience of
other countries in similar positions that have tried to
tap bilateral and multilateral sources to fund critical
government functions and have found that they have
not been successful, as these are not the traditional
areas that donors are attracted to fund.

That is not to say that we will not pursue
bilateral, multilateral and other United Nations
specialized agencies to assist in meeting our needs for
a functioning Government. We have just made a
comprehensive submission to the Government of
Portugal to assist in providing technical assistance
personnel to fill some of the positions earmarked for
bilateral assistance.

Our country's financial resources are presently
inadequate to cover the costs of contracting experts to
assist in the critical areas. The World Bank agrees with
us that the use of the limited financial resources of the
Trust Fund for East Timor and the Consolidated Fund
for East Timor for that purpose would be to the
detriment of education, health and other reconstruction
and development sectors, which cannot in themselves
be wholly funded from our own resources for the time
being.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
inform the Council that the recurrent budget of East
Timor of $65 million remains to be funded. In order for
the new Second Transitional Government to
successfully carry out its function and programmes, we
will require donors to quickly meet the financing gap.
In Oslo, we will be looking for the strong commitment
of donors to not only pledge, but also make good their
contributions as early as January to obviate liquidity
constraints that could cripple and destabilize the
Government.

The United Nations Development Programme has
completed its first draft of a needs assessment study for
personnel requirements for an independent East Timor
Government. This report is a good starting point and
can be used as the basis for discussion in the coming
weeks. The Council of Ministers will require time to
review the numbers and needs in order to be able to
clearly articulate and fine-tune the Government's
needs.

I would take this opportunity to reiterate to the
members of the Council that East Timor has always
sought to maintain the presence of civilian personnel in
the post-UNTAET period. This is reflected in some of
the words spoken by my brother Xanana Gusmao,
national leader of our country, during his address to
this body on 18 May during the Council's special
meeting on East Timor. The success of the Mission is
the success of the international community, given that
it fully reflects the international community. Together
we can uphold the values of peace, justice, democracy,
human rights and abidance by international law.

It will be recalled that our country's
infrastructures and other assets were completely
destroyed after the August referendum. The nature of
the UNTAET mandate has necessitated that, in order to
function as a Government, the United Nations have its
human resources, assets and communications systems
in place. Consequently, this has meant that the Second
Transitional Government is presently heavily reliant on
the assets of the United Nations to function effectively
and efficiently and will need time and the necessary
financial resources to disentangle itself from the web of
dependence. We are currently attempting to address
this issue through the UNTAET core transition group,
but we would wish to use this unique opportunity to
request the United Nations to continue to maintain its
support structures and capital equipment until the
independent Government is able to replace them with
its own. In order not to cripple the operations of the
Government, the people of East Timor would urge the
Security Council to recognize the need to maintain
these support structures and critical assets in place for
the independent Government.

I wish to also underscore the mission carried out
by the peacekeeping force throughout this mandate.
The peacekeeping force in East Timor has gained the
respect and admiration of our people for the
professional and committed way it has been carrying
out its mission. We wish to publicly commend the force
for the secure environment it has fostered in our
country. The downsizing of the force is understandable
and we support it at this point. However, it is our
fervent belief that the Government of East Timor and,
in particular, the Commander of our Defence Force,
Brigadier General Taur Matan Ruak, should be given
the opportunity to actively contribute to the debate on
the downsizing of the peacekeeping force.

The Second Transitional Government is also
preoccupied with the reconciliation process and the
return of refugees from Indonesia. We maintain that
reconciliation is an important component of the healing
process that our people will need to go through. We are
also clear that reconciliation without justice will not be
meaningful and in this context fully support the
maintenance of a Serious Crimes Unit funded by
assessed contributions.

Over the past 12 months, we have seen a steady
increase in the number of refugees returning to the
country. This effort has been strongly led by Mr.
Xanana Gusmao and fully supported by UNTAET and
the Second Transitional Government. All efforts will
be made to continue to encourage the returnees and to
resettle them in the country so that they, too, can enjoy
the tranquillity of being in their homeland.

We were also heartened and pleased by the
positive reaction of the President of Indonesia, Mrs.
Megawati Sukarnoputri, to the reconciliation process
when the East Timorese delegation and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General visited
Indonesia last September. We are hopeful that the
strong interest in re-establishing good relations based
on mutual respect between our two countries will be
quickly cemented.

The members of the Council may be asking
themselves how all this assistance is going to affect
East Timor's use of the assessed contributions fund.
We East Timorese are counting on this source of funds
to consolidate the peacekeeping process and at the
same time to create the necessary conditions for peace-
building.

On the socio-economic front, the Council would
agree that the viability of any State depends to a great
extent on the sustainability of the development of the
productive sectors of its economy. Cognizant of this,
the Government of East Timor is currently embarking
on the creation of an enabling environment to address
land issues and the investment and corporate laws
required to foster development in this area. The
drafters of the Constitution are presently addressing the
land-tenure issues and the Council of Minister's is
reviewing the legislation on investment, micro-credit
banks and corporate laws.

The newly appointed Council of Ministers is
conscious of the high level of unemployment in East
Timor. Anecdotal evidence suggests an unemployment
rate as high as 80 per cent. It is critical that we create
the necessary conditions to stimulate domestic private-
sector activity and attract sound foreign investment to
assist in the generation of employment and
development.

The focus of the Government is on the areas of
education, health, housing and infrastructure policies to
guarantee social and political stability in East Timor.
However, the independent Government will be able to
deliver on this only if it has strong, efficient and
transparent institutions. As a young nation, we will
endeavour to diversify our revenue base and to avoid
over-dependency on the potential revenues derivable
from our stock of non-renewable natural resources. We
recognize that there is a need to be prudent on the use
of these funds and are now studying the appropriate
investment and saving strategy for the Timor Sea
revenues so that these funds are spent to develop other
income-producing resources. As the lead negotiator on
the Timor Sea, I and the people of East Timor are
grateful for the tremendous support provided by the
United Nations in the treaty negotiations pertaining to
the Timor Sea resources.

I am pleased to inform the Council that the
Second Transitional Government, since taking office,
has established the Planning Commission, the role of
which is to develop a framework for a national
development plan that will later be translated into a
blueprint. The Government, civic society, youth and
women are part of this all-inclusive process. This
development plan will be designed to contain
macroeconomic variables and strategies aimed at
alleviating poverty and improving the well-being of
society. In this regard, we will be seeking the
assistance of multilateral financial institutions,
particularly the World Bank, and our bilateral partners
in the design and funding of this development plan.

Allow me to mention our potential fishing
resources. I wish to draw attention to this matter not
only because of the economic perspective, but also
because of the political implications of defining our
maritime borders and hence our sovereignty.
Surveillance of our territorial waters is a prerequisite,
especially when East Timor's exclusive economic zone
is defined. To this end, a naval component of our East
Timor Defence Force is currently being established,
and we request assistance from the United Nations and
our development partners.

Although we address the Council today with a
clear appeal to continue to provide the assistance and
support given to East Timor, we fully recognize the
responsibility that falls upon the East Timorese. We are
conscious of our role as a Government to build the
capacity to become self-reliant in our quest for
economic independence.

East Timor will soon be part of the community of
nations and a Member of this unique international
Organization. As a responsible member of the
international community, East Timor will join the
nations of the world in the struggle against all forms of
terrorism. No one can be indifferent to terrorist acts,
such as the barbaric acts of 11 September. We assure
the Council that our country will stand with all peace-
loving countries and join in the efforts to put an end to
individuals, groups or organizations that organize or
sponsor terrorist activities.

In conclusion, allow me again to express our
special, heartfelt feelings of appreciation for the
opportunity to address the Council. Twenty-seven years
ago my colleagues and I came to the United Nations for
the first time to ask for the support of the international
community to oppose the illegal invasion and
occupation of our homeland, as a gross violation of
international law. Today we address the Council as the
East Timorese Transitional Government, established in
the aftermath of the first free and democratic elections
in East Timor.

We acknowledge that in 24 years of resistance it
was difficult to liberate our people from the illegal
occupation, but now the challenge of governing the
country and addressing the problems of poverty,
disease, education and health is even more difficult.
For this reason, our people still count on and deserve
the Council's continued support.

We have no doubt that had it not been for the
courage and resilience of our people in resisting the
illegal occupation, and later the joint role played by the
international community in restoring international law
and assisting the reconstruction of our country, we
would not have the honour of sharing these special
moments with the Council.

On behalf of our people and the Second
Transitional Government of East Timor, I extend our
invitation to you, Mr. President and the other members
of the Council, to join us on 20 May 2002 for our
independence day celebration in our humble country,
East Timor. We look forward to seeing you all there to
share this special day with us.

