Mr. Bessho (Japan): First ofall, allow me to warmly
thank Italy for convening this important meeting. My
appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Special Rapporteur and the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
informative briefings. This open debate provides a
precious opportunity to discuss how to effectively
confront trafficking in persons in conflict situations.

Trafficking in persons poses a serious threat
to human dignity and integrity. Resolution 2331
(2016), the first-ever resolution to highlight the nexus
between trafficking in persons and armed conflict or
terrorism, stressed that armed and terrorist groups are
using trafficking in persons as a tactic for fundraising
and recruitment.

Regrettably, despite the increasing awareness about
this challenge facing the international community, there
has not been sufficient improvement on the ground.
The report of the Secretary-General (8/2017/939) states
that armed and terrorist groups continue to recruit boys
and girls for combat or support functions and, in some
instances, radicalize them to commit terrorist acts,
using deception, threats and promises of reward.

Almost two years ago, in December 2015, the
Security Council held its first thematic briefing on this
subject (see S/PV.7585). Since then, it has continued
to deal with it proactively in various aspects, such
as sexual violence, exploitation and violence against
children, among others. Japan welcomes today's
adoption of resolution 2388 (2017), which demonstrates
our strong will to take comprehensive and coordinated
action to combat trafficking in persons. The resolution
aims at promoting comprehensive methods to eliminate
this crime. To effectively identify potential victims of
trafficking, the resolution encourages Member States
to use refugee registration mechanisms and early-
warning and early-screening frameworks. Identifying
victims is the first important step in protecting victims
and prosecuting perpetrators.

Japan fully echoes the emphasis on the importance
to collect, analyse and share appropriate data
among Member States and United Nations agencies,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. Accurate information is essential for
their activities to be able to assess and respond to
trafficking in persons in conflicts situations. In that
regard, Japan appreciates the fact that the upcoming
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Global
Report on Trafiicking in Persons includes a chapter
dedicated to this aspect. I believe that such steps will
enable the international community to move forward
and strengthen its comprehensive approach.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/939) and
the relevant Security Council resolutions point out,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, are widely accepted legal instruments
that enhance cooperation among Member States. Japan
will fully engage in the global fight against this heinous
crime as a State party through mechanisms established
by those instruments.

Japan will continue to implement measures to
prevent trafficking in persons, protect victims and
prosecute perpetrators, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and the
pertient Sustainable Development Goals, as well as in
close cooperation with other Member States, relevant
United Nations organizations and civil society.

