Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): We were
dismayed to learn of the cowardly attack on the United
Nations office in Abuja, Nigeria, which has led to
numerous deaths. In this sorrowful context, I should
like, on behalf of the Government of Senegal, to
condemn this indescribable act, whoever was
responsible and whatever their motives may have been.
I convey my sincere condolences to the families of the
Victims, to the people and the Government of Nigeria,
and to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. This
horrendous event serves as a reminder - if one were
necessary - of the need for the international
community to fight without concession against all
manners of extremism.

Mr. President, your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council is a cause of genuine
satisfaction for my delegation because of both your
personal qualities and the excellent relations between
your country and mine. Allow me, therefore, to extend
my warmest congratulations to you and to express my
sincere gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wittig, Permanent Representative of Germany, for his
valuable work last month.

For my country, peacekeeping remains one of the
most important and sensitive tasks of the United
Nations. It is an integral part of the collective
obligation of the international community under the
Charter of the United Nations, which confers upon the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Overall, peacekeeping operations have rewarded us
with significant results, and today more than ever the
world has a great need for these men and women -
soldiers, paramilitary and civilians - who serve the
most worthwhile cause: the cause of peace. My country
therefore pays a glowing tribute to the professionalism
and remarkable courage of the United Nations Blue
Helmets and to salute the memory of those who have
fallen over the past 60 years in the service of peace.

Senegal has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1960 and has certainly
paid a heavy price, in particular in terms of human
lives. Like other peace-loving nations, my country has
nevertheless accepted that consequence as proof of its
unwavering commitment to the ideals of the United
Nations.

That is why we are convinced that the launching
of a peacekeeping operation must follow a number of
parameters, starting with a clear and precise definition
of the mandate, its objectives and the tasks to be
undertaken. Furthermore, good planning is needed that
includes regular dialogue among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries,
along with an effective awareness-raising campaign on
the desired objectives.

The success of a peacekeeping operation also
involves the use of qualified, integrated and well-
equipped personnel who are willing to respect the
traditions and customs of the area of operation. The
provision of the necessary equipment and adequate and
predictable funding are two other major challenges.
However, given that the financial problems faced by
the United Nations are essentially due to the
non-payment of contributions by Member States, it is
necessary to consider more predictable funding
sources, along with the critical financial involvement
of voluntary contributors, especially from the
developed countries.

The United Nations must continue its
peacekeeping capacity-building activities by
coordinating the needs and resources of the United
Nations standby arrangements system as part of a
partnership among the troop-contributing Member
States and those countries that are able to provide the
appropriate equipment to deter belligerent forces. In
the same vein, the establishment at Member State level
of specialized peacekeeping reserve forces would
enable a rapid and effective deployment whenever it is
needed, especially in situations with a high risk of
violence, thereby undoubtedly preventing tragedy or
genocide. Likewise, strengthened collaboration
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations would be desirable to
consolidate their conflict resolution mechanisms.

In this regard, my delegation stresses the need to
strengthen quantitatively and qualitatively the conflict
prevention, mediation and peacekeeping capacities of
the African Union. Moreover, the establishment of a
strengthened partnership with the African Union could
improve the planning, deployment and management of
African peacekeeping operations and contribute to
peace and security on our continent.

The difficulties that characterize peacekeeping
operations highlight the need to address the root causes
of current crises in order to limit their number and
consequences. To do that, we need a coherent, planned,
coordinated and comprehensive action able to
implement all the policy, social and development tools
intended to reduce tensions, many of which stem
directly from the rivalry among human groups for
survival.

Along the same lines, in some fragile States,
following a peacekeeping operation it would be wise to
emphasize the need to promptly implement coherent
development policies in order to support the
democratic processes under way and to create
propitious conditions for a world order based on a
spirit of partnership and solidarity. In that regard we
should finally integrate preventive diplomacy, which
through the institution of early warning systems could
be of great interest in neutralizing some conflicts at the
first signs.

Ultimately, if we want greater satisfaction in
future we must, while addressing the root causes of
some conflicts, combine diligence in the management
of peacekeeping operations with the rigor required by
preventive diplomacy and developmental tasks. The
task is heavy, but our will and determination are
equally strong.

