Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First, let me make a
few remarks about the situation in Libya. In general,
Germany remains very concerned about the situation
on the ground. We continue to witness a military
escalation. There are continued reports about the
shelling of densely inhabited areas. We repeat our call
on all parties to respect international humanitarian law
and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
continue to support the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Libya, Mr. Salame, in his efforts
to achieve a ceasefire, protect civilians and return to
the political track. There is no military solution to
the situation in Libya. We have to come back to the
negotiating table as soon as possible. I very much regret
that the Security Council is not united on that very
simple call.

I would like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing
and her report. Without going into detail, I would like to
align myself with other speakers with regard to support
provided and their concerns about situation. I would
also like to align myself with those who have said that
countries responsible must cooperate with Ms. Bensouda
and enforce all outstanding arrest warrants.

We are appalled in particular - and the Prosecutor
referred to this - about reports pertaining to violence
against refugees and migrants. She also mentioned, and
reported about, the lack of respect for human rights
and the sexual and gender-based violence, in particular
against migrants in detention centres. Libya must
do everything to ensure accountability for the most
serious crimes. Ifit is unable to do so, it should request
assistance from, and work with, the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

Let me make a few general remarks about the ICC.
Unfortunately, today we are witnessing worldwide a
proliferation of acts that violate international law. Many
atrocity crimes have been committed. Two weeks ago,
we had witnesses of atrocity crimes here in the Security
Council (see S/PV.8514). Sexual violence in conflict is a
particular problem. We must prevent impunity for grave
crimes. We cannot, and must not, allow it to become a
new normal. Perpetrators must be held accountable. We
must recognize the victims and bring perpetrators to
court. That is extremely important. As the Ambassador
of the Dominican Republic very convincingly said, it is
also important for prevention.

Germany hosted one of the first international
courts on atrocity crimes - the Nuremberg Tribunal.
Today we are proud to uphold the tradition and what
the Nuremberg Tribunal stood for. We believe that we
have to defend and support the ICC now more than ever
before. The ICC is a crucial element of the international
rules-based order. Let me therefore reconfirm
Germany's commitment to the ICC and to the values
of justice and accountability that the ICC represents.
We support all efforts to strengthen its effectiveness
and defend it against all threats, including threats to
its independence.

Let me conclude by sending a clear message to the
Prosecutor of the ICC, Ms. Bensouda, and her team. I
thank them for their work against all odds. Germany
will continue to support her and her mandate.

