Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for once again
giving me the opportunity to take the floor before the
Council on this topic.

The Council has already laid down fundamental
conditions that are necessary to help the parties to draw
back. The international community has spoken
unanimously, yet the conflict continues, the number of
victims continues to grow and the hopes for a lasting
peace are receding. Proposals to end the violence and
to establish a transition to peace are not in short supply.
They vary in details, which are important, but all of
them are based on the principle of land for peace,
referred to in Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002). These resolutions provide for
two States living side by side in peace and security, a
vision that is shared by all. It is obvious that the two
sides cannot realize this vision on their own.

(spoke in English)

That vision can only be made a reality by the full
and active participation of the international community,
including on the ground. This conflict has implications
that go well beyond the Middle East, and the Secretary-
General has offered a bold and courageous view of the
way ahead. He understands that any solution will
require the sustained involvement of parties from both
inside and outside the region.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the time
has come to consider how we can collectively help the
parties call a halt to the fighting once and for all. It is
past time for all concerned to put the protection of the
Israeli and the Palestinian people at the centre of their
calculations and to do whatever it takes to bring about
the peace those people so desperately want and need.

The current situation cannot continue. The
dreadful loss of life on both sides, the humanitarian
suffering and, most fundamentally, the destruction of
hope - all must stop. Horrific suicide bombings and
the devastation we have witnessed in Jenin and
elsewhere lead only deeper into the vortex of hate and
fear and despair.

The Government of Canada believes that the way
out of the descent into oblivion does exist. It exists in
Council resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002). It exists in the unique authority of the
Secretary-General. It exists in the unique power of the
Government of the United States united behind its
Secretary of State. It exists in the constructive
engagement of the countries in the region, including
through the plan put forth by Saudi Arabia and adopted
by the Arab League. It exists in the efforts of the wider
international community represented in this institution.
Taken together, the components of peace are almost all
there.

Canada has been urging the parties to take the
steps necessary to create an environment where a third-
party presence could play a constructive role. With
experience in every peacekeeping operation in the
region since the start of the conflict, Canada believes
that such a presence would help the situation. As Prime
Minister Chretien recently stated, "If asked, Canada is
prepared to participate in such a presence." Canada
welcomes the Secretary-General's proposals, and we
look forward to studying them in more detail.

So the components of peace exist, or almost exist.
What is lacking is a demonstrable commitment to
peace from both sides. We call on Israel and the
Palestinians to comply with resolutions 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). Israel must immediately
end the destruction of Palestinian civil infrastructure,
withdraw its forces from the West Bank and cease all
settlement building. The Palestinian Authority and
Chairman Arafat must denounce, prevent and punish
terrorism directed at the innocent. Let us be clear that
the aspiration of a Palestinian State, an aspiration that
Canada supports, will never be achieved through
suicide bombings of the innocent.

Next, I wish to address the unacceptable
humanitarian situation. The Council has adopted two
resolutions on protecting civilians in armed conflict:
1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000). Those resolutions, and
the action they envisaged, are not elective prescriptions
to be observed or ignored according to the convenience
of the protagonists. They are not mere guidelines; they
clearly and forcefully remind States of their obligations
under international law, notably under the Geneva
Conventions.
Canada calls on the parties to comply fully with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
To the Palestinians, we reiterate our condemnation, in
the strongest possible terms, of attacks on civilians,
including suicide bombing attacks. They are violations
of international law, they are morally repugnant and
they are strategically self-defeating. To Israel, we say
that it, too, has an obligation to respect civilians and
that it must refrain from indiscriminate attacks that
harm civilians.

Israel has particular responsibilities under the
Fourth Geneva Convention. Canada calls on the
Government of Israel to ensure that the Israeli Defence
Force cooperates with international organizations in
dealing with the situation on the ground, including in
Jenin, and fulfil its obligations under international law
to provide - or to allow others to provide - food,
water and other humanitarian assistance to the
suffering, including the residents of Jenin. International
organizations such as the International Committee of
the Red Cross must be granted full and unhindered
access to the camps and to the detainees. Curfews must
be lifted so that the humanitarian organizations can
effectively carry out the crucial job that needs to be
done. We applaud the dedication of human rights and
humanitarian organization workers as they
courageously carry out their jobs. Today, Canada
announced an additional $8 million in humanitarian
assistance.

We are also concerned about the ongoing
situation in Bethlehem at the Church of the Nativity,
and we call on the two sides to avoid further needless
casualties there.

Finally, we call upon the leaders of both sides to
make the indispensable strategic decision for peace.
Their peoples will bear the tragic consequences if they
do not.

