Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): The
United States views the incidents which resulted in the
deaths of several United Nations employees and the
destruction of a World Food Programme warehouse as
serious ones that should be addressed. We have
expressed our own concerns publicly in that regard,
calling on Israel to investigate the events and to take all
appropriate measures to prevent further civilian
casualties and harm to humanitarian facilities. A
resolution adopted by the Council on this subject
should urge action by all concerned that would
minimize the threats to United Nations personnel and
United Nations facilities. We do not see that focus in
the resolution before us. We have proposed alternative
language to this end. The resolution's sponsor rejected
it.

The proponents of this resolution appear more
intent on condemning Israeli occupation than on
ensuring the safety of United Nations personnel.
Mixing these two issues is inappropriate and weakens
the Council's voice on the need for both parties to take
steps to avoid actions that endanger innocent civilians
and United Nations staff.

Earlier today, President Bush expressed strong
support for the efforts of the Quartet and his firm
commitment to the Quartet's roadmap which would
realize his vision of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security. Adoption of
this draft resolution would not contribute to an
environment where both sides would be ready to move
forward in implementing the practical steps in the
roadmap.

We are deeply concerned about the safety of
United Nations personnel and all civilians in situations
of armed conflict. We also contribute significant funds
to support the work of both the World Food Programme
and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine refugees in the Near East. The United States
clearly was prepared to engage seriously in further
discussions with other Council members in an effort to
achieve a draft resolution text that all Council members
could support. Indeed, we had circulated an alternative
draft which we believed covered all the essential points
and referred to the incidents in question in a fair,
objective and balanced manner.

My delegation reserves its right to resubmit this
draft to the Council for consideration and vote the first
thing next week. Unfortunately, the sponsors of the
draft resolution which we are voting on now refused to
engage on our constructive proposal, insisting rather on
this hasty vote without considered discussion of our
draft. It is therefore with regret that we will vote
against the resolution sponsored by Syria.

