Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): Like other delegations,
Uganda condemns the attack today on the United
Nations building in Abuja, Nigeria. We express our
deep sympathy and condolences to the victims, their
families, and the people and Government of Nigeria
and, through the Secretary General, to the United
Nations family.

I thank you, Sir, for organizing this important
debate and the concept note (S/2011/496, annex)
prepared to help steer today's discussions. We thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing this
morning. This debate comes at a time when United
Nations peacekeeping is being put to the test by new
challenges to global peace and security. Addressing
these challenges requires a more concerted and
comprehensive approach at all levels if the United
Nations is to meet the present and future challenges.

Uganda acknowledges the important
contributions that peacekeeping operations have
continued to make to the cardinal role of the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security. The United Nations has attained successes in
many areas, but there have also been a number of
setbacks. That is why it is crucial for the Council to
continuously evaluate and reflect on whether its
peacekeeping approach to conflict situations and the
prescribed solutions are correct.

I would like to make five points. First, it is
important to recognize that an ineffective United
Nations peacekeeping capability anywhere around the
world greatly hurts the Organization, particularly in the
eyes of an affected population. As aptly put in the
concept paper, the United Nations needs to address the
current mismatch between resources and mandates to
address the performance deficit.

It is difficult for missions in hostile and
dangerous situations to effectively carry out their
mandates without the requisite capabilities. It is
therefore essential that United Nations peacekeeping be
adaptable and effective enough to deal with new
challenges. In recent years, we have seen a welcome
shift towards more robust United Nations
peacekeeping, such as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. However, that very Mission has until
recently lacked vital resources, such as air assets, to
fulfil its mandate.

Secondly, we are convinced that if peacekeeping
operations are to achieve their intended purpose, the
root causes of conflicts need to be carefully identified
and appropriately addressed at the planning stage. This
requires a clear understanding of the situation on the
ground. United Nations peacekeeping efforts should
support the political resolution of conflict, respect the
sovereignty of States, remain impartial and work with
all parties to overcome their problems.

Thirdly, the relationship between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries is particularly
crucial. It is crucial because the political objectives and
peacekeeping mandates of missions need to be clear
and credible. The mandates of peacekeeping operations
should include a range of measurable benchmarks. A
stronger understanding between contributing countries
and the Council as to what is expected of peacekeeping
missions to fulfil these objectives can greatly facilitate
the achievement of mission objectives. Uganda
therefore welcomes and supports efforts to strengthen
cooperation and interaction among all stakeholders in
peacekeeping operations.

Fourthly, the challenges of modern-day
peacekeeping attest to the fact that not even the United
Nations on its own is capable of dealing with the new
challenges. Given the capabilities demonstrated by
regional organizations, such as the African Union and
its subregional organizations, the United Nations
should take maximum advantage of their strengths and
the roles that they can play. This will require the
strengthening of strategic relationships with such
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. This will improve the capacity of these
organizations to contribute to the efforts of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. In this regard, Uganda welcomes the support
given to the African Union Mission in Somalia in
working the stabilization of that country. However, my
delegation underscores the importance and urgency of
the Security Council providing the Mission with
predictable, reliable and timely resources and force
enablers in order to fulfil its mandate.

Fifthly, the early inclusion of some aspects of
peacebuilding, especially socio-economic reconstruction
activities, in peacekeeping operations is vital to
durable recovery and success. It is important to ensure
that people afflicted by conflict get tangible peace
dividends through the provision of such basic services
as health care, education, shelter and improvement of
their standards of living. In this regard, my delegation
calls on the United Nations system to ensure greater
coherence in peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development activities.

Finally, Uganda pays tribute to the men and
women of the United Nations, many of whom serve in
some of the most dangerous places on Earth. We
especially remember and honour those who have paid
the ultimate sacrifice in the service of peace.

