Mr. Tiirk: In the period since the last briefing on
the situation in the Middle East on 19 March, the
attention of the international community has been
focused on the crisis and war in Iraq. At the same time,
there is also a growing realization of the urgent need to
address the Middle East conflict. In this regard, I
welcome the recent reiteration by President Bush and
Prime Minister Blair of their commitment to achieve
progress through the implementation of the road map.

At the March briefing to the Council, the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, spoke of a window of
opportunity that had opened following the
establishment of the post of Palestinian Prime Minister
and the nomination of Mr. Mahmoud Abbas - Abu
Mazen - to that post. We hope that Abu Mazen and
his Government will soon be confirmed by the
Palestinian Legislative Council. As soon as possible
after that confirmation, the Quartet will present the
road map to the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority and will ask for their
contributions as to how to move forward with the
implementation. It is then that the crucial period of
implementation will start, with the Quartet playing an
active and impartial role. The parties, with the full
support of the Quartet and the international community,
will have to take the painful steps necessary to end the
current cycle of violence and suffering.

The parties and the international community must
be prepared to stay the course charted by the road map,
however tortuous or strewn with obstacles that course
may be. In all likelihood, the road map implementation
process will not be easy, but its goal - a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region -
is too important for the parties to be deterred by early
difficulties.

Some of those obstacles are apparent. Since the
most recent briefing to the Security Council, 69
people - 64 Palestinians and 5 Israelis - have lost
their lives in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. That raises
the total death toll since September 2000 to 2,566
Palestinians and 766 Israelis.

On 30 March, a suicide bomber struck a cafe in
the city of Netanya, injuring dozens. The Secretary-
General has consistently condemned such terrorist acts.
The Palestinian Authority must bring to justice those
involved in planning and carrying out these attacks.
The groups responsible for such acts should
immediately cease all forms of violence.

In the month of March, 103 Palestinians were
killed - the highest monthly death toll among
Palestinians in the past 12 months. On three occasions
this month, the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) have
carried out extrajudicial killings of alleged terrorists in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. These operations
have resulted in the killing and wounding of dozens of
Palestinians. In addition, on ll April, a British peace
activist, Tom Hurndall, was shot in the head by IDF
gunfire, and he remains in a coma. This is the third
incident in the past four weeks in which a foreign
peace activist has been injured or killed by IDF
operations.

We again call on the Israeli authorities to abandon
the use of excessive force in densely populated areas
and to protect the safety of civilians, in keeping with
Israel's obligations under international humanitarian
law. We also restate our opposition to extrajudicial
killings, and we call on the Government of Israel to
immediately desist from such provocative acts. Israel,
of course, has a right to self-defence, but it must
exercise that right within the boundaries of
international law.

We have regularly informed the Council about the
deteriorating socio-economic situation in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. It should now be clear to all
that no amount of donor assistance will alleviate the
crisis in the occupied Palestinian territory. The only
solution is to allow the Palestinian economy to operate
in a normal fashion. That can happen only with a
change in the Israeli security approach that entails the
removal of internal roadblocks and the lifting of
curfews. This would enable the resumption of a
predictable business environment, free from the
restrictions that have such a negative impact on
investor confidence.

I should add that the recommendations made last
August by the Secretary-General's Personal
Humanitarian Envoy, Mrs. Catherine Bertini, still
remain to be implemented; there is still a way to go.

We should note that the damage done to
Palestinian society would likely be more difficult to
reverse. The latest research reports indicate that over
half of the children of the Gaza Strip are suffering from
acute post-traumatic stress disorder, due to exposure to
violence and destruction. While it is difficult to predict
the effects of this trend on Palestinian society as these
children become adults, it is not difficult to imagine
traumatized children becoming traumatized adults if
the situation is not changed. There is also a reported
increase in domestic violence - a phenomenon that
tends to rise in societies under severe stress.

It is not difficult to imagine that similar pain and
trauma have been inflicted on Israelis, especially
Israeli children, who have been living with the fear of
terrorism. Both peoples, Palestinians and Israelis, need
to be relieved of the terrible burden of violence that
they have borne for far too long.

Additional concern is raised by the continued
construction of the separation wall in the West Bank.
The all-donor Local Aid Coordination Committee
recently commissioned a report on the socio-economic
impact of the wall. This report will be released soon,
but some preliminary findings are available.

The projected path of the wall's first phase in
some places cuts as far as 6 kilometres into the
northern West Bank. It cuts across roads and water
networks and will form a barrier between Palestinians
on each side of the wall and their agricultural lands,
wells, markets and public services. It may constrain the
delivery of basic social services to Palestinian
populations on the western side of the wall and inhibit
their commercial exchanges if it does not feature a
sufficient number of access points for the movement of
persons and goods. Some Palestinian landowners have
already been denied access to their property. Others are
allowed to cross only by foot or donkey cart, making it
difficult to transport machinery and produce.

The unilateral nature of the Government of
Israel's planning of the wall, and its placement inside
the West Bank, encircling such towns as Qalqilya and
Tulkarm, could have a negative impact on the Quartet's
efforts, through the road map, to establish a viable
Palestinian State.

This description of conditions in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip highlights the challenges facing the
new Palestinian Prime Minister, Abu Mazen. He will
need to build on the impressive progress already
achieved in reforming the Palestinian Authority. Abu
Mazen has firm ground on which to construct his
administration because of his considerable success in
establishing financial accountability and economic
reform. He will need to work hard to bring the judicial
sector's performance up to that of the financial sector.

The new Prime Minister will have two main tasks
in the area of security. He will need to restore law and
order in Palestinian areas and reverse the breakdown in
internal security. Simultaneously, he must take
immediate steps to curb terrorism and to bring to
justice those involved in carrying out terrorist attacks.
He must ensure that Palestinian areas are not launching
pads for attacks on Israelis.

We hope that Abu Mazen will be empowered to
continue and extend the Palestinian reform process. He
must prove to be a leader who will provide the
Palestinian people with the transparent and effective
Government they deserve. He must also provide the
Israelis with the partner in peace that they need.

In his work, Abu Mazen should receive the active
cooperation and support of the international
community, in particular the Quartet. The Governments
of Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, all of which have
endorsed the road map, have played particularly
constructive roles since Abu Mazen's appointment, as
well as before, and the Quartet will remain in close
touch with them in the coming months. President
Arafat, who decided to appoint a Prime Minister, and
the Palestinian Legislative Council, which concurred,
deserve once again to be commended for their actions.

The Government of Israel has an important part
to play in ensuring the success of the new Palestinian
Government. Crucial first steps would include helping
to facilitate the reform process and acting to minimize
the effects of security measures on the people of the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. The removal of internal
closures and the lifting of curfews would be welcome
developments. Of course, the terrorism that has beset
Israel, to which Israeli men, women and children have
fallen victim, presents the Government of Israel with
enormous challenges. But such steps could help
empower the Palestinian Authority and Abu Mazen to
take action against terrorists.

Recent statements by Prime Minister Sharon in
support of a peace process in which he acknowledges
that Israel might need to make what he called "painful
concessions", including the removal of some
settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, are to
be welcomed. Israel's early embrace of the road map
and active implementation of the process would seem
to be an essential manifestation of the support
expressed by Mr. Sharon.

I will now turn briefly to the regional situation.
Since our last briefing to the Security Council, the
situation along the Blue Line has remained calm. The
level of tension, however, remains high. In recent days,
this tension has been amplified by dozens of Israeli air
incursions into Lebanon and the ensuing Hezbollah
anti-aircraft fire.

Both sides have assured their United Nations and
other interlocutors that they intend to maintain a calm
environment during this time of regional instability.
The Lebanese authorities have maintained a visible
security presence in south Lebanon, conducting patrols
and setting up mobile checkpoints throughout much of
the area of operation of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The Lebanese army has
further fortified earthworks and other obstacles along
the Blue Line. We are very concerned, however, by the
number and location of new Hezbollah anti-aircraft
guns near the Blue Line.

Several days this month saw a pronounced
increase in Israeli air violations of the Blue Line, with
Israeli aircraft seen over Lebanon in the greatest
numbers since the Israeli withdrawal from south

Lebanon in May 2000. This disturbing development
stands in contrast to Israel's stated intention. Hezbollah
has reacted with anti-aircraft fire, some of it aimed
across the line - an action which threatens the current
calm. These hostile acts from both sides could lead
quickly to deterioration on the ground. It is incumbent
upon both Lebanon and Israel to prevent any escalation
along the Blue Line, and important for the international
community to use its influence to this end.

We appear to be on the verge of restarting a
Middle East peace process through the Quartet's road
map, which is to be presented to the parties once the
Palestinian Cabinet has been confirmed. At this point,
in the face of the grim reality on the ground, with
terrorist attacks on Israelis continuing and the
humanitarian crisis in the West Bank and Gaza Strip
deepening, the process is at this point only a promise.
The path ahead charted by the Quartet represents the
only realistic hope for ending the current cycle of
violence and counter-violence. The road map, which
provides parallel responses to security, political and
economic or humanitarian issues, entrusts
responsibilities to each of the actors involved in its
implementation.

Each of those actors must embrace the road
map - as drafted on 20 December 2002 - and work
for its implementation, and each should take particular
early steps. The Palestinian Authority must take
immediate and effective action against terrorism. The
Government of Israel must ease the humanitarian plight
of Palestinians by lifting the internal closure and
curfew regime. The international community should
give this initiative its full, consistent and impartial
support in order to help the parties successfully
navigate the challenges ahead.

A number of observers have suggested that the
road map is far from a perfect document, and that it
does not meet all of the needs of the parties. Of course,
no plan is ideal. In the heated environment of the
Middle East conflict, with trust between the parties
virtually non-existent, it is easy to argue that any steps
on the path to peace carry with them potential hazards.
That may be true. It is also true that the absence of a
negotiated settlement has led neither to peace nor to
security for the peoples of the Middle East. The path to
peace along the road map will be difficult and strewn
with obstacles. The alternative is a continued cycle of
violence and of economic and social dislocation.

The road map remains the best prospect for
achieving the vision of two States - a secure and
prosperous Israel and an independent, viable, sovereign
and democratic Palestine - living side by side in
peace and security. The United Nations has participated
very actively within the Quartet to draft the road map
and looks forward to its imminent presentation to the
parties. The Quartet has placed before the leaders and
the peoples of the region the possibility of achieving a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the next few
years. We hope that they will grasp this opportunity
and that they will make peace a reality.

