Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Malaysia on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

The escalation of Violence in the Middle East and
its consequences for the lives of the region's
population - particularly in Palestine - once again
poses a challenge for the international community at a
time when we might have hoped for a decline in
tension given the situation created by the new, post-
electoral political situation both in Palestine and in
Israel.

The fresh attack perpetrated this morning in Tel
Aviv tragically shows how unacceptable it is that
violence should become a daily commonplace in that
extremely sensitive region.

My delegation recalls that during a Security
Council debate just a few days ago we joined other
speakers in calling on the two parties to undertake
dialogue and negotiation on the basis of the road map,
the Arab peace initiative adopted at Beirut in 2002, the
Madrid Conference terms of reference and the
principle of land for peace, with a view to the ultimate
establishment of a Viable Palestinian State living side
by side with Israel in peace and security.

We regret that the Security Council was unable to
reach agreement on the draft presidential statement that
had been circulated; we believe it contained all the
elements necessary for consensus.

It is clear that the international community's
repeated call to transcend political posturing and
inflexible ideological positions has gone unheeded yet
again. The tragic reality has reasserted itself with its
litany of deadly acts, attacks and other reprehensible,
unjustifiable and pointless acts of provocation, which
often give rise to reprisals and indiscriminate and
disproportionate destruction. The two parties have just
given the Council a full - and, I might add,
provisional - list of these repeated acts of violence.

This renewed tension in the context of a
hardening of positions by both parties to the conflict
imposes great suffering, particularly on civilians in the
occupied territories, who already endure extremely
trying living conditions owing to the constraints caused
by Israel's refusal to transfer the tax revenues and
customs duties owed to the Palestinian Authority and
because of the suspension of aid by the principal
donors. The current situation gives rise to fear of a
major humanitarian crisis in the occupied territories,
with the prospect of negative political consequences
and the deterioration of the security situation in the
region.

In that context, it is important to ensure that the
Palestinian people not feel themselves to be harshly
punished for having freely made its choice through
democratic elections - elections for which we all
called.

My delegation considers that peace must be
negotiated in good faith among the various actors in
the Middle East crisis, with respect for international
law, international humanitarian law and all relevant
international texts. Once more, we call on the two
parties to restore confidence-building measures in
order to create the conditions for dialogue, then for
negotiation, in compliance with the clearly established
and well known rules: recognition of Israel; acceptance
of agreements made between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority; renunciation of Violence on both sides;
cessation of unilateral acts and the policy of fait
accompli; the dismantlement of settlements; and a halt
to the construction of the separation barrier and to
targeted killings and acts of collective punishment.

My delegation believes that it is the international
community's responsibility to involve itself tenaciously
and immediately in finding a settlement of the Middle
East crisis. Here, the Quartet, the Security Council and
the other actors in the crisis bear particular
responsibility. The needed support from the
international community, based on the road map,
should, in particular, combine firm implementation of
the principles of international law with balanced
treatment of the two sides.

