Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I had the
honour to assume the chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
11-33901

1373 (2001) at the beginning of this year. I would like
to thank my predecessor, Ambassador Apakan of
Turkey, for his excellent work in steering the
Committee in 2010. It gives me great pleasure today to
brief the Council on the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) since the last briefing in November
2010 (see S/PV.6424).

Terrorism is a global scourge and constitutes one
of the most serious threats to international peace and
security. The United Nations strongly condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever, and for whatever
purposes. It is an attack on human rights, fundamental
freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial
integrity and security of States and destabilizing
legitimately constituted Governments.

The CTC, in accordance with its mandate,
continues to work actively in advancing the global
fight against terrorism. The Committee in its work has
been guided by relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and
1963 (2010), and continues to play a critical role in
promoting and facilitating their implementation.

The Security Council presidential statement
adopted on 2 May (S/PRST/2011/9) in the aftermath of
the death of Osama bin Laden stresses the need for the
full implementation of its resolutions on terrorism, as
well as other applicable international counter-terrorism
instruments. It also calls on all States to work together
to bring to justice the perpetrators, organizers and
sponsors of terrorist attacks, while ensuring that
measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all
their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law.

Important tools in the Committee's work include
preliminary implementation assessments, visits to
Member States, facilitating the provision of technical
assistance, enhancing cooperation and coordination
with international, regional and subregional
organizations and the identification and promotion of
international best practices, codes and standards. The
Committee, through the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), is also making use of
alternative technologies, including video conferencing,
to enhance its dialogue with Member States.

The Committee continues to organize and
participate in discussions and workshops on thematic
3
and regional issues. The major issues considered by the
Committee include the control of cash couriers, the
abuse of the non-profit sector for terrorist financing
and the application of good practices for the
implementation and assessment of resolution 1624
(2005). Important workshops organized during this
period include the launch of CTED's global initiative
in London, from 18 to 20 January, to prevent the abuse
of the non-profit sector for terrorist financing, within
the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force working group on tackling
the financing of terrorism and the workshop on
challenges to effective border control in the Sahel and
the Maghreb region, which was organized in close
cooperation with the International Organization for
Migration and held in Nouakchott from 4 to 6 April.

The Committee is also focusing on regional
specific discussions on issues identified in the 2009
survey on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States (S/2009/620, annex). A
regional discussion on Central Asia was held earlier
this month. In addition, the Committee and CTED
continue to enhance their ongoing dialogue with
Member States, donors and beneficiaries on the
facilitation of technical assistance for capacity-
building.

The Committee has adopted its work programme
this year on an annual basis, which will be helpful in
further streamlining the functioning of the Committee.
Earlier, the Committee had been formulating its work
programme on a biannual basis. In pursuance of
resolution 1963 (2010), CTED is working towards
providing, by 30 June, an updated global
implementation survey on resolution 1373 (2001), as
well as a global implementation survey on resolution
1624 (2005) by 31 December. The Committee has also
adopted a plan of action for the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005).

As part of enhancing its interaction with
international and regional organizations and United
Nations entities, the Committee heard briefings on
counter-terrorism in February by Ambassador Marc
Perrin de Brichaumbaut, Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and Mr. Alexey Kuzyura, Chairperson of the Working
Group of the Meeting of Heads of Special Services of
the Russian Federation.
Furthermore, of particular significance was the
CTC's special meeting with international regional and
subregional organizations, in collaboration with the
Council of Europe, on the prevention of terrorism, held
at Strasbourg from 19 to 21 April. The meeting
provided an opportunity for the Committee, CTED and
various international, regional and subregional
organizations to hold open and in-depth discussions
about the preventive aspects of resolutions 1373
(2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010) and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
special meeting focused on three main areas, namely,
prevention policies, comprehensive and integrated
strategies and the role of law enforcement in
preventing terrorism. Experts from civil society
organizations also actively participated in the event.
The Committee appreciates the close cooperation and
generous support from the Council of Europe in
planning and hosting this event. While the Committee
and CTED will follow up on this important meeting,
the Chair's summary is in the process of being
circulated as a document of the Security Council.

This year marks an important milestone in global
counter-terrorism efforts, as we approach the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).
The Committee will organize a special meeting, open
to the wider membership and other relevant
stakeholders, to commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the resolution and the establishment of
the Committee.

Other major upcoming events include a workshop
in Islamabad for members of Pakistan's Parliament on
strengthening the oversight role of Parliament in the
implementation of anti-money-laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism laws, the fourth
regional workshop for police officers and prosecutors
in South Asia on effectively countering terrorism, to be
held in Thimphu, and a workshop in Belgrade for
countries from South-East Europe on the law
enforcement aspects of preventing the financing of
terrorism.

I attach high priority to enhancing transparency,
public outreach and the strengthening of cooperation
with international, regional and subregional
organizations. Besides participating in the CTC's
special meeting at Strasbourg last month, I also
participated in the meeting of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States held in Washington, DC, in March.

In conclusion, the Committee will continue to
play a critical role in the global fight against terrorism.
The Committee will try to do so in a more strategic and
transparent manner so that it can more effectively
contribute to the global counterterrorism efforts within
its mandate. I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of
CTED, and his team for their excellent work. I also
wish to thank the Secretariat for its continuous support.

