Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate you warmly, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to assure you of its cooperation. We would
like also to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador
Mufioz of Chile, who so ably and skilfully guided our
work in January.

We listened very carefully to the very
comprehensive statement made by Mr. Harri Holkeri
on the report of the Secretary-General on the United
National Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). It was indeed an excellent and very relevant
statement. We would like here to pay well-deserved
tribute to Mr. Holkeri and to his team for their firm
commitment to discharging the responsibilities
entrusted to UNMIK, whose work is proving
particularly helpful in stabilizing the situation in
Kosovo. His comprehensive and personal account has
shown us clearly where significant progress has been
made and has allowed us to identify those areas where
less positive developments have taken place - areas
that require effective improvements.

In that respect, the information provided makes
clear the effectiveness of the review mechanism. We
welcome the concrete steps that have been taken to
support Kosovo as it works to establish functioning
democratic institutions that would bring together all of
the inhabitants of the province.

From that perspective, we would stress the
importance of multi-ethnic representation and of
inclusiveness, as well as the need to take account of the
Vital interests of minorities and to safeguard their
cultural and identity rights.

The ongoing development of the domestic legal
order in Kosovo through the adoption of new
legislation is to be encouraged, as the goal is to
establish the provincial administration on a very sound
footing at the central and municipal levels, as part of
decentralization. We believe that UNMIK should
ensure that the established allocation of competencies
is respected. Likewise, a sustained effort must be made
to strengthen the apolitical nature of the Kosovo
administration and to avoid the development of two
parallel administrations in the province, due to
Belgrade's continued support for Serb populations in
many areas.

We take note of the progress made in establishing
and strengthening the rule of law. The continued
strengthening of the Police Service and the judiciary of
Kosovo, through the inclusion of minorities and gender
mainstreaming, which help to broaden the social base,
are essential in order to improve the security situation.
That goal is also tied in with UNMIK's regional
approach in combating organized crime.

The progress made in these areas could have a
decisive impact in helping to normalize the situation
vis-a-vis freedom of movement and a noted speeding
up of sustainable returns, which can also be encouraged
by the restoration of essential public services.

Furthermore, the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the transformation of the Kosovo
Protection Corps into a disciplined civil emergency
agency merits careful study, particularly as concerns
the structural relations between that entity and the
Kosovo Police Service. We would like to know if such
a study is envisaged.

The economic situation in Kosovo, which the
Secretary-General described as one of the poorest
economies in a poor region, is indeed difficult, requires
that the international community provide greater
financial assistance in order to ensure sustained
economic growth in the province. In that respect, the
unemployment rate in the province is particularly
worrisome, and there is a need to step up the necessary
reforms to eliminate those factors that are slowing
growth, including in terms of the electrical supply, the
investment climate, proposed privatizations, the
precarious situation as concerns property rights, and, of
course, the combat against fraud and misappropriations
of resources.

The province's relations with Belgrade must be
normalized. This could be helped by the restoration of
working relations with the Provisional Institutions in
Kosovo. My delegation welcomes the open attitude of
the Belgrade authorities vis-a-Vis the inter-ethnic
dialogue. Such a dialogue must be cross-cutting and
encompass the greatest possible number of aspects of
the Kosovo Administration.

In that respect, UNMIK must step up its work in
mediating among the various communities, with a View
to adopting a work plan to ensure the consistent
implementation of the standards before status policy.
Every opportunity for peace must be seized quickly in
order to strengthen the process under way.

On behalf of my delegation, I should like to take
this opportunity very strongly to condemn the heinous
terrorist attack in the Moscow subway. We extend our
sympathy to the bereaved families and to the people of
Russia.

