Mr. Johnson (United Kingdom): The Charter of the
United Nations defines the supreme task of the Security
Council as the maintenance of international peace and
security. There could hardly be a clearer threat to world
peace more demanding of a unified response than the
activities of one Member of the United Nations, and
that is North Korea breaking its treaty obligations,
ignoring the will of the Council and making blood-
curdling threats to inflict grievous harm on peoples of
other countries.

For decades North Korea has doggedly pursued the
means to act on those threats. In a nation where the
entire gross domestic product is about $25 billion, and
where its people have over recent decades been exposed
to terrible suffering and been reduced to eating the
leaves and the bark of trees, the Pyongyang regime has
devoted its energy to developing nuclear weapons and
the missiles to convey them.

Last year alone, North Korea tested two nuclear
devices and more than 24 ballistic missiles. This year
we witnessed more missile tests, and I remind the
Council that every one of those tests breaks seven
United Nations resolutions stretching back to resolution
1695 (2006), which was adopted unanimously.

Therefore we should reject, I am afraid, any claims
of moral equivalence between the actions of North
Korea and the defensive and precautionary measures
of other nations. The latter are legitimate; the former
are not. In spite of the strenuous efforts of some to
obscure that distinction, it cannot be ignored or elided.
The United Kingdom therefore believes it is vital for
the Council to stand ready to take further significant
measures to bring about a peaceful resolution. Sooner
or later the North Korean leadership must realize that
their isolation not only holds back their own people - if
the regime really cares about its own people - but also
weakens their own grip on power. The Council must
be united in its demand that the present course not
continue. Today, Great Britain is proud to have joined
its allies to lead the enforcement of sanctions and seek
a peaceful solution.

We urge other partners with direct influence on
North Korea to use that leverage to the full, with the
aim of easing tensions and ensuring compliance with
the expressed will ofthe United Nations. There is a vital
role for China and Russia, both of whom are neighbours
of North Korea with influence on Pyongyang and
are permanent members of the Council. They have a
special responsibility to preserve international peace
and security. The United Kingdom calls on Russia
and China and other Member States to use whatever
influence they possess to restrain North Korea and
guide its leaders toward a peaceful settlement.

Last year the Council decided to toughen sanctions
on North Korea, including by restricting the regime's
access to foreign currency. However, the United
Nations Panel of Experts has shown that not every
Member State is fully enforcing those resolutions.
Most Members of the United Nations have yet to obey
the requirement in resolution 2270 (2016) to submit a
national report on their implementation of sanctions.
The United Kingdom believes that all Member States
should reaffirm their commitment to enforcing United
Nations sanctions against North Korea.

We also have no doubt that negotiations must
at some point form part of the solution; but first it is
reasonable to expect North Korea to make verifiable
progress toward meeting its obligations to denuclearize
the Korean peninsula. For, as long as Pyongyang
continues to defy the Council, the conditions will not
be helpful for the resumption of the Six-Party Talks or
negotiations in any other format.

While the most pressing threat is North Korea's
ballistic-missile and nuclear ambitions, we must never
forget the horrifying abuse the regime metes out to
its own people, as documented by the Commission of
Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in 2014. The Council has discussed
human rights in North Korea on previous occasions,
and there should be no reticence about doing so. The
United Kingdom fully supports the work of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, both of
which perform the crucial task of investigating and
recording these violations.

Britain stands alongside our allies in making clear
that North Korea must obey the United Nations and halt
its nuclear-weapon and ballistic-missile programmes,
disarming in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner. Only then can the Council be assured of the
peace and security of the region, and only then can the
people of North Korea have the chance of a better future.

