Ms. Rice (United States ofAmerica): Let me join
my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on taking
over the presidency of the Council. We look very much
forward to working with you and with your delegation
throughout the month. We have every confidence in
your able leadership. I also want to join others in
paying great tribute to Ambassador ngu and the
delegation of Nigeria for their exceptionally skilful and
wise management of the Council in the complex month
of October.

I should like to begin by thanking the Prosecutor
for his informative briefing and for his important
contributions to laying the foundation for seeking the
justice that Libyans so deserve. The Security Council's
decision to refer the situation in Libya to the
Prosecutor reflected the importance that the
international community attaches to ensuring
accountability for the widespread and systematic
attacks against the Libyan people that began in the dark
days of February. Resolution 1970 (2011), adopted
even as atrocities were being perpetrated, represented a
historic milestone in the fight against impunity. Justice
and reconciliation efforts will be critical components of
a successful transition that allows all of Libyan society
to leave behind what has been in many, many respects
a tragic and bloody past.

An effective criminal justice system with a
competent judiciary and safeguards to guarantee
humane treatment and due process is crucial to the
future of Libya. The new Government must ensure that
the rule of law, treatment safeguards and due-process
protections are firmly in place. Helping the National
Transitional Council (NTC) implement its
commitments to respect human rights and to proper
detention procedures that meet Libya's international
obligations must be a very high priority. We emphasize
the importance of ensuring that the human rights of all
in Libya, including former regime officials and
detainees, are fully respected during and after this
transition period.

The victims of Al-Qadhafi's terrorism and their
families in Libya and in the United States now know
definitively that the era of Al-Qadhafi's violence has
ended. Al-Qadhafi engaged in countless barbaric acts,
but this does not and cannot justify the apparently
brutal way in which he met his death. We welcome the
NTC's announcement of an investigation into
Al-Qadhafi's death and will look to it to follow through
by undertaking an effective inquiry.

Independent and impartial investigations into
abuses committed in Libya on both sides are the first
step in fulfilling the NTC's commitments to
accountability and laying a foundation for a transition
that embraces the rule of law. We remain deeply
troubled by reports, including those mentioned by the
Prosecutor, that sub-Saharan African migrants and
others detained in ad hoc jails are being abused.
Continued support by the international community,
including through the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, will be vital to helping the Libyan people
achieve the future they seek.

We must now move together to support the
creation of an inclusive and democratic State in which
Libyans of all backgrounds have a future and an
opportunity to participate in the rebuilding of their
country. We welcome the Prosecutor's report that the
NTC is fully cooperating with his investigation, in
accordance with resolution 1970 (2011), and we
encourage other States in which individuals subject to
International Criminal Court arrest warrants may be
found to ensure that they are brought to justice. We
encourage the Prosecutor to continue to consult with
the NTC.

We urge the speedy apprehension of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and of Abdullah Al-Senussi, who
remain at large in the region. They must be brought to
justice in a legitimate process governed by the rule of
law. Ensuring justice for those who have endured
unspeakable atrocities will be crucial to Libya's ability
to emerge from the ashes of dictatorship to become a
country in which all of its citizens enjoy the full
protection ofthe rule of law.

