Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset,
Mr. President, we would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate you and your country on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month and
ensuring sustained attention in the debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

South Africa fully supports the Security Council's
convening of regular open debates on this matter, as it
allows all Member States an opportunity to express their
Views and to inject greater impetus into the negotiations,
as this is one of the most protracted matters on the
Council's agenda. We also express our appreciation
to Japan's predecessor, the French Republic, for the
manner in which it led the deliberations of the Council
during the month of June, as well as its continued
commitment to finding a lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

While we reiterate that the central responsibility
for achieving peace is primarily in the hands of
Palestinians and Israelis, the international community
does have a responsibility to support and encourage
the parties towards that endeavour. South Africa is of
the opinion that the basis of the negotiations, which
has been the two-State solution, is being threatened
by the increasing construction of illegal settlements in
occupied territories, as well as by heightened tension
and sporadic acts of violence between Palestinians
and Israelis.

The French initiative endorsed by the international
community in Paris in June is welcome as an effort
to resuscitate the peace process and thereby prevent
the two-State solution from slipping away. As South
Africa's Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation stated at the Paris meeting, "this initiative
is like the first raindrop after a long drought, and we
hope it will nourish the peace process".

South Africa would like to highlight the views
of the participants in Paris, stressing that both sides
should demonstrate their commitment to the two-State
solution and resolve all permanent status issues through
direct negotiations based on resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). We also welcome the Paris communique,
recalling relevant Security Council resolutions, further
highlighting the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative
and the key role of the Quartet, and welcoming the
French offer to coordinate an international conference
before the end ofthe year. It is essential that the General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map constitute the international legal framework
of those initiatives.

The Quartet report that was released last week was
eagerly anticipated to provide leadership and direction
for moving the peace process forward. The report
rightfully calls upon each side to

"independently demonstrate, through policies and

actions, a genuine commitment to the two-State

solution and refrain from unilateral steps that

prejudge the outcome of final status negotiations".
However, the reaction of the parties, in particular
the Palestinians, is indicative of some level of
disenchantment with the Quartet.

For a long time, our responsibility has been
deferred to the Quartet, to which the United Nations
provides moral legitimacy. In the light of the Quartet's
recent report, the international community must assert
its moral and legal weight by insisting that the Israeli-
Palestinian peace process take place in accordance
with the international legal framework whereby the
United Nations will play its role as neutral arbiter.
The international conference proposed in Paris is an
opportunity for the international community to play
such a role.

The Security Council, in turn, must play its part
in support of the international efforts. The Council
has been known to support other peace processes with
resolutions demanding compliance with international
obligations. That approach has led to successful
conclusions of conflicts as parties to the conflict
recognized that non-compliance would result in
punitive measures. The same is needed in the Israeli-
Palestinian context.

We deplore the fact that four days following
the release of the Quartet report, Israeli authorities
announced plans to build additional housing units in the
West Bank. That has detracted from any progress made
in resolving the conflict. As the Secretary-General has
stated, the continuing construction of settlements

"raises legitimate questions about Israel's long-term
intentions, which are compounded by continuing
statements of some Israeli ministers calling for the
annexation of the West Bank".

The fact that Israel was able to make that announcement
immediately following the call in the Quartet report
for a halt in settlements further undermines the
effectiveness of the Quartet.

The message emanating from Paris is that the time
has come for the parties to resume negotiations with the
full support of the international community, based on
the existing international legal framework, and to work
towards a two-State solution. The Council must play its
part in dissuading unilateral measures that may impede
the realization of the two-State solution that has eluded
the peoples of the region for too long. It is high time
that the Security Council assume its full responsibility
with respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
