Ms. Bensouda: Each time I appear before the
Security Council to brief its members on judicial
developments at the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and to update its members on the activities of my
Office with respect to the situation in Darfur, I wish I
could declare that at last the victims of the protracted
and incessant conflict in Darfur will soon see justice
and that persons alleged to be responsible for Rome
Statute crimes in Darfur will soon be held accountable
before the Court. Unfortunately, the reality is that the
individuals against whom the ICC arrest warrants have
been issued remain at large.

Ten years have elapsed since the Council concluded
that the situation in Darfur, Sudan, constituted a threat
to international peace and security. It was on that basis
that the Council decided to refer the Darfur situation to
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court so that those
alleged to be responsible for Rome Statute crimes may
be investigated and prosecuted. As recently as 29 June,
in resolution 2228 (2015) the Council reiterated yet
again, as it has done in so many of its previous
resolutions, that the situation in the Sudan constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. Starting with
resolution 1593 (2005), each of the resolutions adopted
by the Council has represented the hope that the victims
of grave crimes allegedly committed in Darfur will not
be forgotten, that those responsible for their suffering
will be held accountable and that peace and tranquillity
will return to their lives, families and communities.

I observe with great regret that the adoption of each
resolution has, in practical terms, amounted to no more
than an empty promise. Year after year, victims' hopes
and aspirations forjustice and a durable peace have been
dashed. Instead, the people of Darfur have continued to
endure desolation, alleged gross violations of human
rights, indiscriminate killings, mass rape and sexual
abuse, while the individuals against whom ICC arrest
warrants have been issued and who may be implicated
in those crimes continue to evade justice. Countless
victims have been demoralized. After all, who can
blame them when attaining justice appears so remote,
not least because of the absence of adequate follow-up
and support from the Council? Their frustration and
resignation in the face of inaction must weigh heavily
on our collective conscience.

My Office's numerous reports to the Council over
the years must offer little, if any, solace to victims of
atrocity crimes in Darfur. Despite my repeated requests
for the Council to take action with respect to the Sudan's
blatant disregard of its obligations, and in Violation
of this Council's resolutions, my appeals continue to
be unheeded. As my Office's reports have indicated,
Mr. Al-Bashir is not only a fugitive from justice who
continues to travel across international borders, but he
also harbours other fugitives and refuses to facilitate
their surrender and transfer to the ICC to be tried.

My Office, and indeed the Court as a whole, do
not have powers of arrest. Those powers rest with
States. In the case of the Sudan, the Council, which
referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC, has
important responsibilities to ensure that States uphold
their obligations. I can only reiterate my appeals to
the Council to take appropriate measures within its
powers to ensure that all Darfur situation fugitives are
apprehended and brought to justice for the sake of the
victims.

Today, my message to the victims in Darfur is clear
and unequivocal - we shall not stop our work and we
shall not despair. My Office remains firmly committed
to its legal mandate with respect to Darfur, Sudan.
We will also continue our principled approach and
will repeatedly call upon the Council to more robustly
support our work. Victims of atrocity crimes in Darfur
should rest assured that the cases against the Sudan
suspects are far from over. Contrary to the misinformed
belief that investigations in Darfur have been closed,
a team of committed lawyers and investigators from
my Office is continuing with its work of interviewing
witnesses, collecting documentary evidence and
seeking information from relevant sources. My team is
also continuously reviewing the evidence and following
leads. In short, notwithstanding the challenges present,
we are doing everything we can within our mandate and
means. Our resolve to fully meet our mandate vis-a-vis
Darfur remains unshaken. Let me be clear that the
arrest warrants against all Sudanese fugitives remain
in full force and effect, and my Office will continue its
efforts to do everything feasible within its powers to
press for their arrest and surrender.

The victims of Darfur will no longer find solace
in our words. They deserve tangible justice, and they
deserve to see that justice is being done. What is
required is concrete andjoint action by the Council, the
States and the Court to achieve real progress. Without
arrest and surrender, the Council will not be able to
deliver on the promise to hold accountable those alleged
to be responsible for committing Rome Statute crimes
in Darfur, neither will it be able to facilitate sustainable
peace and security in the Sudan.

Whether it be in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda or
Sierra Leone, the Council has repeatedly demonstrated
that where there has been widespread commission of
atrocity crimes against thousands of victims, peace and
reconciliation cannot be fully achieved unless and until
those responsible for the crimes are held accountable.
The same rationale applies to Darfur. The criminal
justice process that commenced with the Court's
issuance of arrest warrants against Mr. Al-Bashir and
other suspects in the situation must be adequately
supported.

I must also emphasize that my Office's ability to
effectively and fully discharge the mandate the Council
entrusted to it is hampered by lack of resources. The
level of investigative activities in Darfur is necessarily
a function of capacity and resource constraints. I have
stressed similar concerns in various other contexts,
including in my most recent briefing (see S/PV.7549)
before the Council last month. I take this opportunity
to once again recall the provisions of article 115(b) of
the Rome Statute in accordance with which funds of
the Court may be provided by the United Nations, in
particular in relation to the expenses incurred due to
referrals by the Council. The situation in Darfur is one
such referral, and it is incumbent upon the Council to
help support and devise innovative ways of providing
the much needed resources for my Office's investigative
activities.

Victims of Darfur have been let down for far too
long. IfI may be so bold, the Council must do more
to demonstrate its commitment to Darfur, Sudan.
It must confidently play its part in facilitating the
arrest of suspects against whom the Court has issued
warrants of arrest. It must act concretely on the Court's
non-compliance communications. In that regard, I
thank the Council members who are tirelessly working
to ensure that communications from the Court receive
the attention they deserve by the Council. Ultimately,
this body must recognize its crucial role vis-a-vis those
States, including the Sudan, that have been found to be
in non-compliance by the Court and fully assume its
responsibilities to advance the objectives of the Rome
Statute.

I conclude my remarks this morning by making
the following observation. The interplay between the
Court and the Council is entrenched in the founding
treaty of the ICC, and hence is here to stay. It is
reasonable to expect that with time and increased
inter-institutional interaction, the burgeoning relations
between those two important institutions will develop
further and evolve. I encourage regular exchanges
with the Council, independent of the situation-related
periodic briefings, so that we may jointly brainstorm
and address inter-institutional matters regarding how
to strengthen the support and working methods of the
Council in relation to the ICC, building on a similar
and most helpful initiative organized in October 2014
under the presidency of Argentina. More opportunities
for dialogue and exchange of views between the Court
and the Council will be conducive to generating ideas
and practical solutions, enabling the Council to more
effectively respond to ICC-related matters.

Ending impunity for the world's most destabilizing
and gravest crimes is not the prerogative of one
single institution. It is a collective responsibility with
humankind as a whole as its beneficiary. The Council's
tangible, consistent and principled support for the Court
will be an important factor for not only the maintenance
of international peace and security, but also the cause
of international criminal justice in this new century.
Indeed, the former is in many ways contingent on the
latter.

As detailed in my report, terrible crimes allegedly
continue to be perpetrated in Darfur. Only strong and
committed action by the Council and States will stop the
commission of grave crimes in Darfur and ensure that
the perpetrators of past crimes are held accountable.
History will surely stand witness to the tenacity of our
will and ability to deliver on our respective obligations.

