Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for presenting the report
on the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts.
Ambassador Quinlan has worked with ardour and
brought new energy to the Committee. We also take
note of the recent report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation of
safeguards under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in Iran.

The Council and the 1737 (2006) Committee have
made considerable efforts to address the issues relating
to Iran's nuclear programme. We take this opportunity
today to reaffirm the need for the Council to consider
revisiting objectives and strategy as set out in the
relevant resolutions. We welcome the resumption of
diplomatic efforts between the five permanent members
of the Security Council and Germany (P5+1) and Iran.
We hope that recent positive and conciliatory overtures
and statements will not only improve the atmosphere
but lead to results. Affirmation by all sides of their faith
in negotiations is important. There may be a way out
of the current impasse through consistent engagement.

A peaceful resolution of the issues is possible on the
basis of reciprocal confidence-building measures and
the necessary steps to ensure Iran's right to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. The Council and the Committee
need to lend their support to those efforts. It is essential
to avert confrontation over Iran's nuclear programme,
which has the potential to destabilize the immediate
neighbourhood of Iran and the volatile region.

As other Council members have pointed out, the
work of the Panel of Experts and its activities should
conform to its mandate. Its reports, analyses and
recommendations must be objective, impartial and
backed by solid evidence. We reiterate our view that
Security Council sanctions should not be pursued as an
end in themselves; anegotiated solution to the unresolved
issues needs to be facilitated by striking a balance
between sanctions and negotiations. We call upon the
Council, the Committee and the Panel of Experts to
adjust the objectives and strategy accordingly. Easing
of pressure could help with negotiations.

Iran is a party to the NPT and, as a member of
the IAEA, is entitled to certain rights that should
be respected in line with the provisions of those
instruments. At the same time, Iran should fulfil its
legal obligations under the NPT. We urge Iran to stay
engaged with the IAEA and extend full cooperation to
it, with a view to resolving all outstanding issues.

It is important for the Council to broaden the
composition of the Panel of Experts, particularly from
developing countries. Such a step would enhance
awareness and make implementation of the relevant
Council resolutions more effective. The Council should
revisit the existing method of appointment of the Panel
of Experts and align it with the United Nations core
values of transparency and impartiality. We hope that
the Council will attend to that issue in all its subsidiary
bodies. We will gladly contribute to that process.

