Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, Mr. President, I would first
like to convey to you our sincere congratulations and
our appreciation for your initiative to organize this
public debate on such an important issue. I would also
like to thank the Chairmen of the three Committees for
their comprehensive briefings and the useful
information they have given us on the current and
future work of the Committees.

The three Committees constitute an effective
mechanism within the Council's strategy to combat
terrorism, as well as an important component of the
United Nations architecture to combat that scourge. My
delegation therefore commends the efforts made by the
Committees' expert groups to continue to cooperate
with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, which was established with a View to ensuring
overall coordination and coherence in the counter-
terrorism efforts of the United Nations system. My
delegation also welcomes the initiatives of the three
expert groups with regard to technical assistance,
experience-sharing and information exchanges.

Morocco acknowledges and respects the leading
role of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We reiterate our
commitment to pursuing our efforts to
comprehensively implement the resolutions of the
Council aimed at combating terrorism. In line with our
resolute and priority commitment to combating that
scourge, Morocco strives to make its policy in that
regard both substantive and results-oriented at the
national, regional and international levels in the
framework of a proactive, comprehensive and
multifaceted approach aimed at protecting our citizens
and depriving terrorists of all possible means of
threatening regional and international peace and
security.

Our commitment is grounded in our firm belief
that terrorism is a complex phenomenon, which
therefore requires the efforts made to eradicate it to be
resolutely backed by synergistic efforts along several
tracks. Those, of course, include the security and legal
tracks, as well as the political, economic, social and
cultural. That approach includes the complete rejection
of terrorism by all Moroccans. In the context of
implementing preventive security laws and measures
and observing human rights and basic freedoms, that
approach also contributes to denying terrorists an
environment conducive to their actions.

Morocco remains determined to strengthen its
national capacities, bolstered by mobilizing all sectors
of its population and their commitment to the counter-
terrorist efforts of the public authorities.

It is precisely within the context of my country's
ongoing efforts to strengthen the legal institutional
framework that I would like to cite the recent step of
appointing last April the Chairman and members of the
Financial Intelligence Unit, a body tasked with fighting
against money-laundering.

The Mahgreb, the subregion to which my country
belongs, and the Sahel, an adjacent subregion, continue
to be exposed to terrorist acts, which, unfortunately,
prove once again that the terrorist threats to the
security of that area, the Euro-Mediterranean region
and well beyond are far from having been averted.
They also demonstrate that national efforts, however
significant, remain insufficient as long as they are not
based on lasting, effective and unconditional regional
and international cooperation.

My delegation, while welcoming the growing
awareness by the affected countries, and also by United
Nations bodies, of the constant and real nature of that
threat, would like to recall once again its true
conviction that, faced with the extent and intensity of
the terrorist threat in its various, complex and new
forms and in view of the increasingly close links that
international terrorism is forging with organized crime
and the trafficking in drugs and in human beings,
sincere and enduring commitment at the national and
international levels remains a sine qua non for
protecting us all from that scourge.

To that end, Morocco will spare no effort to
contribute to any initiative that supports joint
international action in this field. In that context and in
the framework of the follow-up to the fifth Conference
of Ministers of Justice of French-speaking African
Countries, Morocco, as a depositary, opened for
signature the Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance
and Extradition against Terrorism, which we hope will
contribute to strengthening cooperation among States
parties.

In conclusion, Morocco would like to reaffirm its
resolute and unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
origins, motives or perpetrators, and to reiterate its
commitment to work within the framework of the
United Nations to eradicate that scourge.

