Mr. Zacharakis (Greece): Let me first of all express
my appreciation for the work accomplished during your
month's term in your high office. May I also congratulate
on this occasion your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon.

My delegation subscribes to the statement delivered by
the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union. I wish, however, to dwell further, very
briefly, upon certain points that are of special importance
to my country.

Greece, being a country of the area, takes a keen and
direct interest in the maintenance of peace and stability in
the Balkans and is therefore concerned over developments
in Kosovo as well as with the repercussions that the
possible deterioration of the situation there could have on
the stability of the region. In this context, Greece actively
participated in the meetings of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Countries of South-Eastern Europe in Sofia,
Bulgaria, and Bonn on 10 and 25 March, respectively, and
adheres to the joint statements adopted there, hoping that
the relevant decisions will lead to a swift settlement of the
issue in question.

My country firmly believes that a solution in Kosovo
must be sought only through peaceful means, namely
through dialogue between the Government in Belgrade and
the Kosovar Albanian leadership. Terrorism must be wholly
condemned and so must the excessive use of force insofar
as it stifles the free exercise of human rights.
On the other hand, Greece particularly insists upon
the need to safeguard the inviolability of existing
international borders, which is a fundamental and sine qua
non condition for peace and stability in the Balkans. In
this respect, Greece fully supports the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and categorically rejects any secessionist claims.

Finally, I wish to express my country's support for
the resolution adopted by the Council today, which in our
view is balanced and should be implemented by all
parties concerned. But I would also like to point out that
any measures against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
should also take into account the stability of south-eastern
Europe and should not unduly harm States in the region,
which were particularly hit by the negative consequences
of the sanctions regime in the years 1992 through 1996.

