The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

The successful conclusion of the historic
transformation of Afghan society is a critical challenge
to the United Nations today. Significant work has
already been done. Under the Bonn Agreement,
normalcy is gradually being built in Afghanistan and
the national State institutions are gaining strength. To
say that the peace process has been concluded is
clearly premature, however. We have all seen the
difficulties encountered by the Afghan Transitional
Administration in overcoming the legacies of the past.
The terrorist actions against the International Security
Assistance Force and the coalition forces are visible
proof of the danger of a resurgence of the Taliban and
other extremist elements.

It is necessary to continue to provide multilateral
assistance to the central Afghan Government in order
to enhance its ability to govern the country
independently. We are convinced that we must support
those Afghan forces that have proven themselves to be
consistent fighters against the Taliban regime and the
Al Qaeda terrorist network. It is also important to avert
interference in Afghanistan's internal affairs, including
through the development of specific measures for the
practical implementation of the Declaration on Good-
neighbourly Relations, adopted in Kabul in December
2002.

The Security Council has regularly monitored the
situation in Afghanistan. We have already discussed the
issues of security, political reform and economic
assistance. It is important to pursue a focused
discussion of Afghanistan's current problems. Russia
has today suggested centring the discussion on the
challenge of combating the Afghan drug threat.
Russia is located on the historic crossroads of
world trade routes that now overlap the channels of
world drug trafficking. Because of its geographic
situation, attempts have been made to use our country
as a convenient transit bridge for smuggling Afghan
drugs. This is particularly true with respect to heroin
from Afghanistan, which is spreading ever further, not
only in Russia and Europe as a whole, but also in North
America, Japan and Australia.

Hence the task of developing a comprehensive
approach to combating the Afghan drug threat. We
need an effective and comprehensive strategy of
international action, whereby internal Afghan measures
are organically supplemented by efforts around and
beyond Afghanistan.

We deeply appreciate the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the efforts of
donor countries in response to the decisions taken at
the Geneva conference on Afghanistan, held in April
2002, to resolve the drug problem within that country.
Russia supports the measures adopted within this
process to establish anti-drug agencies in Afghanistan,
strengthen their potential and the capacities of law
enforcement agencies and develop alternative
economics. We also note the contribution made by the
lead countries in these areas: the United Kingdom in
combating drugs, Germany in police training and Italy
in criminal justice.

It is clear, however, that the efforts under way
remain inadequate. We need in particular to organize
the systematic search for and destruction within
Afghanistan of illegal narcotics caches and
underground laboratories. Greater attention must be
focused on intercepting drug couriers. We see once
again the ineluctable link between the tasks of fighting
drugs and of establishing security, law and order in
Afghanistan. We expect this issue to be taken seriously
into account by the provincial reconstruction teams.

Considering the ongoing gravity of the problem,
the countries neighbouring Afghanistan must undertake
additional and sometimes extraordinary steps to
strengthen counter-narcotic capacities along their
borders. Establishing anti-narcotic security belts -
first on Afghanistan's borders and then on those of its
neighbours - would help substantially to enhance the
effectiveness of efforts to sever flows of Afghan
opiates into major markets. Russia actively interacts in
this sphere with United Nations agencies and countries
of the region. A large portion of Russia's annual
voluntary contribution to the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) fund
is used precisely for these purposes. As a result of
implementing, under its auspices, a project in 2000 and
2001 to assist a team of the Russian federal border
service in Tajikistan, our success in combating
smuggling on the Tajik and Afghan border was
enhanced nine-fold. Last year, Russian border officials
seized more than 4 tonnes of narcotics, including more
than 2.3 tonnes of heroin. Since the beginning of this
year alone, we have seized about 2 tonnes of narcotics,
1.2 tonnes of which was heroin.

We are seeing greater effectiveness in counter-
narcotic cooperation through the agencies of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, within which
special mechanisms and agencies have been set up.

The problem of the drug threat from Afghanistan
is not confined to regional frameworks. It affects the
vitally important security spheres of the entire
international community. The illegal trade in Afghan
drugs is truly global and justifiably placed within a
category of new threats. The drug threat is closely
connected with money laundering. It breeds organized
crime. It provides financial resources for those who
organize terrorist acts. We are fully justified in talking
about a new threat, called narco-terrorism.

In these circumstances, it is critical to step up
multilateral cooperation to strengthen border, customs
and law enforcement agencies of countries that lie
along the corridors of the illegal drug routes for
Afghan narcotics. It is very important to implement the
measures approved in the ministerial document of the
United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs and in
the Paris Pact. It is in the interest of the entire
international community to identify and neutralize the
whole chain of transnational criminal groups that
deliver and market Afghan drugs, including taking
steps to stop the laundering of drug income.

We need to develop practical steps to cut off
supplies into Afghanistan of precursors for the
production of heroin. Also, this is an external, not
internal, factor in the Afghan drug threat. It is up to
foreign Governments to make efforts to reduce the
demand for drugs, including preventive measures,
treatment and the rehabilitation of drug addicts. We
hope that today's multilaterally engaged discussion will
allow the Security Council to make a decision focused
on joining, under United Nations auspices, the efforts
of all interested States, of international financial and
other organizations, in order to implement, in practice,
a multilateral, comprehensive approach to combating
the Afghan drug threat, in the interest of creating the
basis for political, social and economic stability in
Afghanistan and for strengthening security in the
region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.

