Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for
giving me the floor and for organizing today's open
meeting of the Council. It is essential to ensure that the
entire world, not just the members of our Organization,
can be witness to Council members" positions with
complete transparency in the wake of the recent events
in Syria.

The delegation of Bolivia asked that today's
meeting be held because we are concerned about the
events of the past 24 hours. While the Security Council
was debating proposals about what the investigation
mechanism should be for the horrendous chemical
attacks witnessed by the whole world, while we were
discussing how to word a draft resolution for the
Council's consideration and while the permanent and
non-permanent members were making suggestions
about its text, the United States was once again preparing
and carrying out a unilateral attack. Those missile
attacks are indeed a unilateral action and represent
a serious threat to international peace and security.
That is because for the past 70 years humankind has
been creating and building a structure that is not just
physical or institutional but also legal. We have created
international legal instruments precisely in order to
avoid situations in which the most powerful can attack
the weakest with impunity, to ensure a balance of
power in the world and to avoid the most serious kinds
of violations of international peace and security.

We believe it is the duty not only of the Security
Council but of all the bodies of the United Nations to
defend multilateralism. That is why we are here. We
have agreed that the Charter of the United Nations must
be respected, and the Charter forbids unilateral actions.
Any action must be authorized by the Security Council
in accordance with the Charter. I would like to refresh
our memories a little by reading from Article 24, which
states that

"In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under
this responsibility the Security Council acts on
their behalf."

The Security Council is not just the 15 members
who are seated here at this table. We represent the
193 States Members of this Organization, and through
them we represent the people of the world. And we
have agreed that unilateral actions violate international
law. Yesterday, as we in the Security Council were
discussing draft resolutions and striving to come up
with alternatives and consensus, the United States not
only launched a unilateral attack but - while we were
discussing and demanding an independent, impartial,
thorough and conclusive investigation of those previous
attacks - the United States had taken it upon itself
to be investigator, prosecutor, judge and jury. Where
is the investigation that would enable us to establish
objectively who was responsible for the attacks? This
is an extremely serious violation of international law.

This is not the first time that this has happened.
Throughout our history we can recall many episodes
in which not just the United States but various Powers
have acted unilaterally and violated the Charter. But
the fact that it has now happened again does not mean
that the United Nations and its members must accept
it. In September 2013 the United States also launched
attacks on Syria. I would like to recall what the then
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, said at the time,
and I will read it in English, ifI may.

(spoke in English)

"[T]he Security Council has primary responsibility
for international peace and security... That is my
appeal, that everything should be handled within
the framework of the United Nations Charter. The
use of force is lawful only when in exercise of self-
defence in accordance with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, and/or when the Security Council
approves such action."

(spoke in Spanish)

That was the position of the then Secretary-
General, which helped to avert the taking of unilateral
action in circumstances very similar to those we are
experiencing today. This attack represents a threat to
international peace and security because it threatens
the political processes in Geneva and Astana.
Mr. Feltman expressed it very well in the message from
the Secretary-General when he said that it is essential
to avoid any escalation of tensions that could damage
the progress that has been made in Astana and Geneva.

As I said, this is not the first time this has happened,
and I would like to recall here something that happened
some years ago, on Wednesday, 5 February 2003,
when the then Secretary of State of the United States
of America came to this Chamber in order to present
to us what he said in his own words was convincing
proof that there were weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq (see S/PV.4701). I believe that it is essential that
we remember those images and the fact that in this
very Chamber we were told that there were weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq and that was the reason for the
proposed invasion. That invasion resulted in 1 million
deaths and set in motion a series of atrocities in the
region. Would we be talking about the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham without that invasion? Would
we be talking about the series of horrific attacks that
have occurred in various parts of the world without that
illegal invasion? I believe it is vital that we remember
what history teaches us, and on that occasion the United
States affirmed that it had all the proof necessary to
show that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction. They
were never, ever found.
I would like to repeat here what President Evo
Morales Ayma said this morning.

"I think and feel - I hope not to be
wrong - that chemical weapons in Syria are an
excuse for a military intervention. Unilateral
actions are imperialistic actions. The United
States is not interested in international law. It sets
the United Nations aside when it suits it. Internal
problems of States must be resolved through
dialogue, not through bombing. This action
threatens international security and world peace."

It is important that we talk about the
double-standards - when we are in the United Nations
meeting rooms, on the one hand, and when we are
dealing with what can be considered real life, on the
other hand. My own peoples - the peoples of Latin
America and the Caribbean - have lived this reality
throughout our history. They speak to us in the language
of human rights, which we are supposed to live up
to, but when their interests make the human rights
discourse inconvenient for them, they systematically
violate human rights.

The series of coups d'e'tat in Latin America was
organized and financed by the CIA. That is historical
truth. It is not rhetoric. It is not a speech-making. It is the
truth. Let us remember the coup d'etat in 1973 against
the constitutional Government of Salvador Allende,
which was financed by the CIA. Let us remember the
Escuela de las Americas at which soldiers were taught to
torture people. There were training manuals for torture,
which was taught to Latin American military personnel
as part of the so-called national security doctrine.

When they are interested in human rights, the
human rights are fine, but when human rights no
longer comport with their interests, human rights no
longer matter. The same goes for democracy. When it
suits their interests, they are defenders of democracy,
but when it does not they finance coups d'e'tats. And
unfortunately the same thing is happening with the
United Nations and with the Security Council itself.
When it is no longer in line with their interests, then
multilateralism is not important. For the few things that
suit them, multilateralism is fine. The United Nations
is fine, but when it opposes their interests, then they
are no longer interested in the United Nations, human
rights or democracy.
When we unequivocally condemn chemical
attacks, we are saying that the Security Council must
not be used as an echo chamber for war propaganda
or interventionism. The Security Council should not
be used as a pawn that can be sacrificed on a chess
board, the chess board of war. The Security Council
is ultimately the last hope we have to guarantee
international peace and security, based on principles,
norms and the international rule of law.

I would also like to point out that, just as you have
convened this meeting in a very transparent manner,
Madam President, it is absolutely vital that we show
concern about the unfortunate fact that there are
first-class and second-class members of the Security
Council - the permanent members that not only
have the right to veto but also control the procedures
that govern decision-making, and the other 10, which
are members only temporarily, that are brought in or
consulted only occasionally, not to carry any weight but
simply to support the positions of the permanent five.
This is not multilateralism.

Bolivia would like to reiterate its strong
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons or the
use of chemical-weapons precursors as an unjustifiable
and criminal act regardless of its motivation, wherever
it may be, whenever it may be and by whomsoever it
may be committed. We reiterate that when these cases
arise we demand independent, impartial, complete and
conclusive investigations.

Unfortunately, yesterday's attacks have dealt a
mortal blow to the Joint Investigative Mechanism and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and their ability to carry out an investigation and find
out exactly what happened a few days ago in Syria. We
reiterate that those responsible for acts must be duly
prosecuted and punished to the fullest extent of the law.
The same is true of any actions that violate international
law and that endanger international security.

