Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Permit me
to begin by drawing the Council's attention to the
presence of a delegation of six British Members of
Parliament from the House of Commons who are here
on an official visit to the United Nations, at the side of
the Chamber.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his briefing, which, as always, was very
full and informative. I also wish to thank Acting
Special Representative Asplund for his leadership of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) since the beginning of the year and to pay a
particularly warm welcome to Ambassador Kai Eide
and to congratulate him on his appointment. We look
forward to working very closely with him in the
months ahead.

The United Nations is at the heart of the
international effort in Afghanistan, and as head of
UNAMA, Mr. Eide is going to play a crucial role in
coordinating the overall international effort in
Afghanistan. We welcome the Secretary-General's
willingness to see UNAMA assume an even greater
role in that coordination process. That is something we
and others have been advocating for some time, and we
recognize that those calling for greater coordination
must themselves be willing to be coordinated.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
taking the initiative of convening today's debate. One
of the remarkable things about Afghanistan is the
number of countries and organizations involved in the
international effort there. Another remarkable aspect is
the degree of common thinking and common purpose
among those countries and organizations. Events such
as today's are an important reminder of the breadth of
that international engagement and the extent of the
common support for the Government of Afghanistan. I
warmly welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan at today's debate.

We welcome the Secretary-General's latest report
on and we recognize the picture it paints: a country that
has made great strides since the fall of the Taliban in
2001, but that continues to face significant
challenges - some of which are unique to
Afghanistan, some of which are common to other post-
conflict democracies. The international community has
no choice but to continue to support Afghanistan in
overcoming those Challenges.
One of the tasks of the international community,
led by the United Nations, is to bring together the

various strands of activity - military, political,
9
development and economic - in a comprehensive

approach in support of the Afghanistan Government.
We are all aware that there is no purely military
solution to Afghanistan's current challenges. Success
depends upon marshalling all our resources in support
of a common objective.

We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's
call for closer civilian-military cooperation. The United
Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) share the same objectives in Afghanistan, and
it is important they work together to deliver them. The
NATO summit to be held in Bucharest next month is an
opportunity to look at the totality of NATO
contributions in Afghanistan and the way in which
those efforts can best contribute to our overall
objective. We welcome the announcement by the
Secretary-General yesterday that he and President
Karzai will both be present for a special meeting to
discuss Afghanistan in Bucharest.

We also look forward to further expansion of the
UNAMA presence in Afghanistan, including into the
south. The greater the reach of UNAMA and the better
its understanding of the dynamics in different parts of
Afghanistan, the more it can deliver on its mandate and
play the leadership role we all want to see.

Supporting a comprehensive approach also means
supporting Afghan efforts to bring disaffected Afghans
into society's mainstream, provided they renounce
violence and accept Afghanistan's Constitution. We
agree with the Secretary-General that UNAMA has an
important role to play in supporting Afghan-led
reconciliation activities in whatever ways the
Government of Afghanistan considers appropriate.

The overall framework for our work in
Afghanistan remains the Afghanistan Compact, signed
in London in January 2006. That agreement constitutes
the international community's commitment to
Afghanistan. It also sets out what we, the international
community, expect of the Government of Afghanistan.
We should remember that this is an Afghan-led
process, and that progress is measured by the ability of
the Afghan Government to take the lead in key areas. I
know that is also how the Afghan Government judges
success and is what all their efforts are aimed at.
The process will take time. We are already seeing
the Afghan National Security Forces increasingly take
the lead in security operations, with international
forces in support. It is clear that the next presidential

and parliamentary elections should be Afghan-led and
Afghan-administered, with the support, including
financial, of the international community and the
United Nations.

We also look forward to an increasingly proactive
Afghan lead in counter-narcotics. The agreement
reached in Tokyo on a prioritized implementation plan
for the National Drug Control Strategy is an important
step forward, with its aggressive eradication targets
and commitment to provision of proper force
protection. We also hope to see continued government
efforts to improve local governance, which is so crucial
to the counter-narcotics drive, including through the
work of the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance.

On the development side, we look forward to the
finalization and launch of the Afghan National
Development Strategy. That will be an important step
in increasing Afghan ownership of the development
effort, including the difficult process of identifying a
realistic number of priority areas for that effort to focus
on. The Paris conference to be held in June this year
will be an important opportunity to review progress in
implementing both the Development Strategy and the
Compact more generally.

No one, and certainly not the United Kingdom,
underestimates the challenges we face in Afghanistan.
But we recognize what is at stake in Afghanistan, and
that is why we have committed our military, financial
and political support since 2001 and have stepped it up
markedly over the past two years.

We are optimistic. We know that the people of
Afghanistan and their Government want what people
everywhere want: the chance to live peaceful,
prosperous lives. That is a far more powerful vision
than the violence and hatred offered by the enemies of
democracy in Afghanistan. We are confident that, with
our support, it is the vision of peace and prosperity that
will win out.

