I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres and Special Representative Tanin for the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/964) and their efforts in carrying out the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in line with resolution 1244 (1999). The undiminished presence of UNMIK in Kosovo and Metohija is critical to building lasting peace, stability and security in the province. Serbia has been taking a very serious and responsible approach to the dialogue with Pristina, which has lasted for almost a decade. I would like to point to the problems that we have been facing since the beginning and persist to this day. Let me remind the Council that more than seven years ago in Brussels, Hashim Thagi and I signed the Brussels Agreement following difficult negotiations and major concessions on our part. The guarantor of the agreement was none other than the High Representative of the European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy at the time, Ms. Catherine Ashton. I have already noted in this organ that, by refusing to form a community of Serb municipalities, under the pretext that it was contrary to the so-called Constitution of Kosovo, Pristina misled Serbia and the EU, as guarantor, by failing to implement the agreement it signed. For years now, we have kept asking the EU the same question, which I have repeated in the Chamber time and again, concerning whether something we discuss, agree and sign can be called a dialogue and agreement if one side says it will not implement what was agreed. I ask the same question again today: What would happen if Serbia decided not to deliver on its commitments? Would the Council have patience and understanding and make excuses for us the way it has done for Pristina for more than seven years? Nevertheless, Serbia has patiently demonstrated its commitment to dialogue and the implementation of what was agreed in the hope that others will realize how the process as a whole was damaged by Pristina's unacceptable conduct. We are encouraged that last week, on his visit to Pristina, Special Representative Lajeak insisted on the full implementation of the agreements reached. The negative reaction of Pristina to his statements, however, indicates that they still lack the political will necessary for substantial progress in the dialogue process. I would like to reiterate that the Republic of Serbia remains committed to the EU-facilitated dialogue, in the sincere belief that dialogue is the only true path towards a sustainable solution to the issue of Kosovo and Metohia. We are also grateful to the United States of America, President Trump and his Special Presidential Envoy for Serbia and Kosovo Peace Negotiations, Mr. Grenell, for their commitment and engagement, as the agreement reached on 4 September in Washington, D.C., on economic normalization represents a significant step forward. The fact that Pristina joined the mini-Schengen zone is important not only for the economy, but also for the day-to-day life of all communities in Kosovo and Metohija and the entire region. Unfortunately, by continuing to lobby for new recognition, Pristina has violated the section of the Washington agreement calling for a one-year moratorium on activities that recognize Kosovo, thereby undermining trust and rendering meaningless the agreements reached in good faith. I am confident that the Council shares the view that a great deal of time has been wasted. For seven and a half years, Pristina has stalled dialogue by failing to implement the obligations it has undertaken. It is high time for Pristina to start to act in a serious and responsible manner by implementing what has been agreed, rather than waiting for another seven and a half years to make progress in the dialogue. To live as a Serb in Kosovo and Metohia today is an achievement in itself. Unlike anywhere else in Europe, Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija have become a legitimate everyday target - just for belonging to another nation and religion. Their houses are set ablaze, their property is usurped and destroyed, their cemeteries and churches are desecrated and their families are attacked and intimidated. Videos of people trampling on the Serbian flag are shared on social networks and hatred towards members of the Serb community is still rampant. The report under review today, like most such reports since UNMIK was deployed, expresses concern about a large number of incidents directed against Serbs in Kosovo and Metohya. Yet, despite the appeal to local authorities to respond urgently in order to track down the perpetrators and publicly discourage such acts, justice for Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija is slow and unachievable, and the number of incidents are undiminished. Even during the pandemic, under even more adverse conditions, acts against the Serb community continue unabated. Just a few weeks ago, in the village of Donja Brnjica, near Pristina, Serb children were shot at by an Albanian in the elementary schoolyard. In the village of Babin Most, near Obili¢, there was an attempt to abduct a Serbian schoolgirl coming home from school. The attacks on families of returnees have not ceased, not to mention cases of houses being set on fire, as well as looting and intimidation. It is no wonder, then, that internally displaced persons are not returning to their homes. Twenty years on, out of 200,000 people, a meagre 1.9 per cent have achieved a sustainable return. Pristina claims that every displaced person who wished to return to Kosovo and Metohija could have done so, and that most Serbs did not return because they did not wish to do so. Information from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees says otherwise, while the report of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) states that "a considerable number of displaced persons are interested in returning, but many of them remain deprived of their property or face serious obstacles to return". How can returns take place when security is still not guaranteed and when it is impossible to enjoy fundamental human rights, access to justice, the right to property and freedom of movement? I should also mention the Serb cultural and religious heritage in Kosovo and Metohia and Pristina's attempts to revise history with claims that Serb churches in Kosovo and Metohija are not actually Serb. What then is next - claiming that Serbs have never lived in Kosovo and Metohija? Other examples of Pristina's arrogance in the cultural heritage sphere are its repeated attempts to build a road through the special protected zone of the Visoki Deeani monastery, which has been placed on the UNESCO List of World Heritage in Danger. Despite interventions by representatives of the Quinta group and other international organizations - the EU, the OSCE and the Kosovo Force (K FOR) - it remains uncertain whether the final court order will be enforced, since the local authorities have not committed to permanently ceasing the construction in the special protective zone. Today Council members will probably hear again the same falsehoods on Serbian colonialism and the alleged genocide against Albanians that the representatives of Pristina have been promoting for 20 years. Let me be clear: every victim deserves justice, and every perpetrator must be brought to justice. That said, this principle must apply equally to everyone. For the past 20 years, Serbia has maintained that it had to process perpetrators of horrendous crimes committed against Serbs and Roma as well as some Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija by the terrorist so-called Kosovo Liberation Army. And yet for years we have been hearing Pristina lament the Albanian victims, the plight of innocent civilians and the "pure and unblemished fight" of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army. The fact that Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office were established more than five years ago suggests that there is another side to the coin. Notwithstanding the more than five years that have elapsed since the establishment of the court, we welcome the first indictments. However, we are also following with great concern Pristina's activities aimed at derogating the functioning of the court, attempting to formally limit and prevent its operation or even to abolish it. We are particularly concerned with the activities aimed at intimidating witnesses and disclosing witness identities. It is unheard of that the Specialist Prosecutor's Office would publicize the indictments against Tha¢i, Veseli and other individuals before they were formally indicted for charges that include war crimes and crimes against humanity, killings, forced disappearances, persecution and torture. According to the Specialist Prosecutor's Office, this decision was made because of the "repeated efforts by Hashim Thagi and Kadri Veseli to obstruct and undermine the work of the Specialist Chambers". In his report, the Secretary-General also singled out this problem (S/2020/964, annex I). The initiative of adopting a law on the protection of the values of the so- called Kosovo Liberation Army is equally unthinkable at a time when indictments are brought against its members for the most serious criminal acts. How can it be explained that the current President of so-called Kosovo is trying to abolish a court that Pristina itself had established, so as to avoid indictment and prosecution for crimes he had committed? How can one explain the appearance of a masked man at the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army veterans association headquarters, removing thousands upon thousands of documents, including draft indictments and protected- witness testimonies with their names and personal data? This would be too much for even a Hollywood thriller. We genuinely hope that, despite these incredible events and obstructions, the court will manage to conduct proceedings so that the victims of the horrendous crimes will finally obtain justice. Needless to say, the UNMIK presence in Kosovo and Metohija remains necessary, and we expect the Mission to continue to actively perform its mandate, together with the equally important presence of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and KFOR, for its engagement in the rule of law and as major guarantors of security, respectively. In the context of KFOR's activities, allow me to voice our serious concern over the practice introduced by its forces to conduct joint patrols with so-called Kosovo police forces in the vicinity of the administrative boundary line, which is contrary to the existing security framework according to which KFOR is the only partner of the Serbian Armed Forces in securing that boundary line. The announced intention by Pristina officials to introduce three-month mandatory military service also gives reasons for concern. This is yet another announcement of a one-sided and unacceptable act of Pristina, contrary to resolution 1244 (1999) and the established KFOR mandate as the only legal and legitimate military structure in the province. In early September, we took a step in the right direction. Economic cooperation is important for future political agreements, but the road to political normalization is long. The talks we resumed in Brussels are not easy, since major differences in our respective approaches persist. However, we truly believe that dialogue is the only possible way to reach a long-term solution to our problems and ensure better relations, peace and stability in the region.
