Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
First, let me thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting today and express thanks for the helpful
and constructive comments and questions that have
been provided by other members of the Council.

I am not going to try to answer all the questions
that were raised here at this meeting. I think there will
be opportunities, for example, when the Governing
Council submits its formal report in accordance with
the timetable of resolution 1511 (2003). We have
already been talking with our Bulgarian colleagues
about finding a suitable date in the middle of
December for scheduling consultations on the subject
of Iraq, at which time I think we will be in a position to
answer some of those questions in more detail.

But, meanwhile, let me address several of the key
points that have been made today. There have been a
number of comments to the effect that the security
situation in Iraq is alarming. While we would certainly

Sll'V.4869

 

agree that there are some very serious security
problems, indeed - and, as I mentioned in my formal
remarks, particularly in the centre of the country -
there are vigorous steps being taken by the coalition
and by the Iraqis to deal with those questions. We are
confident that with the ongoing efforts that are taking
place, this situation will be dealt with, and we are
determined to assist the people of Iraq in creating the
kinds of security conditions that will permit the Iraqi
people to live in political peace and in economic
prosperity. I outlined for the Council a number of the
specific measures that are being taken to bolster Iraqi
security capabilities, and I hope, at our next discussion
of these questions, to be able to report to the Council
even further progress in that regard.

I also mentioned that both President Bush and
Prime Minister Blair appealed to our international
partners to increasingly participate in the multinational
force. I think that it would be yet another way of
contributing constructively to the security difficulties
that Iraq currently faces. Such participation could take
the form of training Iraqi police or military forces.
Thus, there are a number of ways in which the
international community can be further helpful to the
country and the people of Iraq in ameliorating their
security conditions.

Lastly, with respect to security, since there has
been some mention of the role of regional countries,
clearly one of the areas where the regional countries,
particularly the neighbours of Iraq, can be helpful is by
assisting the security forces of Iraq and the coalition in
bringing the borders of Iraq under as tight a control as
possible.
Let me turn briefly to the role of the United
Nations since that subject was very much on the minds
of a number of the delegates who made comments. The
essential or basic role of the United Nations, as far as
we can see it, is laid out in resolutions 1483 (2003) and
1511 (2003). In my remarks today, I emphasized and
repeated what is our well-known position: we believe
that the United Nations has a vital role to play in Iraq
and we would welcome the return of United Nations
international personnel to Iraq to carry out the
mandates that have been ascribed to them in the
pertinent resolutions. We stand ready to discuss with
United Nations officials appropriate security support as
envisioned under resolution 1511 (2003).

I might also take this opportunity to note that, of
course, it is not only United Nations international
personnel that are involved; there are 3,000 to 4,000
national personnel of the United Nations working in
Iraq itself. Now, some of those numbers will be
reduced with the termination of the oil-for-food
programme, but there are still significant numbers of
United Nations personnel working inside Iraq, carrying
out various humanitarian programmes. I think we all
pay tribute to the heroic efforts that those individuals
are making under very difficult circumstances.

There were a number of questions about the
political process, particularly from our colleague from
the Russian Federation. I think in most instances I will
perhaps await the report of the Governing Council to
the Security Council, but I want to mention a couple of
points. Ambassador Lavrov asked whether the electoral
process would take place rapidly enough, referring to
the 15 March 2005 deadline for electing a
constitutional convention and then the 31 December
2005 deadline for electing a new Iraqi Government. I
would point out that those are the outer limits. I would
hesitate to predict that those elections could be
conducted sooner than that, but I would point out that
the agreement stipulates elections and a constitutional
convention no later than those dates.

Secondly, I think the essential point with respect
to the political process is that the question of drafting a
constitution and electing the final Government of Iraq
has now been separated from the question of creating
an internationally recognized transitional Government,
which can happen much sooner as a result of the 15
November agreement. I think that was the important
point: to decouple the question of recognizing a
sovereign transitional Government of Iraq and allowing
some time for the drafting of a constitution and the
holding of elections.

Lastly with respect to that question, I would point
out that in the very example that has been frequently
cited to us in this regard, namely Afghanistan, there
has been quite a period of time between the
establishment of a transitional Afghan authority and the
current process of drafting a constitution with a view to
conducting full-scale national elections. That process
has already taken more than two years and will run into
2004.

The question of inclusiveness in the political
process was raised by a number of delegations. I think

SANA-869

 

that the mechanism that has been described in this
agreement between the coalition and the Governing
Council does not exclusively limit the Iraqi role to
those who are in the Governing Council. There are also
provincial and local councils which will be involved,
and efforts are going to be made to ensure the largest
possible degree of inclusiveness in this process.

I would like to address just one last set of
questions that was put to us by Ambassador Pujalte of
Mexico, in which he asked if there is a mechanism for
coordination with neighbouring countries. I believe the
Governing Council has definitely reached out to all the
neighbouring countries and, as you know, one of the
policies of the coalition has been to encourage the
Governing Council to be as active on the diplomatic
front as possible. We have seen a variety of evidence of
that, including the Governing Council's participation in
Arab League meetings, in meetings here at the United
Nations and at the Madrid Conference.

The Ambassador of Mexico also asked about
criteria for distinguishing between the various kinds of
individuals who might be carrying out some of these
terrorists acts in Iraq, whether they are common
criminals, or former members of the Baath party or
international terrorists. I do not think I can provide an
authoritative or definitive answer on that question.
Most indications we see point to a probable mixture
among all these elements. We also believe that the
more the coalition and the Iraqi security forces are able
to capture, detain and identify former Baathists - one-
time members of the Saddam regime who might be
involved in these activities - the more likely the
prospect of bringing the security situation under
control. But, clearly, this is the kind of question to
which we will be able to develop increasingly better
answers as time goes on and our intelligence efforts
improve.

Those would be a few of my preliminary
responses, and, as I said, we will go back over the
various questions that have been raised today and look
forward to answering them in more detail at a future
date.

