Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC).
7

The achievement of a durable and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East and the centrality of a just
and lasting settlement of the core issue of Palestine in
that regard is the shared objective of the international
community, including this Council. The OIC has a
strong and direct interest in the realization of this
objective. It is manifested in our long-standing
commitment and solidarity with the legitimate cause of
the people of Palestine and all other occupied Arab
territories. The principled position of the OIC is rooted
in its firm conviction in the supremacy of international
law, respect for the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular the principle of equal rights, self-
determination of peoples, and the peaceful resolution
of disputes.

The eleventh OIC summit conference, held in
Dakar, Senegal, on 13 and 14 March 2008, reaffirmed
the centrality of the cause of Al-Quds Al-Sharif for the
whole Islamic Ummah. In the Dakar Declaration, the
Islamic World reaffirmed its solidarity with the heroic
struggle of the Palestinian people to establish their
independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The summit reiterated its call on Israel to fully comply
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, to
enable the establishment of the independent State of
Palestine, to withdraw completely from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, and to
respect Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The leaders proclaimed, once again, the common
position on the overall settlement of the Palestinian
question in accordance with the OIC and United
Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map of the Quartet, within the spirit of the OIC's
constant commitment to the Middle East peace process.

The framework for the Middle East peace process
is well known. It is based essentially on the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, in particular Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), and the principle of land for
peace. It is Israel's pattern of refusal to comply with
these resolutions, which is hindering the achievement
of peace and stability in the region. Unfortunately, it is
the same behaviour of non-fulfilment of its obligations
by Israel that is frustrating the understanding and
objectives of recent important initiatives, at Annapolis
and Paris, to revive the peace process, to end the
occupation and to realize the two-State solution.
This is a tragic state of affairs. The rekindled
hope for peace is being dashed by the incessant

military onslaught by Israel, the Occupying Power,
against the innocent, defenceless and besieged
Palestinian civilian population in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, in particular the Gaza Strip.

The excessive and disproportionate use of force
by Israel, including strikes by warplanes and ground
artillery and targeted extrajudicial killings, among
other grave breaches of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, are a challenge to
the conscience of the world community. We are deeply
grieved and distressed at the heavy civilian casualties
including, women, children and infants, and the trauma
being endured by the Palestinian people in the face of
widespread destruction.

This wanton use of force, collective punishment
and terrorizing of civilian populations by the
Occupying Power has no justification whatsoever. The
OIC shares the international concern over further
deterioration of the already dire humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip caused by the military escalation by
Israel and its continuing illegal siege of the Gaza Strip.

Similarly, illegal Israeli actions against the
civilian population in the West Bank, including the
continuing construction of new settlements and the
wall, only fuel the cycle of violence, undermine the
steps taken by the Palestinian Authority to establish
calm and security, and threaten the prospects of peace.

The international community must respond to this
deliberate policy of escalation of the ground situation
aimed at derailing the fragile peace process. Israel
must be held responsible for its actions and their
dangerous consequences for the civilian population in
the occupied Palestinian territories.

It is high time to ensure respect for the rule of
law by putting an end to the impunity enjoyed by
Israel. The OIC supports the call by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon that incidents in which civilians have
been killed or injured must be investigated, and
accountability must be ensured. The OIC expects
urgent follow-up action in that regard.

The Security Council, in particular, must act in a
credible, timely and effective manner in fulfilment of
its Charter responsibilities to address the threat to
international peace and security. The Council cannot
remain silent and marginalized as this crisis escalates,
undermining international law, the sanctity of civilian
life and the vision of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace enshrined in the Council's own resolutions.

It is unfortunate and unacceptable for the
Security Council to be deadlocked on even
pronouncing itself in response to violence and
deterioration of the situation on ground. The Council
must condemn the killing of innocent civilians and
violence, undertake measures to bring about an
immediate ceasefire and its respect by all parties,
ensure full compliance by Israel, the Occupying Power,
with its obligations under international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, and demand an
immediate end to the siege of the Gaza Strip.

Going beyond these crucial immediate steps, the
Council must play its rightful strategic role in the
pursuit of a comprehensive and durable peace in the
Middle East. It must demonstrate the political will to
ensure full and non-discriminatory implementation of
its own resolutions and to respond effectively to non-
compliance. It must reclaim its position as the focal
point of international efforts, and promote synergy
among different initiatives and the political, security
and humanitarian tracks. The Council must be the
principal guarantor of the understandings and
agreements entered into by the parties, including their
respective obligations under the Road Map, the
implementation of which it must also oversee.

The Security Council should thus make concerted
efforts to bring about a rapid and tangible improvement
of the situation on ground in the occupied territories,
including through the release of prisoners and removal
of all kinds of blockades and restrictions. It must
ensure cessation of all policies and actions by Israel
that seek to change the realities on the ground that
could prejudice a final settlement, including the
integrity and viability of the future Palestinian State.
Israel must halt the construction of the illegal
separation wall, freeze all settlement activity and
dismantle unauthorized settler outposts.

The Council should ensure immediate and
unfettered provision of adequate humanitarian
assistance and of all essential goods and services in the
occupied territories, in addition to enhanced economic,
social and technical support from the international
community, including for building State institutions
and a security apparatus for the Palestinian Authority.
Peace is indivisible. That is why the summit
conference in Dakar, while reiterating the demand that

the situation on the ground in the Gaza Strip be
restored to what existed prior to the events of June
2007, once again stressed the need for national
dialogue among the Palestinians to achieve
reconciliation and restore unity in order to serve the
Palestinian people's higher national interests. We call
on the international community to fully support the
ongoing efforts for intra-Palestinian unity and welcome
the breakthrough achieved in Sana'a.

The key to success in resolving the Arab-Israeli
conflict is in addressing its root cause, namely, the
continuing Israeli occupation of the Arab territories.
That is the leitmotif of the peace process, of which no
aberration or unilateral alteration will be acceptable to
the international community. The OIC calls for Israel's
complete withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and all other
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan.

Comprehensive peace in the Middle East will
remain elusive unless all aspects of the Arab-Israeli
conflict are addressed, including the Syria-Israel and
Lebanon-Israel tracks. We therefore urge progress on
those parallel tracks to reach a just and durable
settlement. Israel must withdraw completely from
Lebanese land and the occupied Syrian Golan and
comply fully with Security Council resolution 497
(1981).

The OIC reaffirms its steadfast support to the
Palestinian people for the realization of their
inalienable right to self-determination and the
establishment of a sovereign, independent and viable
State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and for a just
resolution of the refugee issue in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

It was in keeping with our sincere commitment to
that larger goal that, despite recent setbacks and the
negative developments in the occupied territories, the
OIC summit in Dakar welcomed the revival of the
peace process and called for building on the
momentum in order to reach a final settlement
agreement before the end of 2008. It called also for the
establishment of an independent and viable Palestinian
State. The OIC is ready and willing to work with the
international community and the Security Council to
realize this collective objective.
