Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council has convened today to reaffirm its
primary responsibility in the maintenance of international
peace and security, including through the provisions of
Article 26 of the Charter, which should be aimed first and
foremost at nuclear disarmament, particularly following
the nuclear tests carried out in South Asia in May.

These tests are a cause of deep concern to the entire
international community, not solely because they represent
a real setback for the efforts of the international
community to achieve the universality of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons within a specific
schedule. These explosions should not be considered as
falling outside the non-proliferation regime or its effective
scope, whether the proliferation be vertical or horizontal.

Time has vindicated Egypt's true far-sightedness
when it warned, at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension
Conference, that the Treaty's indefinite extension -
without the achievement of universality through the
accession of all States without exception - would
provide to the non-Parties to the Treaty capable of
producing nuclear weapons outside international control
the conditions conducive to developing and producing
these weapons, regardless of the grave threat they pose to
the security of the non-nuclear-weapon States.

The NPT's historic record clearly shows that the
non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the NPT have
always strongly called for the provision of security
assurances, in accordance with their commitment under
this Treaty not to seek to develop nuclear weapons, to
protect them from the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons. It is incumbent upon us now to evaluate the
effectiveness of the safeguards regime for the non-
nuclear-weapon Parties to the NPT. Despite the Security
Council's adoption of resolutions 255 (1968) and 984

 

(1995), the recent nuclear explosions and their aftermath
require the Security Council to reconsider the entire range
of security assurances and to undertake measures to
maintain the security of the non-nuclear-weapon States
Parties to the Treaty.

Resolution 984 (1995) is inadequate in the face of the
Security Council's Charter responsibility, as it provides
neither the required deterrence to any State that might
contemplate the use of nuclear weapons nor the minimum
protection or guarantees of urgent and comprehensive
assistance to non-nuclear-weapon States subject to nuclear
threat or attack.

It is now more urgent than ever that we establish an
effective regime of active and passive safeguards by which
the Security Council would unequivocally decide that the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons constitutes a threat
to international peace and security in accordance with
Article 39 of the Charter. Such a threat would require the
Security Council's intervention to deter it within the
framework of the collective security regime laid out in
Chapter VII of the Charter. In this respect, the Council's
responsibility for providing urgent and comprehensive
assistance to States subject to such a threat should be clear
and indisputable.

It goes without saying that this intervention by the
Council should in no circumstance be subject to the veto,
since the destructive power of nuclear weapons requires
that the effectiveness and credibility of the Council's
measures be preserved. In other words, the voting rules laid
out in paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter should not
be in force in cases of the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons.

In this context the conclusion of an agreement in
which nuclear Powers are committed not to use their
nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear States which are
parties to the Treaty will serve as a contractual undertaking
and an important dimension for the protection of non-
nuclear States. The General Assembly - which adopted the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in
1968 - the Conference on Disarmament and the
Conference of the Parties to the NPT have a role to play in
maintaining their cooperation, solidarity and continuity of
efforts to achieve this goal.

The nuclear dangers which today threaten humanity
impose a special responsibility on the nuclear-weapon
States far greater than the responsibility they impose on
non-nuclear States. Despite some limited achievements,
which we recognize, the nuclear States still hesitate to
implement their contractual commitments to nuclear
disarmament under article VI of the Treaty. The failure of
the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva to undertake
any objective or significant discussion on nuclear
disarmament in the years since the indefinite extension of
the Treaty reveals that the nuclear States believed the
indefinite extension to be a goal in itself and not a means
to implement what was agreed upon.

The foot-dragging by nuclear-weapon States in
implementing their contractual commitments with regard
to nuclear disarmament is in sharp contrast with the
pressing desire of the international community to
renounce completely these weapons and may prompt
other countries to seek to enjoy the same advantages as
the nuclear-weapon States. The report of the Canberra
Commission is clear in saying that

(spoke in English)

"The proposition that large numbers of nuclear
weapons can be retained in perpetuity and never
used, accidentally or by decision, defies credibility.

"The only complete defence is the
elimination of nuclear weapons and the assurance
that they will never be produced again."

(spoke in Arabic)

In this respect we should be guided by the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice, which
reaffirmed the illegality of the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons.

All this evidence proves just one point: that having
nuclear weapons does not serve any special or public
interest and that they should be renounced completely.

When we talk about the implementation of what was
agreed upon, Egypt feels extreme bitterness over the
hesitation of some States to commit themselves to the
package deal which was the basis for the adoption of the
resolution on the indefinite extension of the Treaty. We
who participated in that Conference recall and are quite
mindful of the fact that that resolution was adopted within
the framework of a package deal which included three
decisions and a resolution. The first decision was on
strengthening the process of the review of the Treaty; the
second was on the principles and objectives of non-
proliferation and nuclear disarmament; and the third was

 

on the extension of the NPT. In addition, there was also an
important resolution regarding the Middle East in which the
international community clearly recognized the danger and
importance of the situation in that region.

It was regrettable to witness in the meetings of the
second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2000
Conference, which was held in Geneva last month, that
some States are trying to evade their commitments under
this package deal and express scepticism on the possibility
of implementing parts of the resolution on the Middle East.

Egypt would like to express its deep concern vis-a-vis
the consequences of the failure to realize the universality of
the NPT, and we reiterate our deep conviction that if Israel
were to remain outside the framework of the Treaty -
despite its ambiguous nuclear policies and its refusal to
place its nuclear installations under the comprehensive
safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) - this would definitely lead to grave
consequences not only for stability and security in the
region but also for international peace and security and,
even more so, for the credibility and continuity of the non-
proliferation regime, at the forefront of which is the NPT.
That credibility will be undermined if the international
community does not act with solidarity and undertake the
necessary measures to face this situation as soon as
possible.

Accordingly, since 1974 Egypt has pursued its goal to
establish a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East. In this
connection, the initiative launched by President Hosni
Mubarak on 18 April 1990 to establish a zone in the
Middle East free from all weapons of mass destruction and
the means of delivering them is an extension of Egypt's
original call to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone. This
call was adopted by consensus by the General Assembly in
1980.

The Arab States, as evidence of their genuine desire
to achieve the goal of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East, have without exception joined the
NPT and placed all their nuclear installations under the
comprehensive safeguards regime of the IAEA. The Arab
States of Africa have joined the Treaty of Pelindaba in
order to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. This
was an initiative to demonstrate their complete confidence
in this regime. However, this did not result in any response
by Israel, which persists in not adhering to the NPT. This
has led to a military imbalance in the Middle East which
threatens international peace and security and which may
undermine the non-proliferation regime.

In this vein, we find that the Madrid Peace
Conference of 1991 resulted in multilateral negotiations
on arms control and regional security in the Middle East.
At Egypt's request, this issue is considered one of the
essential elements to be agreed upon regionally in order
to establish genuine peace and stability in the area, as we
believe that security and peace cannot prevail in any
region where there is a security imbalance or where one
party has the advantage.

Despite the fact that Israel originally called for
negotiations to establish that region, the negotiations
which took place in the Arms Control and Regional
Security Working Group under the umbrella of
multilateral negotiations have been at an impasse for three
years as a result of Israel's persistence in aborting any
attempt to begin serious negotiations to establish this zone
or even to hold consultations on the elimination of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction within the regional framework.

The Security Council's consideration of the
consequences of the nuclear explosions in South Asia,
where a kind of nuclear military balance exists, should
prompt the international community to study the
consequences of the general rules governing the nuclear
disarmament provisions in a number of agreements aimed
at the eventual renunciation of nuclear weapons under
strict international control. Yet this should not distract our
attention from the more dangerous nuclear military
imbalance in the Middle East, which makes it incumbent
on the Council, the General Assembly and all the States
parties to the Treaty to show their responsibility with
regard to that region by persuading Israel to adhere to the
NPT and to place all its nuclear installations under the
comprehensive IAEA safeguards regime and then to work
towards establishing a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East as soon as possible.

Under the current circumstances we would have
expected the Council to single out Israel by name and
urge it to adhere to the Treaty instead of merely
introducing a general reference in paragraph 13 of the
resolution adopted by the Council today. We would have
expected the nuclear-weapon States, especially the
depositary countries, to take the initiative to implement in
earnest the resolution on the Middle East adopted in 1995,
which would be conducive to strengthening regional and
international peace and security.

