Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Tiirk for his
useful briefing.

We welcome this first-ever written report on the
progress of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB). Having a regular written
report is a great help to Council members in assessing
UNPOB's progress, particularly as the Office
approaches the 31 December end date for its mission.

We would have liked to see laid out more clearly
a timetable and benchmarks for UNPOB's exit strategy,
including specific steps UNPOB plans in order to meet
each benchmark on time. We hope that the report
prepared for the Security Council's next discussion on
this subject could be modified and more detailed in this
regard.

The United States Government welcome the
progress that has been made towards the achievement
of stage II of weapons disposal, the containerization of
weapons. The report indicates that 80 per cent of
Bougainville had reached stage II by the end of
February. We congratulate UNPOB for its role in this
excellent achievement, and we applaud the leadership
of the main Bougainville factions for their clear
commitment to the peace process.

We are heartened that the security situation has
greatly improved on the island. The report raises
concerns about the renegade group led by Francis Ona
and his decision to remain outside the peace process.
However, we question how serious a problem this
really represents. We understand that the main
Bougainville factions do not see Ona as a grave threat.
His small band seems to have been marginalized. He
has remained outside the peace process for five years,
and it seems unrealistic to expect this will change any
time soon.

The vast majority of Bougainville's 185,000
people have shown that they are keen to move forward
with steps towards autonomy now. The welcome
completion of a draft Constitution by the Bougainville
Constitutional Commission is clear evidence of this
point. It is important that the international community
not allow perfection to be the enemy of progress. One
small, marginalized band should not be allowed to hold
the entire peace process hostage, delaying UNPOB's
certification of stage II indefinitely.

My delegation wonders at what point UNPOB
will be ready to certify that a sufficient number of
weapons have been containerized. As we know, until
stage II is certified, a constitutional assembly cannot be
established and further steps towards autonomy cannot
be taken, and the longer we wait, the greater the
chances for another break-in and theft of containerized
weapons.

We believe our focus must be on driving this
process forward, not on lowering expectations. The
time to achieve this task is not unlimited. It is
important for all of us to remember that the clock is
ticking. The Peace Monitoring Group is leaving in June
after making an outstanding contribution to the island's
future. UNPOB itself will depart in December.
Progress towards the autonomy of the people of
Bougainville is far too important to be further delayed.

