Mr. Gonzalez Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Paraguay takes this
opportunity to reaffirm our position on the working
methods of the Security Council, as expressed in
statements we have made in discussions on reform of
this organ. Paraguay believes that in addressing the
working methods of the Security Council, the key
issues are transparency, participation, accountability
and efficiency.

Transparency is a feature that should permeate
all levels of deliberation and decision-making in the
Council. One crucial aspect in that regard is the holding
of open meetings of the Council. As the Council works
today, open meetings seem to be the exception and not
the rule - a situation that prevents non-member States
from having any effect on the Council, particularly in
the adoption of its decisions.

The issue of participation is twofold. The first
aspect of participation exclusively involves the States
members of the Council, whereas the second involves
non-members. With regard to the first, we believe that
non-permanent members should participate on an equal
footing with permanent members. The treatment of
certain items as reserved and withheld exlusively for
the permanent members and not to be addressed by
non-permanent members is a discredit to the work of
the multilateral system and restricts the rights of the
latter as members of this organ. With regard to the
second, Paraguay feels that measures should be taken
to allow non-permanent members of the Council
to participate in matters that are addressed by the
permanent members, particularly when they involve
issues that affect those countries or the Organization.
To this end, these subjects should be made known with
sufficient time in advance.

With regard to accountability, it is essential to
recall that, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the members of the Council act on behalf of
all States Members of the United Nations. This implies
a particular and special commitment. Acting on behalf
of everyone requires responsible action and, therefore,
accountability. In this regard, we call for the annual
reports of the Council to the General Assembly to
contain a substantive analysis and not simply a list of
facts or a summary of meetings and decisions adopted.

Finally, let us address the issue of efficiency.
The Council's working methods must ensure the
efficiency and effectiveness of this organ, which will
require improving its capacity to respond in a timely
and appropriate manner to issues that are vital to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Paraguay expresses its firm desire for the selection
of the next Secretary-General to be undertaken through
a transparent, dynamic and inclusive process in which
the Security Council and the General Assembly act in a
coordinated and complementary manner.

In conclusion, we know that some members of
the Council believe that only they have the authority
to choose their working methods. However, at various
points in the past we have seen this organ heed the
concerns of the General Assembly or of non-member
States, and in this regard it has incorporated suggestions,
proposals or specific contributions to improve, correct
or optimize its working methods. That is why we ask
that the outcomes of this debate be taken up by the
members of the Security Council.

