Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honore for her briefing, which, together with the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/162), illuminates
the impressive strides Haiti has made, as well as the
challenges it continues to face.

Today, I should like to focus on three areas that
are essential for the Council, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
international community to consider as we work with
Haitians to build for the future. These are deepening
security and the rule of law, ensuring consistent
political progress, and finding the right scope and size
for the United Nations presence in the country.

First, with respect to security, the United States
welcomes the ongoing expansion and development of
the Haitian National Police (HNP), and in particular
its growing and demonstrated capacity to take on
responsibility for Haiti's security. The relatively stable
security situation reported by the Secretary-General,
including in areas of the country that the MINUSTAH
military component has already vacated, indicates
strong progress on this front. While a larger professional
police force remains necessary if sustained stability
and the rule of law are to take root throughout Haiti,
the Government of Haiti and its partners, including
MINUSTAH, must also prioritize the development
of the judiciary, the corrections system and oversight
mechanisms. Further minimizing the number of
prisoners held in pre-trial detention, for example, would
be a key indicator of the Government's commitment to
strengthening due process in the legal and corrections
systems.

Like strong institutions, a democratic, functioning
political process featuring regular elections is critical
to Haiti's long-term stability. The gains made since
the Council last met on Haiti in August 2013 (see S/PV.7024), culminating in this month's signing of
the El Rancho agreement, are encouraging, and we
commend Haiti's political leaders for making the
difficult but necessary compromises to move the process
forward so that the Haitian people can freely exercise
their right to choose their Government representatives.
The United States urges those same leaders to act
without delay to amend the electoral law, as needed,
and to stand up the provisional Electoral Council so
that Haiti's election adminstrators will have sufficient
time to organize - with the strong support of Haiti's
partners, including MINUSTAH - elections in 2014
that are free, fair, credible and inclusive.

The United States also encourages Special
Representative Honore to continue to facilitate dialogue
among political leaders and with civil society to ensure
that disagreements about the electoral process or other
areas of civic life are resolved swiftly so that they do
not threaten Haiti's hard-won gains.

In the light of Haiti's progress, the United States
welcomes the Secretary-General's presentation of
possible alternate designs for the United Nations
presence in Haiti beyond 2016, and we agree with
the Secretary-General that an accelerated transition
to a new United Nations configuration in Haiti could
be considered if conditions on the ground permit.
The United States urges the Secretary-General to
conduct, as soon as possible, a strategic assessment
that evaluates whether conditions, including expected
election support requirements, warrant accelerating the
transition to a new Mission structure or continuing the
conditions of the base drawdown under way. We urge
the Secretary-General to report his findings in his next
report on Haiti to the Security Council.

The Council must continue to ensure that
MINUSTAH's mandate, structure and size remain
appropriate to Haiti's evolving circumstances. In that
regard, we hope that the United Nations can provide
more detailed reporting on the declining role of
MINUSTAH forces in ensuring security in Haiti. For
example, specific information over time on the number
and type of incidents in which the HNP requested
and received operational support, also organized by
location and the type and number of MINUSTAH
forces that responded, would be useful to determining
where the HNP stands in progressing towards being
able to assume full responsibility for Haiti's security.
More information about the frequency of, and need
for, independent MINUSTAH patrols, particularly by
military elements, also would be useful to the Council's
deliberations. We expect that such patrols would already
be in steady decline, given the expansion of the HNP
and the fact that they need to test their capacity while
robust MINUSTAH operational support and advice
remain available. At a minimum, those patrols should
be conducted with the HNP, not independent of them.

Finally, the United States expresses its deep
gratitude to two Brazilians. First, we thank Lieutenant
General Pujol for his dedicated service as Force
Commander. Secondly, we congratulate Lieutenant
General Jaborandy on his appointment. The dedicated
men and women of MINUSTAH have the utmost
admiration and support of the United States as they
work together with the Haitian people to build a more
peaceful and prosperous future in Haiti.

