Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation at present in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has again spiked quite seriously.
There is a need for immediate steps to de-escalate
the situation, to attenuate the fervency of the rhetoric
on both sides and to promote rejection of all forms
of violence. We hope that this will be helped by
renewed diplomatic efforts, including the Secretary-
General's negotiations in the region and the imminent
ministerial-level meeting of the Quartet in Vienna,
which will be held on our initiative.

An exit from the current cycle of violence would be
helped by a visit to Israel and Palestine by the special
representatives of Quartet. The Russian initiative
to organize a Security Council mission to the region
remains relevant. The Security Council must more
clearly focus on resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis. However, fundamental change will not occur
unless, in parallel with efforts to overcome the present
crisis, a renewal of political prospects for resolving
final-status-related issues and for implementing the
two-State concept based on a universally recognized
international legal framework, namely, the Quartet
road map, the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative, does not also take place.

The strategic task remains the same: resuming
direct negotiations between Israel and Palestinians in
order to address the gamut of final- status-related issues.

We are convinced that only the creation ofa Palestinian
State living in peace side by side with Israel within
internationally recognized borders can guarantee
Israel's security and the fulfilment of the aspirations of
the Palestinian people. Progress towards that objective
requires a rejection of settlement activities. The most
important issue on the agenda is the problem of restoring
Palestinian unity on the platform of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization. Neither violence nor terrorism
stands to bring us any closer to a lasting settlement of
the Palestinian issue on the aforementioned terms.

We believe that only through combined efforts of
the international community will we be able to stabilize
the situation in the countries of the Middle East. The
situation requires prompt decisions. Chaos and anarchy,
resulting to a large extent from foreign interference in
regional affairs, is being actively exploited by terrorist
organizations, first and foremost by the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), whose evil
plans are being implemented in Iraq and Syria, and
are slowly coming to light in other countries, with the
aim of creating a transborder Islamic caliphate. It is
regrettable that this international army has been joined
by fighters from many States around the world. The
situation has simply become intolerable.

That is why, pursuant to a request by the authorities
of the Syrian Arab Republic for military assistance in
its fight against ISIL and other terrorist groups active
in Syrian territory, the Russian Federation initiated, on
30 September 2015, air and missile strikes on terrorist
formations and facilities in the country. Collective
approaches are needed to eliminate the terrorist threat
on the basis of norms and principles of international law
and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

To solve this pressing issue, we should lay aside
non-essential political differences. The Russian
Federation has circulated a draft Security Council
resolution whose main objective is to close our ranks
and work to achieve the aforementioned objectives.
We urge all to come and join constructive work on our
proposal. The main thing in this regard is to review the
near-sighted policy of rejecting a joint fight against
terrorism as reflected, in particular, in a rejection of
a joint determination of targets, including facilities
whose destruction would weaken the military capacity
ofISIL and other terrorist organizations.

I would remind the Council that the Russian
initiative on Syria is two-pronged. It proposed closing
our ranks for counter-terrorist purposes and, in
parallel, the launching of a political process on the
basis of Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). In
that context, we back the efforts of Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura and urge
the opposition to form a representative delegation to
participate in thematic intra-Syria working groups.

A lasting settlement of the situation in Syria is
the objective of our contacts forged at the very highest
levels with representatives of Saudi Arabia, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Jordan, Iran and
other key players. The lack of alternatives to a political
settlement was confirmed during the meeting between
Russian President Vladimir Putin and the President of
the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Bashar Al-Assad, on
20 October in Moscow. In that context, we continue to
stress that Russia stands ready to make its contribution
not only to fighting terrorism, but also to promoting
the political process, so that Syria can become a
country where security and stability and the peaceful
coexistence of different religious groups prevails.

We attach great importance to the upcoming
meeting in Vienna on 23 October of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, the United
States, Saudi Arabia and Turkey. We hope that this
format will in the near future be joined by other States,
in particular Egypt, Jordan, Iran, Qatar and the United
Arab Emirates.

We backed Special Envoy for Yemen Ahmed's
efforts aimed at moving the situation into the political
field and the launch of the intra-Yemeni dialogue for
a lasting settlement. We call for an immediate end to
violence, in the light of the tragic humanitarian situation
in the country. It is our shared obligation to put an end
to the long-standing suffering of the Yemeni people.

The well-known events of 2011 have led to the
collapse and splintering of Libya and turned the country
into another hotbed of tension in the Middle East and
North Africa. The situation is being exploited by ISIL,
which has announced its presence through horrific
vandalism. The waves of instability are travelling
southward through the Sahara and the Sahel, as well as
northward across the Mediterranean and into Europe.
The situation in Libya and other hotspots in the region
have given rise to a migration crisis that is tragic in
scale.

We urge all sides in Libya to act responsibly and
form a Government of national unity and join together
to fight terrorism. The Russian Federation, mindful of
its historical links with the States of the Middle East,
will continue to make a robust contribution to restoring
stability, normal life and sustainable development to
the region.

