The President (interpretation from Russian): I
would now like to make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Russian Federation.

The successful conclusion of the London and Paris
Conferences, where we witnessed the signing by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia of the Peace Agreement, began a culminating
breakthrough in the peaceful settlement of the problem of
the territory of the former Yugoslavia, which was begun
with the Dayton Agreement. As a result of the steadfast
efforts of the United Nations and the Security Council,
the Contact Group, the European Union, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and international mediators, it
was possible to convert the compromises reached in the
course of the negotiating process into a tangible language
of international agreements.

Clearly, no diplomatic efforts at that time or today
can replace the sincere efforts of the parties themselves to
resolve existing differences through negotiations and
through their rejection of solutions of force. Today the
Security Council has adopted a draft resolution which
makes it possible to begin the practical implementation of
the Peace Agreement. Thereby, the parties receive the
support of the international community in their aspirations
for peace. But at the same time they must now bear the
full responsibility before the international community for
compliance with the commitments that they have entered
into.

 

It is of prime significance that, in full accordance with
the Dayton Agreement, the resolution deals with the
forthcoming operation in all its civilian and military
aspects. The Security Council has welcomed the readiness
of Member States to respond to the requests of the parties
and to render assistance to them in implementing the
military aspects of the Peace Agreement through the
deployment of the multinational force.

I would like to emphasize the most important feature
of the resolution, which is that the Member States providing
forces are authorized by the resolution to do only what the
Bosnian sides themselves have agreed to, together with the
leaders of the Balkan States that signed the Agreement.
Thus, should force be used against violators of the
Agreement, the resolution clearly makes those sides'
agreement conditional on an equal, impartial approach to all
sides in the Bosnian conflict. Russia will consistently
defend the need to avoid unjustified use of force in the
course of the operation.

It is important that under the resolution the Security
Council of the United Nations specifically - and no other
Council - must in a year take a decision regarding the
need to extend the military component of the operation.
This provision, together with the regular reports to the
Council on the conduct of the entire operation, ensures
reliable political control by the Security Council and clearly
indicates that the massive military operation under way in
Bosnia in no way means a replacement of the United
Nations by individual or regional organizations.

This will not be the first time that Russia has taken
part in a military peace-keeping operation, side by side with
Western partners. In the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) Russian soldiers and officers serve together
with French and Belgian soldiers. In the multinational Force
they will serve together with Americans on the basis of
mutually agreed procedures.

Genuine peace can be achieved in Bosnia only on the
basis of political decisions. A particular role here must be
played by the political structure for the implementation
machinery, headed by the High Representative, machinery
elaborated and agreed at the London Conference and
"sanctified" by the resolution. We welcome the designation
of Mr. Carl Bildt to this post, and we will support him in
his activities.

The resolution defines the need to strengthen regional
stability and control over armaments. It clearly follows
from the resolution that all sides must ensure that the arms

 

reserves of the Bosnian side should be reduced, rather
than built up. The Security Council has confirmed that the
achievement of a just and lasting peace is impossible
without securing internationally recognized human rights,
including the right of refugees and displaced persons
freely to return. Another necessity is all parties'
cooperation with the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, in accordance with Security Council decisions
and the commitments entered into by the parties
themselves in Dayton.

Of primary importance in creating an appropriate
climate in relations between the parties are the immediate
measures to strengthen and build confidence, particularly
in areas where ethnic groups live side by side. The most
complex situation arises in Sarajevo, where there is an
urgent need to prevent a massive exodus of the Serbian
population. We expect immediate implementation of the
tasks entrusted to the Secretary-General by the resolution
to ensure a speedy redeployment to Sarajevo of additional
contingents of the United Nations Civilian Police.

An important stage in the process of a peaceful
settlement was the adoption by the Council of its
resolution 1022 (1995) on the suspension of sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, without
which we would not have had the successes of Dayton,
London and Paris. At the same time, events are
developing so fast that today the situation in that regard
cannot be a source of satisfaction; the signing of the
Peace Agreement has resulted in a qualitatively new
situation. We are in favour of deciding on an immediate
repeal of sanctions against Belgrade and against the Serb
Republic, which undoubtedly would foster the successful
implementation of the Agreements that have been
reached. Similarly, the time is ripe for reaching an
agreement on the return of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council.

The signing in Paris of the Peace Agreement does
not complete the peace process; it only opens its most
responsible phase. In the course of the year to come
multilateral meetings on Bosnia will continue, aimed at
further promoting the peace process. The Russian
invitation to hold a meeting in Moscow still stands.
Today I must dwell specifically on the role of the
United Nations and of its "blue helmets", who bore the
greatest burden of peace-keeping in the former
Yugoslavia at the most difficult time. Risking their lives,
and often paying with their lives, the "blue helmets" have

 

saved the defenceless and have delivered clothing,
foodstuffs and medicine to the homeless, the hungry and
the sick. The mandate of the "blue helmets" was not
impeccable. But this mandate was approved not by them,
the "blue helmets", but by us. The greatest of pressures
were brought to bear on the United Nations and its "blue
helmets" to force them to exceed their authority. It is not
surprising that in the light of all this, the United Nations
peace-keepers made mistakes in the course of an
unprecedented operation designed to deal with humanitarian
problems in the midst of a war and, in such circumstances,
only someone who did nothing would have made no
mistakes.

Let us not forget that United Nations peace-keepers
were in Bosnia precisely when all Bosnian sides were
counting on a military solution and were not prepared for
peace. It is universally recognized that if the United Nations
had not gone into Bosnia, the number of victims in the
conflict would have been immeasurably greater.

The unique peace-keeping experience the United
Nations has accumulated at great cost in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be preserved. One of the most important
lessons of the crisis is the need for joint action on the part
of all parties concerned, including those in the United
Nations and its Security Council. Such joint action is
extremely important in the present phase if we are to
overcome the consequences of the conflict, restore peace to
the region and ensure that it shall enjoy democratic rights
and freedoms.

We are convinced that without the active role of the
United Nations, it would be difficult to solve these
problems. Russia will from this time on work consistently
towards strengthening peace and stability in the Balkans
and other regions to preserve and develop the potential of
the Charter of the United Nations in the area of peace-
keeping and security.

I now resume my function as President of the Council.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I

invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
