Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin, Mr. President, by conveying to you the sincere
apologies of his Excellency Mr. Sidiki Kaba, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, who, because of a last-
minute scheduling conflict, was not able to participate,
as he had planned to do.

Our delegation would like to thank the United
States of America for having requested this meeting
and the Ethiopian presidency for having facilitated its
convening. We also thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, whose

very important statement has shed light on our work.
Our debate today is a topical one, given recent
events, which constantly remind us of the pressing
nature of the terrorist threat and the growing risk of
seeing non-State actors acquire nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons. Indeed, the rapid progress
of science and technology, as well as globalization,
facilitated by ongoing developments in the world of
business, all are new factors that non-State actors could
use to help them acquire weapons of mass destruction.
This is demonstrated on the one hand by the use of
chemical weapons in the Middle East and in Asia and,
on the other, by issues related to cybersecurity, whose
consequences could be even more serious if they were
to be attacks aimed at critical infrastructure such as
nuclear power plants.

Meanwhile, on the Korean peninsula, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is methodically pursuing
its military nuclear programme in deliberate violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, with the
objective of developing nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery, which seriously undermines the
non-proliferation regime and exacerbates tension in the
region and beyond.

All of this clearly reflects the need to rigorously
implement the commitments contained in the various
relevant resolutions. Indeed, in the absence of genuine
political will to put a term to it, the risk of proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction will continue to grow.

In the light of all these factors, my country
condemned as firmly as is possible the launch, for the
second time in less than a month, of a North Korean
ballistic missile, which flew over the Japanese island of
Hokkaido before crashing into the Pacific. The launch
took place less than a week after the adoption by the
Council of resolution 2375 (2017), which condemned
North Korea's sixth nuclear test, on 3 September.

The targeted measures rightly adopted in the
previous resolution of the Council against North Korea
must, in order to meet the challenge posed by the North
Korean ballistic and nuclear programme, be part of a
comprehensive political strategy that would prompt the
parties to engage, with the assistance ofthe international
community, in a frank dialogue whose ultimate

objective would be respect by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea of its international obligations and
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

That is why my country, in reiterating our
commitment to a peaceful and diplomatic settlement of
the Korean crisis, calls once again for a resumption of
a direct dialogue between the parties so as to create
conditions conducive to peaceful coexistence between
the countries and the peoples of the region.

Right now, the challenge to be met by all of
us - States, international organizations and the
business world - remains that of implementing the
current sanctions measures, because failure to do so
provides the North Korean authorities with sizable
loopholes that they are systematically using to mobilize
the resources necessary to pursue their illegal and
dangerous programme.

We must work to strengthen the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) by making
it universal and by promoting respect for previously
reached commitments. Senegal remains convinced
that working for the universalization of the NPT and
the implementation of its relevant provisions, as well
as acting in a resolute manner to secure the entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
constitute decisive steps on the path towards general
and complete disarmament.

Furthermore, it is now more necessary than ever to
draw up a detailed inventory of all sources of weapons
of mass destruction throughout the world so as to ensure
that they are systematically placed under safeguards
or destroyed. Significant measures have already been
taken to this end, but a great deal remains to be done.

In an interdependent world, where our interests
are linked together, strengthening cooperation in the
areas of border controls, the monitoring of financial
flows and Internet activity and legal assistance is
more necessary than ever if we are to develop an
aggressive preventive strategy designed to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction do not fall into the wrong
hands. Of necessity, that involves not just sharing
experience but working to synergize the efforts of all
the stakeholders concerned.

Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are
interrelated and dialectically linked goals. It is therefore
meaningless to speak of general and complete
disarmament when, in addition to the nuclear-weapon
States that already exist, there are others that are
circumventing the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons so as to acquire such weapons. Our
work on nuclear non-proliferation must therefore must
go hand in hand with the effective implementation of
disarmament, according to a verifiable and irreversible
timetable. To that end, our initiatives should focus on
the multilateral framework that the United Nations
system offers.

