The Secretary-General: This open debate on
cross-border issues in West Africa comes at a critical
moment for peace and security in the subregion. We
see some signs of hope and encouragement. Yet we
also see very worrying developments.

As the current crisis in Togo reminds us, much
remains to be done to establish peaceful, constitutional
transfers of power as the region's norm. I urge all sides
in Togo to exercise maximum restraint while efforts
continue to find a peaceful solution to this crisis.

The progress report that you now have before you
reflects my serious concern about the perpetuation and
indeed proliferation of conflict situations in West
Africa. It details the efforts of the international
community, including the United Nations Office for
West Africa, to adopt a regional approach to peace
efforts in the region and to implement the
recommendations made last year by this Council.

The region continues to face grave security
challenges. Border areas are especially volatile, with
populations at risk from illicit trafficking of drugs and
weapons, recruitment of child soldiers, banditry, rape
and environmental damage. The lack of funding for
reform of the security sector, and in particular for the
reintegration and rehabilitation phases of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR)
programmes, is disturbing, given their central
importance.

Youth unemployment levels are shockingly high,
and the accompanying desperation carries a real risk of
political and social unrest in countries emerging from
crisis, and even in those that are currently stable. And
there is very rapid population growth in the region's
urban areas, where job opportunities are limited and
social services are far from adequate.

The report highlights areas that require
immediate and longer-term action. Its
recommendations are directed at a wide range of
players, including the Security Council and other parts
of the United Nations system, bilateral and multilateral
development partners, the secretariat of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
individual Member States and civil society
organizations. They place particular emphasis on good
governance. And they call on all of us to practice
prevention and to address root causes of conflict at an
earlier stage.

I welcome the recent efforts of ECOWAS and its
members to address the complex challenges facing the
region. There is growing cooperation among security
agencies to crack down on cross-border crime. Efforts
are also under way to protect children, to stem small-
arms flows and to involve civil society groups more
regularly in peacebuilding and other initiatives.

I am also pleased at the constructive partnership
that has emerged among ECOWAS, the United Nations
system and other relevant actors. My Special
Representative for West Africa, Mr. Ould-Abdallah -
who is here with us today and his team will
continue to do their part. I assure the Council of my
own strong commitment, and I look forward to
working closely with it, on an urgent basis, to improve
lives throughout this region where improvement is so
badly needed.

