Mr. Gambari: Before starting my formal
statement to the Council, I am most happy to be able to
report the safe release earlier today of the two German
international non-governmental organization (NGO)
staff members who were kidnapped on 22 June in
Nyala. They were picked up by an African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) helicopter in Kabkabiya at 11.30 Sudan
time. Unfortunately, one staff member of the
international NGO Samaritan's Purse kidnapped south
of Nyala on 18 May remains in captivity. It is my hope
that ongoing efforts to secure that individual's safe
release will soon bear fruit.

I am honoured to be present here again today to
brief the Council on the progress and challenges in
UNAMID mandate implementation and in the
2

achievement of the benchmarks presented to the
Council in the Secretary-General's report of
16 November 2009 (S/2009/592). I would like to recall
in this regard that the UNAMID strategic work plan
defined benchmarks for the following four priority
areas: a comprehensive political solution; a secure and
stable environment; enhanced rule of law, governance
and human rights; and a stabilized humanitarian
situation.

In regard to the search for a comprehensive
political solution, it is gratifying to note that this
meeting is taking place immediately following the
conclusion of two key meetings of international
stakeholders engaged on the Sudan, including Darfur.
The first was the first meeting of the Sudan

Consultative Forum, which includes the E-6 - the
special envoys of the five permanent members of the
Security Council plus the European Union - all of

Sudan's neighbours, the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations, held in Khartoum
on 17 July 2010. The second relevant meeting is the
just-concluded 237th meeting of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, held in Kampala, Uganda,
in the margins of the ongoing African Union summit.
Both meetings reiterated the need to ensure effective
coordination of international engagement on the Sudan
in a holistic manner, which I believe remains the
objective of the Security Council.

As we speak here today, negotiations between the
Government of the Sudan and the Liberation and
Justice Movement are making steady progress in Doha
under the facilitation of the AU-United Nations
Mediator and the Government of Qatar. Furthermore,
on 12 July, the second civil society forum was
launched in Doha, attended by approximately 320
representatives of civil society organizations, internally
displaced persons (IDPs), native administration and
experts from all three Darfurian states. This has
provided an important boost to the peace process.
Although significant progress has been made, the
continued absence of two of the major armed
movements - the Justice and Equality Movement
(IBM) and the Sudan Liberation Movement (SLM) of
Abdul Wahid - is deeply unfortunate. Joint Chief
Mediator Djibril Bassole' is in contact with the
leadership of both movements to urge them to join the
10-46528
process and to discuss possible modalities for their
participation.

In accordance with its mandate and in line with
the requests contained in the communiques adopted at
the first meeting of the Sudan Consultative Forum on
17 July, as well as by the AU Peace and Security
Council on 21 July, UNAMID has continued to support
the efforts of Joint Chief Mediator Bassole, including
in the ongoing negotiations in Doha. Furthermore,
UNAMID is currently finalizing its preparations for a
process of internal political dialogue in Darfur to
support and complement the Doha peace negotiations.

To this end, UNAMID will be engaging in a
proactive manner with IDPs, refugees and the broader
civil society, as well as with the newly elected
legislators in the three States of the region, some 86
Darfurian members of the National Assembly in
Khartoum, and Darfurians who have been appointed as
ministers by President Al-Bashir, including those
holding the key Ministries of Finance and Justice. The
purpose of the dialogue will be to focus in detail on
issues that affect a wide cross-section of Darfurians,
and in particular on those issues that are the root
causes of the Darfur conflict, including political and
economic marginalization, land, justice and
reconciliation. In this way, the dialogue will both
inform and ensure that Darfurians buy in on the final
contents of the peace agreements to be signed between
the Government and armed movements.

In a similar positive development, UNAMID is
nearing full deployment, with 88 per cent of military
personnel, 70 per cent of police, including 13 out of 19
formed police units, and 75 per cent of civilian
personnel in theatre. I would also like to highlight
progress in the issuance of visas for UNAMID staff
over the past couple of months. Notably, I would like
to mention the arrival in the Mission of the new Force
Chief of Staff, whose visa was granted by the
Government recently after an unfortunate long delay.
While this is encouraging, it is important for the
Government of the Sudan to sustain this progress so
that the rapid processing of visas for all nationalities is
the norm rather than the exception.

Over time, the deployment of UNAMID has
allowed the Mission to shift its focus towards
harnessing its assets in pursuit of an effective
implementation of its mandate and an early
achievement of the benchmarks identified in November
10-46528
2009. With a view to contributing to a stable and
secure environment throughout Darfur, UNAMID has
been able to expand its patrols both in number and
range throughout the three Darfurian states, currently
conducting on average more than 100 patrols per day,
and to intensify its efforts in community policing.
Furthermore, UNAMID's substantive sections have
been providing support in the areas of human rights,
the rule of law, local reconciliation and others through
capacity-building, facilitation and advocacy with local
institutions, political office holders, newly elected
officials, native administration, civil society,
community representatives and other stakeholders in
Darfur so as to advance in the priority area of rule of
law, governance and human rights in accordance with
UNAMID's strategic work plan. However, challenges
remain on the path to lasting peace and stabilization in
Darfur.

When I last addressed the Council on 14 June
(see SPV.6338), I drew attention to the dire security
situation in Darfur and the serious operational
challenges facing UNAMID. It is with greater concern
that I must report again today that, despite considerable
efforts on the part of UNAMID, the security situation
in Darfur has not greatly improved. Fighting between
Government forces and the Justice and Equality
Movement continues to be a major source of insecurity
in several parts of Darfur. Government forces have
been able to dislodge JEM. from its traditional
stronghold in Jebel Moon, Western Darfur, and the
Adula mountains in Southern Darfur, and to disrupt its
main supply routes to El Fasher and Nyala. Of late,
JEM. convoys have been sighted even in Northern
Darfur moving northwards, possibly towards the
Libyan border.

The resumption of fighting was accompanied by
JEM. withdrawal from the peace talks in Doha. The
movement is yet to re-engage in the talks, despite
efforts to bring it back into the negotiating process. In
an apparent attempt to take advantage of the
Government's military engagement with JEM, the
Abdul Wahid faction of the Sudan Liberation Army
attacked Sudanese Armed Forces positions in the Jebel
Marra area around 29 May. This has led to sporadic
fighting between the two parties, civilian casualties and
the displacement of several communities.

In addition to these very troubling incidences of
military confrontation, intense intercommunal fighting
has been occurring between the Misseriya and Nawaiba
3
communities - both semi-nomadic Arab tribes -
which have been fighting over fertile land along the
border of Southern and Western Darfur. This fighting
resulted in an estimated 126 casualties in May and 133
in June, compared to a total of 134 fatalities
attributable to tribal clashes throughout the whole of
2009. On 29 June, a peace agreement was reached
between the two tribes, according to which the parties
agreed to disarm their militia, pay compensation to the
families of the victims, and establish a joint security
task force to restore law and order. As I address the
Council today, it is fortunate that this agreement is
largely holding, and fighting between the groups has
largely ceased.

It is with grave concern that I have to report a
spike in criminal acts and attacks against United
Nations and humanitarian personnel. As highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report before the Council
(S/2010/382), during the previous year UNAMID
peacekeepers were attacked on 28 occasions, resulting
in 10 dead and 26 injured. We have also seen two
instances of kidnapping of UNAMID personnel and six
cases involving humanitarian colleagues. In the most
recent event, on 21 June armed men, apparently in
military fatigues, attacked UNAMID troops guarding a
construction site in Nertiti, Western Darfur. In the
exchange of fire, three UNAMID military personnel
from Rwanda and three attackers lost their lives. I
would like to take this opportunity to underscore once
again that such attacks against peacekeepers constitute
war crimes, and we call on the Government of the
Sudan to arrest, try and bring the perpetrators to
justice.

As we speak here today, my colleagues in Darfur
are working to urgently solve yet another incident
involving UNAMID-related staff. Yesterday, 26 July, a
UNAMID helicopter went missing while transporting
members of the Security Arrangements Committee of
the Liberation and Justice Movement to locations in
Southern Darfur. Fortunately, earlier today we were
able to establish contact with three of the four crew
members of the helicopter, as well as one international
staff member, who are reported to be in safety at a
location controlled by the Government of the Sudan
south of Menawashi. However, the captain of the
helicopter remains unaccounted for. UNAMID is
working with the Government and the movements in
the area to try to locate the missing pilot.
In response to the attacks on UNAMID
uniformed personnel, I have met with high-level
Government officials, including the Vice-President, the
new Minister for Foreign Affairs and the new State
Minister for Humanitarian Affairs, to reiterate earlier
demands that the Government conduct thorough and
timely investigations into the attacks and prosecute
those involved. Following my meetings, on 26 July
UNAMID received a note verbale from the
Government of the Sudan in which it condemned the
attacks on UNAMID troops, informed the Mission that
it would establish an emergency reaction force, and
enhance cooperation and exchange of information with
UNAMID to mitigate remaining security risks. While
this represents a welcome move by the Government on
this matter, the support of Member States, including
this Council, is kindly sought to impress upon the
Government the need to urgently address the continued
impunity of such attacks.

It is also in this context that, on 5 July, I
convened a retreat of the Special Envoys to the Sudan
in an attempt to enhance the shared understanding of
the achievements and challenges at hand. I was very
much encouraged by the high participation, as a total
of 19 delegations came to El Fasher, including my
colleagues Joint Chief Mediator Bassole and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios, to
review the general situation on the ground and discuss
the security situation in Darfur, the peace talks in Doha
and facilitation of early recovery. The meeting
expressed full support for the work of the Joint Chief
Mediator and UNAMID and underscored the need for
full humanitarian access and freedom of movement.

The participants also observed the link between
security and sustainable voluntary returns, and
highlighted the need to achieve lasting peace through a
comprehensive negotiated settlement. This was also
endorsed in the respective communiques of the Sudan
Consultative Forum of 17 July and the meeting of the
African Union Peace and Security Council in Kampala
on 21 July.

Regrettably, progress achieved over the past year
towards a stabilized humanitarian situation has been
slowed in recent weeks as access to the affected
population in areas of recent fighting - in particular to
large areas of eastern Jebel Marra and in Southern
Darfur - has remained problematic. I am particularly
concerned at the situation in eastern Jebel Marra,
where, following the onset of the fighting between the

Government of the Sudan and SLA-Abdul Wahid in
February, all NGOs operating in the area closed down
their activities and relocated their international staff.
Consequently, the provision of humanitarian assistance
has ceased, creating gaps in the delivery of vital
services and livelihoods. I therefore reiterate my call
on all parties to respect UNAMID's mandate and to
allow UNAMID and the humanitarian community full
access to the affected population.

UNAMID continues to engage in negotiations
with Sudanese Government authorities at all levels and
with the armed movements to ensure wider access,
including for humanitarian assessment missions to
deep field locations. Recognizing the apparent
disconnect in the transmission of directives on access
and communication between Khartoum and Sudanese
Government officials on the ground, we have also
encouraged the Government to improve information
flow throughout the chain of command.

Similarly, during the recent meeting of the High-
level Committee on humanitarian issues on 19 July in
Khartoum - comprising the Government, the United
Nations country team, donors, NGOs and UNAMID -
the participants decided to establish a subcommittee on
safety and security, which is to meet on a weekly basis
to address the enhanced security of the humanitarian
community and restrictions of movement.

In this context, I also wish to report that
UNAMID continues to engage with the Government at
all levels to develop a shared understanding of the
modalities for the unrestricted use of UNAMID's
tactical helicopters in full support of its core mandate
activities. As outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General, these assets are yet to become fully
operational, beyond training and crew activities, as a
result of Government restrictions. Accordingly,
practical results on the ground since the acquisition of
these assets have not yet been registered. It is my firm
belief that, in order to maximize the added value of the
Mission for Darfur, and for the Sudan in general, it is
essential that the Sudanese authorities show increased
commitment in practical terms to providing an
enabling environment for UNAMID. I ask the Council
for its support in this regard.

Economic marginalization and competition over
scarce resources are among the major root causes of
the Darfur conflict. The United Nations country team
and UNAMID have an important role to play in
10-46528

assisting the Government and local authorities to take
advantage of existing pockets of peace, where these
exist, to stimulate livelihood opportunities. To this end,
UNAMID will continue in its efforts to provide a
secure environment conducive to voluntary and
sustainable returns and to support the United Nations
country team's efforts through the use of our assets
within our capacities. However, our efforts cannot
supplant the primary responsibility of the Government
for recovery and development. Indeed, the Government
could go a long way towards addressing the root causes
of the conflict in Darfur if it committed firmly to
increasing public investment in the region.

As I address the Council today, the Darfur peace
process is at a critical juncture. It is perhaps fortunate
that, at precisely the same time as the security situation
in Darfur has deteriorated, prospects for a negotiated
settlement appear to have slightly improved. Civil
society is now more involved in peace talks than ever,
the Government of the Sudan is demonstrating renewed
commitment to the negotiations in Doha, and the
leaders of most armed opposition movements are either
participating in or are expressing an interest in
participating in those talks. A comprehensive
agreement, combined with improvements in the
security situation, is vitally important if UNAMID is to
implement its core mandates of protecting civilians and
facilitating humanitarian assistance. But to be fully
effective, UNAMID could also benefit from more
support in the form of utility helicopters, a transport
company, an aerial surveillance unit, and the lifting of
restrictions that prevent the Mission from carrying out
its mandate effectively and responding swiftly to
emergencies.

As I hope I have been able to convey in my
briefing, progress in achieving the UNAMID
benchmarks has been varied. I should like to highlight
that significant progress in this regard is contingent not
only on the full deployment and capacities of the
Mission, but also on the willingness of all parties in
Darfur to facilitate and contribute to UNAMID
mandate implementation and to effectively work
towards lasting peace and stabilization.

In this vein, I should like to conclude my remarks
by calling on the Council to continue to support
dedicated and focused efforts to address the root causes
of the Darfur conflict in a holistic manner through the
activities of UNAMID and of my colleague Djibril
Bassole and in collaboration with the AU High-level

Implementation Panel. I also wish to request the
Council to renew its appeal to the Justice and Equality
Movement to rejoin and to SLA-Abdul Wahid to
urgently engage in the Doha peace talks in the interests
of peace in Darfur, without preconditions, in order to
conclude and finalize a peace agreement before the end
of the current year. We suspect that, if this is not
achieved, the attention of the international community
will likely shift to the issue of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and the referendum between
Northern and Southern Sudan.
Finally, I urge the Council to lend its weight and
appeal to all parties to demonstrate restraint and to
refrain from actions that are likely to further
complicate an already complicated security situation
and the search for durable peace in Darfur.

