Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I join previous speakers in
thanking Foreign Secretary William Hague for
convening this meeting.

I warmly greet President Thabo Mbeki and
express Brazil's appreciation for the invaluable work
he and his fellow eminent members have been doing in
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel for
Sudan. We are encouraged by the progress he reported
to the Council today. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and for the increasing
attention he has dedicated to Sudanese issues. I extend
my greetings to His Excellency Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, and
Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement, for their remarks.

I also take this opportunity to express my
Government's support to the work of President
Benjamin Mkapa and fellow members of the United
Nations panel tasked with monitoring the referendums.
Our appreciation also goes to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Haile Menkerios, Joint Special
Representative for Darfur Ibrahim Gambari, and Joint
Chief Mediator Djibrill Bassole.

The Sudan represents today one of the major
challenges posed to the Security Council. Peace in the
Sudan is essential to the future of the African
continent. While it should be careful not to interfere in
delicate matters upon which only the Sudanese people
can decide, the international community has important
obligations to fulfil in its support for the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). As the final
phase of the CPA approaches, it is indeed desirable that
the Security Council keep the situation in the Sudan
high on its agenda.

Our primary concern is peace and stability, while
taking special care to ensure that a complex situation is
not made worse. Our primary common goal should be
to see to it that the referendums are conducted in a
cooperative atmosphere and in a timely, free and fair
manner. Of central importance in building a
prosperous, democratic and peaceful future for the
Sudanese people is the implementation of the outcome

of the referendums. In this regard, we welcome the
beginning of voter registration yesterday for the
Southern Sudan referendum.

We support a strong message from the Council to
the CPA parties to the effect that all Sudanese,
including southerners in the North and northerners in
the South, have their rights respected and their safety
guaranteed, regardless of the outcome of the
referendums. To this end, the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan has to be provided with adequate means to
effectively contribute to maintaining security in its area
of operation, in particular in Abyei.

We are confident that the Sudanese leadership
will rise to the challenge of overcoming mistrust and
reach the compromises that will promote reconciliation
and further strengthen social and economic ties among
themselves and with their immediate neighbours. It is
in the interest of all to nurture such ties. In this context,
I welcome the conclusion of negotiations on a
framework for resolving outstanding issues relating to
the implementation of the CPA and the agreement
between the parties to resume high-level negotiations
on 22 November, under the auspices of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel.

Regardless of the results of the referendums, the
mediation support and peacebuilding efforts of the
United Nations will have to be undertaken in
cooperation with the Sudanese authorities. Possible
tasks in this regard will include the monitoring of
wealth-sharing arrangements, institutional development
and development assistance. A comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy should, in due course, be
discussed with the Sudanese. When the time comes, the
Security Council may wish to consider the role that the
Peacebuilding Commission can play in this regard.

In order to achieve durable peace, the efforts of
the international community and the Sudanese people
should also aim at overcoming poverty, fostering social
and economic development, and respecting human
rights. The referendums, if conducted in a transparent
manner, as is our expectation, should pave the way for
the normalization of economic relations between
members of the international community and the
Sudanese.

Brazil wishes to contribute to the economic and
institutional development of the Sudan, which will lead
to improvements in the living standards of all
Sudanese. Our bilateral trade has grown significantly
over the past few years. In agriculture and biofuels,
new partnerships are being forged. In March this year,
a mission of the Brazilian Agency for Cooperation
visited Khartoum and identified possible areas for
future work. We are also currently engaged in a
dialogue with the Sudan on ways to provide electoral
assistance.

The North-South civil war was, in part, a result of
long-standing power and wealth imbalances in the
Sudan. Such imbalances also contributed to the conflict
in Darfur. In this context, the Government of the
Sudan's New Strategy for Darfur is a positive step, as it
seeks to deal with the root causes of the conflict and
involve local communities in the peace process. Efforts
currently undertaken in the context of the Doha peace
process to address those issues deserve our continued
support.

In Darfur, there are also urgent short-term
measures that need to be taken by all parties. Military
operations are not legitimate tools for increasing
bargaining power at the negotiating table, however. All
groups should join the Doha peace process, as there is
no military solution to the conflict. Of particular
concern is the persisting arms flow to Darfur. All
Member States should refrain from selling or in any
way facilitating the provision of weapons that could be
used in the conflict.

Other measures are necessary, including securing
humanitarian access to those in need and refraining
from hindering the mobility of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. The parties
are, of course, expected to cooperate with and respect
the presence of the United Nations on the ground.

The Sudan is a vast and bountiful country, but its
ancient peoples face serious historical imbalances with
roots in its colonial past and in centuries of economic
and social exclusion. Brazil has enthusiastically
assumed its share of responsibility in joining forces
with Africans to consolidate an increasingly prosperous
and democratic continent, and we look forward to a
future of durable peace and sustained economic
development for all the Sudanese people.

