Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We appreciate the
convening of today's debate. Similarly, we would like
to join colleagues in condemning the terrorist attack in
Burkina Faso that claimed 29 lives.

My delegation would like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, for his detailed briefing. We would
like to reaffirm that peacekeeping is one of the most
effective tools available to the United Nations in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts.

Let me from the outset state that we continue to
call for the prioritization of mediation, negotiations and
dialogue to resolve ongoing conflicts. In that regard,
we want to welcome the positive developments in the
Sudan and South Sudan; considering the rapprochement
between Eritrea and Ethiopia, stability in the Horn
of Africa is improving. We also welcome the recent
signing of a peace agreement in Mozambique. We
further welcome the entry into force of the African
Continental Free Trade Area agreement in May as
contributing to sustainable development in Africa and,
ultimately, the maintenance of peace and security.
Those are positive steps towards the implementation of
the African Union's (AU) Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and will also
contribute to the implementation of the joint United
Nations-AU framework for enhancing partnership in
peace and security.

However, as long as peacekeeping is needed on
the continent, South Africa remains committed to
ensuring that it becomes more effective so as to be able
to contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. We therefore welcome the continued
discussions on improving or rather reforming United
Nations peacekeeping, to make it adaptable to the
changing nature of security threats. Some of the
important issues that must be addressed in the context
of peacekeeping reform are the process of developing
mandates, better cooperation among the relevant
stakeholders, sufficient funding, the role of regional
organizations, improving gender balance and stepping
up training and capacity-building.

South Africa appreciates the efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at strengthening cooperation
on peacekeeping among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs). Cooperation
among those three important stakeholders should take
place during the planning phase of defining mandates,
the implementation phase and the assessment phase,
when possible exit strategies are considered, consistent
with resolution 1353 (2001).

Furthermore, such cooperation should extend
beyond discussing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. It should also include the provision of
support to peacekeepers, such as for their safety and
security, training, conduct and discipline, equipment
and national caveats, among others. In that regard,
South Africa reiterates its support for the Action
for Peacekeeping (A4P) Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations, adopted
in 2018, which provides an opportunity for the United
Nations and its Member States to undertake future
peacekeeping operations that are fit for purpose.

We also acknowledge the increased and vital role
that regional organizations play in peacemaking and
peacekeeping efforts. In that regard, there is always
room for strengthening cooperation between the
Security Council and regional organizations such as the
African Union. We appreciate the considered efforts of
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix to work
closely with AU Commissioner for Peace and Security
Chergui on peace endeavours in various African
conflicts, as well as of Secretary-General Guterres and
AU Commission Chairperson Faki Mahamat in going
forward in those areas.

We reiterate our call for sustainable and predictable
funding for AU-led peace-support operations authorized
by the Security Council, as recognized in many Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2378 (2017).
South Africa would like to recall that in resolution
2378 (2017), the Council undertook to give further
consideration to practical steps that can be taken and
the conditions necessary to establish the mechanism
through which African Union-led peace-support
operations authorized by the Security Council and
under the Council's authority under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations could be partly financed
through United Nations assessed contributions.

That will further be on a case-by-case basis, in
compliance with the relevant agreed-upon standards
and mechanisms, so as to ensure strategic and financial
oversight and accountability, taking into account the
work carried out by the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission in that regard. We await
a decision by the Council to address that pertinent issue.

We also recognize the vast experience and
expertise of TCCs and PCCs in Africa in the field of
peacekeeping and their potential in strengthening the
capacity of peacekeeping operations. We therefore
urge the Secretariat, in consultation with African
countries with resident training centres, to enhance
cooperation in the field of training, capacity-building,
experience-sharing and best practices.

We further welcome the operationalization of
regional initiatives such as the African Standby Force,
which is based on standby arrangements with the AU's
five subregions to allow it to respond swiftly to any crisis
on the continent. We also call for increased funding
and support for regional and national peacekeeping
centres and for ensuring that the peacekeeping
curriculum is streamlined and periodically reviewed
for accelerated performance.

South Africa is proud to be among the countries
with a high number of women deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping missions and will continue
to work diligently towards increasing the number of
women police officers and military troops, in line with
resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2382 (2017). We commend
the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
which is aimed at the realization of those goals.
Furthermore, we recognize the important work done
by the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
over the past number of years. We should continue to
utilize that mechanism for the discussion of thematic
and related issues, in a timely and detailed manner.

We further urge all Member States to work in
unison to ensure that the General Assembly Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
continues to discharge its mandate and provide support
to the Council's work. The impasse that led to the C-34
not adopting its annual report at its substantive session,
held in March, should not be repeated.

South Africa is fully committed to the zero-
tolerance policy against sexual exploitation and abuse
in peacekeeping operations. We have developed and
institutionalized a predeployment sexual exploitation
and abuse induction programme to raise the level of
consciousness, efficiency and command accountability
for our deployed troops. Furthermore, South Africa
provides additional in-mission training interventions
on a continuous basis to reinvigorate troops' situational
awareness and mission readiness on command-and-
control matters, leisure time utilization, the protection
of civilians, human rights standards and sexual
exploitation and abuse. From June 2018, we also
introduced practical steps to fight the scourge of sexual
exploitation and abuse by introducing DNA tests to all
deployed South African troops. That has proven to be
a best practice.

With regard to transitions, the Security Council
must ensure at the outset that peacekeeping mandates
are realistic, tailored and flexible in order for missions
to achieve their desired outcomes in terms of keeping
the peace and creating an enabling environment for
peacebuilding processes. We reaffirm our support for
strengthened cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council, in particular
when the Council is considering the review and
drawdown of peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to those
peacekeepers who have paid the ultimate price while
executing the mandate of the Council.

