Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Since this is the first
time I am taking the floor in the Security Council this
month, allow me, Sir, to extend my congratulations to
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of April. Similar sentiments are
also extended to your predecessor for the excellent
manner in which he guided the work of the Council last
month. Let me also associate myself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Namibia, like other countries, shares the global
and legitimate concern about the fear that non-State
actors could acquire weapons of mass destruction and
related technology. In today's world characterized by
international terrorism, it is increasingly obvious that
possession of these weapons is a threat to international
peace and security. So long as such weapons exist, some
will always aspire to have them. The only effective means
of preventing non-State actors from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, is the
complete elimination of such weapons and the
assurance that they will never be produced again.

The problem is that those States that have such
weapons are unwilling to eliminate them. Instead, they
are preoccupied with preventing others from acquiring
them. At the same time, they continue to modernize
their weapons, in the name of national security. If all
States parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention had faithfully
implemented their commitments under those
instruments, the world would have been rid of the most
dangerous weapons and technology that exist. The
security that all of us are entitled to can be achieved
only by our meeting our commitments assumed under
those multilateral treaties and related agreements.

The non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is a universal concern, requiring the
engagement of the whole membership of the United
Nations. Under the current international law regime,
which recognizes the sovereignty of States, the affected
States should take part in the negotiation of any
measure that seeks to impose obligations over and
above existing treaties and conventions. That is why
my delegation believes that the issue we are discussing
here today belongs in the General Assembly, whose
membership will be required by the terms of this draft
resolution to at least align their national laws with it if
these measures are to be implemented effectively.

Namibia recognizes that there are gaps in the
existing multilateral legal instruments which need to be
filled. However, such gaps can be filled by multilateral
negotiated instruments and should not be filled by
Council measures, which are unbalanced and selective,
as they represent only the views of those who drafted
them.

We hope that the measures envisaged in the draft
resolution will be temporary, to be replaced later on by
a legal negotiated instrument.

