Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Permit me, Sir, to congratulate you and your delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May and on having organized
this debate. I also thank Ambassadors Jurica, Urbina
and Verbeke for their briefings on the work of the
Committees over which they preside. In particular, my
delegation would like to recognize the work done and
the dedication shown by Ambassador Verbeke as
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, related to Al-Qaida,
and to wish him every success in his new duties as
Special Coordinator of the Secretary-General for
Lebanon.

Effective compliance with the mandates of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) requires constant
review of their working methods. Panama welcomes
the important work done by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, because it has
developed methodologies for deleting names of
individuals, entities and deceased persons from the
consolidated list. As Ambassador Verbeke indicated,
that will produce a dynamic list that reflects the
evolution of the threat to international peace and
security represented by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The
views of interested Member States in that regard must
be duly heard and heeded.

My delegation also highlights the significant
progress made in recent months by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee in assessing the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) in each of the countries
Members of the Organization. The approval and
referral of more than 167 Preliminary Implementation
Assessments (PIAs) and the ongoing review of the
study on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) are the Committee's main
mechanisms for defining the current state of
implementation.

It is worth pointing out that those documents are
only practical tools for defining priorities and
improving compliance with obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). The Committee should bear in
mind that the PIAs and the study are living documents
of a technical nature, adapted to the particular
circumstances of a country, a region or a point in time.
We must also strive for greater cooperation and
coordination with the special Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, established by the General
Assembly in 2005.

Panama attaches great importance to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. With
the adoption of resolution 1810 (2008), the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) moves from merely monitoring the
implementation of obligations to promoting best
practices that facilitate the attainment of the objectives
of its mandate and promoting dialogue among the
Committee, States and other organizations or entities,
in particular those having a broad and representative
membership. We highlight, inter alia, the important
work of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force,
established among States of the Caribbean basin, which
supports countries in the region in implementing
legislative and financial measures to prevent the
financing of terrorism.

In order to more effectively accomplish the tasks
entrusted to them, these subsidiary bodies must
strengthen cooperation among themselves and with the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, always
mindful that the diversity of approaches among the
Committees represents a truly integrated response to
the scourge of terrorism. All cooperation must focus on
common areas under those bodies' respective
mandates. Any proposal to merge the mandates and
structures of these Committees must be examined very
carefully, given the different objectives and nature of
each mandate.

Finally, we should recall that we must always
wage the fight against terrorism mindful of the
importance of protecting and promoting human rights
and respect for the rule of law.

