Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia has always considered the United
Nations humanitarian programme in Iraq an
opportunity to satisfy the basic needs of that country's
civilian population with the assistance of the
international community. Given the continuing trade
embargo, it is the only way to solve Iraq's
humanitarian problems. We hope that, as the relevant
Security Council resolutions are implemented with the
full cooperation of the Iraqi side, a prospect will open
for the suspension and then the lifting of sanctions.
That moment has not yet come, and therefore the
uninterrupted delivery of major humanitarian goods to
Iraq is of vital importance.

The resolution just adopted by the Security
Council provides for the introduction of a number of
adjustments in the way in which humanitarian
deliveries to Iraq are carried out, pertaining to the
Goods Review List and procedures for its application.
Russia was unable to support the draft resolution and
thus abstained from voting. We note that, in the course
of the consultations that preceded today's vote, the
draft resolution's text became more balanced. In
particular, it now includes an important observation
that, in future, review of the List will cover not only
additions of new elements but also deletions of entries.
We hope that the Office of the Iraq Programme, the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, taking the experience of resolution 1409
(2002) fully into account, will make recommendations
with regard to corrections to the List and procedures
with a view to facilitating the flow of humanitarian
goods to Iraq.

It is of key importance that the resolution
provides for the possible lifting of sanctions. However,
the consultations that were held did not enable us to
take various views - including proposals by the
Russian Federation - fully into account. We believe
that some wording in the List imposes too many
restrictions and affects not only dual-use goods but also
goods that are exclusively civilian in nature. We should
especially like to recall that we believe the limitations
on trucking and transport vehicles to be unjustifiably
harsh, as such vehicles are necessary for ensuring
normal civilian transportation.

In that context, we are seriously concerned at
information that came recently to the Secretariat that,
in the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 661 (1990) concerning the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait, virtually all requests made
by Iraq for truck transport and for trucking equipment
have been blocked. This trend has a very negative
impact on the possibility of full distribution of
humanitarian goods to the Iraqi population and is
further complicating an already difficult situation in
such important sectors of the economy as water supply,
electric power, irrigation and oil refining.

However, we decided not to object to the
adoption of the resolution, based on the fact that the
Goods Review List is not a denial list, but only one
that provides for the adoption in the sanctions
Committee of well-considered and valid - and this
includes from the humanitarian standpoint - decisions
on specific contracts. We trust that in future all the
members of the sanctions Committee will take a
constructive approach in considering such requests.
Our View of future work and of the improvement of the
Goods Review List and procedures will, to a significant
extent, depend on the effectiveness of the activities of
the sanctions Committees in approving humanitarian
and other types of civilian goods.

