Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open debate on how peacekeeping
operations can better contribute to sustaining peace. I
would also like to thank all the briefers for their very
informative and enlightening statements.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are one
of the most important political innovations we have in
our collective efforts to maintain international peace
and security. After decades of sweat and toil, the Blue
Helmets have earned their place as a symbol of hope
and freedom for millions of people across the globe.
But as United Nations peacekeeping missions operate
in increasingly complex and challenging environments,
many have been questioning whether they are fit for
purpose in effectively responding to that growing
complexity. It is in that context that the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(HIPPO) (see S/2015/446) highlighted the critical
importance of conflict prevention and sustaining peace,
while calling for four essential shifts in the design and
delivery of United Nations peace operations - namely,
the primacy of politics, responsive operations, stronger
partnerships and field-focused and people-centred
approaches. The Republic of Korea, as co-Chair of the
Group of Friends of HIPPO, together with Norway and
Ethiopia, is pleased to note that the recent debate on
peace-operations reform continues to focus around the
HIPPO recommendations.

I sincerely hope that the ongoing peace-operations
reforms, alongside those of the Organization's
management and development systems, will help peace
operations deliver more effectively on the ground. They
should focus not just on restructuring the Secretariat
but, more importantly, on changing the culture, so
that the United Nations system can overcome its silo
problem and work more coherently and strategically.
The reforms" ultimate objective should be to focus
on strengthening synergy among the three pillars of
the United Nations, substantively and operationally.
Against that backdrop, I would like to highlight the
following four points.

First, the Secretariat and Member States must
significantly increase their investment in analysis,
strategy and planning, which will lead to more
effective design of missions. We welcome, in that
regard, the Council's increased efforts to establish
sequenced and prioritized mandates. In particular, the
Secretariat should improve the analysis it provides so
that the Council can fully understand the dynamics on
the ground when establishing and adjusting mission
mandates. In close consultations with missions, the
United Nations country teams and other relevant
actors, it should undertake regular joint assessments
with host Governments, focusing on every dimension
of the three United Nations pillars, in order to build and
sustain peace.

Secondly, based on that enhanced analysis, a
comprehensive political strategy or road map should
be developed that takes into account the entire
peace continuum from prevention and peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and long-term development.
Peacekeeping missions' mandates should be designed to
be part of that broader political strategy, laying out the
bigger picture of the engagement of the United Nations
in building and sustaining peace. That comprehensive
strategy would also serve as a basis for the Council and
the Secretariat to decide on a clear division of labour
between the mission, the country team and the other
relevant entities, from the mission's launch until its
drawdown. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
is well placed to provide qualitative advice to the
Council in following up on the implementation of the
peacebuilding component of the comprehensive strategy.

In that regard, it will be particularly important to
ensure that the Council determines the extent of the
peacebuilding activities that should be carried out
by the peacekeeping mission as part of its mandate,
which should take into consideration the calls we
are hearing for less ambitious and more manageable
mandates. Member States should also deliberate
on ways to better secure programmatic funding for
peacebuilding activities - including scaled-up support
for the Peacebuilding Fund - whether those activities
are implemented by missions, country teams or other
relevant partners.

Thirdly, the comprehensive strategy for sustaining
peace should reflect on strategic partnerships with
relevant stakeholders outside the United Nations. Given
the complex, multifaceted nature of today's challenges,
and the continued insufficient funding and capacity of
the United Nations, sustainable peace and development
simply cannot be achieved by the United Nations
system alone. With regard to peacekeeping missions,
strategic partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union (AU),
should be mapped out. Such organizations have a far
better understanding of the situation on the ground, as
well as greater political influence. In that regard, we
look forward to the high-level debate on peacekeeping
to be convened in the Council by Ethiopia next month
with a view to exploring ways for the United Nations to

enhance its support ofAU-ledpeace-support operations.
Where peacebuilding activities are concerned, the
comprehensive strategy should address the issue of
strengthening partnerships not only with regional and
subregional organizations but also with international
financial institutions, such as the World Bank and the
African Development Bank, as well as civil society and
the private sector.

The PBC could also play an increasingly important
role in building partnerships with relevant stakeholders.
It can use its unique convening power to mobilize
relevant actors. In fact, as Chair of the PBC for this
year, I have been focusing on strengthening the PBC's
partnerships with relevant stakeholders. A case in
point is the agreement between the Commission and
the World Bank to hold a dialogue on an annual basis,
which was announced in June on the occasion of the
PBC's annual session. Later this year, in my capacity
as PBC Chair, I also plan to visit the African Union and
the African Development Bank with interested PBC
members in order to explore ways to further strengthen
our partnerships.

Fourthly, it is critically important to respect a host
Government's national ownership and its priorities for
building and sustaining peace at every stage ofa mission,
from planning to implementation and transition. At
the same time, missions should work closely with host
Governments and other relevant entities, including the
PBC, to strengthen the capacity of State institutions
with a long-term vision. In that regard, it should be
noted that the mandates of peacekeeping operations
often overlook the social mechanisms and informal
institutions that are readily available to serve as a
basis for sustainable peace, such as the role that can be
played by elders and religious and traditional leaders,
as well as by traditional justice systems. Efforts to
sustain peace should build on such existing institutions
and on the resilience and reconciliation processes of
local communities.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the
Republic of Korea is committed to strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping operations with a view to
contributing to sustaining peace.

