The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic for the kind words he addressed to me and to
my country.

The next speaker is the Senior Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of
Barbados, The Honourable Dame Billie Miller, to
whom I give the floor.

Dame Billie Miller (Barbados): The Caribbean
Community deeply appreciates this opportunity to
address the Security Council on the situation in Haiti.

One year ago, we were all gravely concerned about
deteriorating political and security conditions in Haiti.
With Haitian agreement and international support, the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) launched a
diplomatic initiative. Underpinned by the principles of
democracy and good governance enshrined in the
CARICOM. Charter of Civil Society and the Inter-
American Democratic Charter, the CARICOM
initiative sought the following: to stabilize the political
situation through a power-sharing arrangement; to
avoid the repetition of the traditional Haitian practice
of getting rid of the President by any means in order to
resolve political conflict; and to help the Haitians find
a pacific and political solution that would preserve the
rule of law and constitutional continuity.

Unfortunately, on 29 February 2004, the quick fix
was in and principles thrown out. CARICOM. heads of
Government were disappointed by the reluctance of the
Security Council to take immediate action in response
to appeals for assistance from the Government of Haiti
and to the request of the Caribbean Community. The
elected President departed the country in circumstances
still to be elucidated. An interim administration was
subsequently put in place using some of the elements
outlined in the CARICOM. Prior Action Plan.

In the view of CARICOM, the fundamental tenets
of democratic practice and behaviour have been
compromised. We cannot vacillate on principles since
they are essential to our security as small States.
Continuing violations of the principles laid down in the
CARICOM. Charter of Civil Society have made it
impossible for the Community to receive representatives
of Haiti in its councils. The interim administration
must be held to internationally recognized standards
with regard to respect for fundamental civil and
political rights, due process and the rule of law.
Allegations of egregious abuses at the hands of the
police must be fully investigated. The prolonged
detention of Fanmi Lavalas leaders and activists
without trial or charges can only be construed as
arbitrary detention on the basis of political affiliation.
Such persons should be released forthwith. That
serious breach of fundamental rights is exacerbated by
a persistent failure to prosecute the rebels for their
criminal activity. Such an approach also hinders the
establishment of an enabling political climate, without
which peace and security cannot be sustained.

CARICOM. remains committed to the people of
Haiti. To that end, the Caribbean Community has put in
place mechanisms such as an assistance programme, of
which electoral support is a key component.

Now, one year later, the deep concerns of the

regional and international communities have increased.
We have been hearing references to that this morning.
The inability of the interim administration to promote
stability and political inclusiveness has been a
stumbling block to progress. Insecurity and volatility
persist. The lot of ordinary Haitians has not improved.
The traditional clamour for a change in government is
once again being raised. Hopelessness and joblessness
combine with the easy availability of weapons to fill
the ranks of the illegally armed groups that proliferate
on both sides of the divide. Their activities, whether
criminal or political in intent, subvert the authority of
the State and must be curtailed. Instability has an
adverse effect on Haiti's neighbours as well, including
the Bahamas and Jamaica, as it spurs illegal
immigration and, increasingly, trafficking in small
arms and drugs.
The November report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAN) (S/2004/908) rightly underlines the need
for increasing the capacity of the Stabilization Mission
to implement disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. That must be a priority. Those who
foment and engage in violence must be prosecuted.

The disbursement of donor pledges is urgently
required to help alleviate the desperate social and
economic situation. It is to be hoped that the recent
release of funds by the World Bank will be replicated
by other major donors. Coherence and mutual
reinforcement among the humanitarian, security,
political and developmental strategies must also be
ensured. Those strategies must also be informed by the
harsh realities of the Haitian environment.

Free and fair elections are pivotal to returning to
constitutional rule. They are, however, only a critical
way station on the long and arduous road to stability,
recovery and a viable democracy. It is clear that the
daunting prerequisites for credible elections later this
year are not yet entirely within grasp. Our joint and
urgent task must be to help create a secure environment
that permits open campaigning; to help ensure a
political climate that facilitates the participation of all
political groups that reject violence, including those
currently outside the political and electoral process;
and to help establish an effective administrative
structure to conduct proper elections.

As the difficulties of the transition process
mount, the concepts of national dialogue and bridge-
building are being increasingly advocated from within
Haiti. Domestic attempts to make the idea of bringing
together a representative cross-section of Haitian
society a reality must be encouraged. In that
connection, the Caribbean Community commends the
exploratory efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

Defusing tensions, identifying common and
unifying interests, promoting inclusiveness and
building confidence are urgently required societal
building blocks. They could facilitate a way forward on
sensitive and contentious issues such as security,
disarmament, development paths and priorities and
elections. But ultimately, responsibility for creating
favourable conditions for reconciliation, recovery and
stability lies with the citizens of Haiti themselves.

The building of democracy in Haiti and the
creation of a stable political, social and economic order
require the long-term commitment of the Haitians and
their partners in the international community. The
Caribbean Community salutes the key role played by
Latin American States within MINUSTAH, as well as
by the other contributing States. It also recognizes the
supportive efforts of the Organization of American
States. As circumstances permit, CARICOM. makes its
own contribution to the stabilization and rebuilding
efforts of the United Nations in the sister country of
Haiti.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the Assistant Secretary of State for Western
Hemisphere Affairs of the United States, His
Excellency Mr. Roger Noriega, to whom I give the
floor.


