Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to express its gratitude to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for their
respective briefings on the political and humanitarian
aspects of the crisis in Syria.

Echoing other delegations that spoke earlier, my
delegation remains deeply concerned by the most recent
developments in Syria, which are characterized as a
fresh resurgence of fighting in the south-west part of
the country, particularly in Dar'a, which has triggered
the flight of some 45,000 people towards the Jordanian
border. We particularly deplore the challenging of the
de-escalation status enjoyed by the city of Dar'a, which
had allowed that city to benefit from relative calm.
It is now seeing an intensification of armed clashes
and bombings carried out by the various parties to
the conflict.

My country further deplores the fact that it remains
impossible for the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies to gain access to areas previously under siege
owing to the number of administrative obstacles and
red tape. C6te d'Ivoire wishes once again to call for the
protection of civilians and for respect for international
humanitarian law so as to ensure safe, sustained and
unhindered access of humanitarian assistance, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions, in
particular resolutions 2165 (2014), which established
the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the
cross-border delivery of humanitarian aid in Syria, and
2401 (2018), which called for an immediate cessation
of the fighting and the establishment of a lasting
humanitarian pause in Syria.

My country welcomes the independent review of
United Nations humanitarian cross-border operations,
as called for by resolution 2393 (2017), whose
recommendations will allow us to further strengthen
the Monitoring Mechanism by taking account of the
views of the parties concerned, in particular the Syrian
authorities, neighbouring countries and United Nations
humanitarian agencies.
As the military escalation on the ground continues
unabated, my delegation reiterates the importance of
a political solution aimed at restoring stability and
finding a lasting solution to the humanitarian crisis
in Syria. C6te d'Ivoire remains convinced that the
military solution cannot be a solution to the Syrian
conflict and calls once again on the parties involved to
implement a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire and
resume political negotiations for a lasting peace under
the auspices of the United Nations.

In that context, my country welcomes the various
initiatives aimed at relaunching the intra-Syrian
dialogue process and encourages the Special Envoy,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to undertake, within the
framework of the Geneva process, all steps necessary
to establish a constitutional committee for Syria, as
agreed at the Sochi conference.

My delegation welcomes also the consultations that

took place on the establishment of such a constitutional
committee on 18 and 19 June in Geneva, led by the
Special Envoy and bringing together representatives of
the Astana guarantor States on the Syrian negotiations.
It welcomes the holding on 25 June in Geneva of a
meeting between the Special Envoy of the United
Nations for Syria and the representatives of the Small
Group of the Global coalition, composed of France,
Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America, where views were
exchanged on constitutional progress and ongoing
diplomatic efforts, in order to create synergy between
international players.

My delegation also welcomes the efforts to
harmonize the positions of the members of the Small
Group and the Astana group within the framework
of the establishment of the constitutional committee,
which is charged with drafting a new constitution for
Syria, and welcomes also the decision of the Syrian
Government to transmit a list of 50 persons to be
considered for membership in the committee.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire continues to call on
the Syrian parties to choose the path of dialogue and
to move the political process forward in order to find
a lasting end to the crisis, in line with the road map
enshrined in resolution 2254 (2015). It calls on the
international community to support the mediation and
good-offices efforts ofthe Secretary-General and of his
Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, which are aimed
at bringing the Syrian parties back to the negotiating
table in the framework of a constructive dialogue with a
view to finding a lasting solution to the crisis in Syria.
