The President: Under the item on its agenda, the
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Republic of
Kiribati for admission to membership in the United Nations,
which appears in document S/ 1999/715.

In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee
recommends to the Council that it should have recourse to
the provision of the last paragraph of rule 60 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure in order to present
its recommendation to the General Assembly at its
fifty-third session. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that
the Council wishes to waive the time limits set forth in the
penultimate paragraph of rule 60.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In paragraph 4 of the report, the Committee
recommends to the Security Council the adoption of a draft
resolution on the application of the Republic of Kiribati for
admission to membership in the United Nations. I should
like to congratulate the Committee on its decision to
recommend that the Republic of Kiribati be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

In accordance with the understanding reached in prior
consultations among members of the Council, I propose that
the Council adopt the draft resolution contained in
paragraph 4 of the report of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members without a vote.

As I see no objection, it is so decided.

I therefore declare that the draft resolution contained
in paragraph 4 of the report of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members (S/1999/715) has been
adopted without a vote as resolution 1248 (1999).

I shall immediately convey the decision of the
Security Council recommending the admission of the
Republic of Kiribati to membership in the United Nations
to the Secretary-General for transmittal to the General
Assembly in accordance with rule 60 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

I shall now make a statement, in my capacity as
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the
members of the Council:

"The Security Council has decided to
recommend to the General Assembly that the
Republic of Kiribati be admitted as a Member of the
United Nations.

"On behalf of the members of the Security
Council, I wish to extend my congratulations to the
Republic of Kiribati on this historic occasion. The
Council notes with great satisfaction the Republic of
Kiribati's solemn commitment to uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to fulfil all the obligations contained
therein. We look forward to the day in the near
future when the Republic of Kiribati will join us as
a Member of the United Nations, and to working
closely with its representatives."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/ 18.

The Council has thus concluded its consideration of
the matter before it.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.
