Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, for her briefing. I also welcome the Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste and his participation in today's
meeting. I have listened carefully to his statement.

We take pleasure in seeing that the overall
situation in Timor-Leste remains stable. The State
capacity has gradually strengthened. There are
significant opportunities for economic and social
development. The national police of Timor-Leste are
playing an increasingly important role in maintaining
public order. The Government and people of Timor-
Leste have made inspiring progress in the construction
of their country. I also commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
for their efforts to that end.

At the same time, however, Timor-Leste still
faces many challenges on the road to consolidating
peace, maintaining peace and stability and achieving
sustainable development. China is of the view that the
international community should now focus its support
to Timor-Leste in the following three areas.

First, we encourage all parties in Timor-Leste to
base their actions on the country's long-term interest,
to maintain unity and settle their differences through
political dialogue. We commend President Ramos-
Horta for continuing to promote the national consensus
dialogue. We hope that the presidential and
parliamentary elections to be held next year will
proceed smoothly.

Secondly, China welcomes the strategic
development plan proposed by the Government of
Timor-Leste. Poverty, lack of economic development,
insufficient institutional capacity, youth unemployment
and the shortage of human resources are the major
factors affecting peacebuilding and social stability in
Timor-Leste. We support the Government in its efforts
to continue to strengthen institutional capacity-
building, focus its energy on development, expand its
input in infrastructure, education and health and further
improve the lives ofits people.

Thirdly, ultimately achieving lasting security and
stability in Timor-Leste depends on the strength of the
people and Government of Timor-Leste. China
supports Timor-Leste in strengthening capacity-
building in the police and judicial sectors, with the
assistance of the United Nations and relevant countries,
and in taking over full responsibility for the
maintenance of public order at an early date.

We support the extension of UNMIT for one year
on the basis of the current mandate. We have taken
note of the plan for the future restructuring and
downsizing of UNMIT mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report (S/20ll/32). We support the full
transfer of responsibilities to the Government of
Timor-Leste when conditions are right. Meanwhile, the
plan to downsize should fully take into account next
year's elections and, under the prerequisite of
maintaining security and stability, ensure a smooth
transition. The international community should
continue to provide further assistance to Timor-Leste in
order to consolidate peace and promote development.

Once UNMIT's mandate expires, on the basis of
respect for the will of the people and Government of
Timor-Leste, the United Nations can remain in Timor-
Leste as a friendly partner. China is ready to continue
to provide as much support and assistance to Timor-
Leste as we can.

