The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Indonesia, Japan,
Malaysia, Mexico, Mozambique, New Zealand, Papua
New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea and Thailand in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. de Ruyt (Belgium), Mr. Fonseca
(Brazil), Mr. Serbini (Brunei Darussalam),
Mr. Ouch Borith (Cambodia), Mr. Naidu (Fiji),
Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia), Mr. Akasaka (Japan),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Navarrete (Mexico),
Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Donigi (Papua New Guinea),
Mr. Manalo (Philippines), Mr. Seixas da Costa
(Portugal), Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea), and Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand) took the
seats reservedfor them at the Side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, Special Representative and Transitional
Administrator for East Timor.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Vieira de Mello to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mari Alkatiri,
Chief Minister of the Second Transitional Government
of East Timor.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Alkatiri to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mats Karlsson,
Vice President, External Affairs and United Nations
Affairs, of the World Bank.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Karlsson to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Zephirin Diabre,
Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Diabre to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, document
S/2001/983 and Corr.1.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to a letter dated 30 October 2001 from
the Secretary-General transmitting a letter from the
Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of East Timor,
photocopies of which are before the members of the
Council.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing from Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative and Transitional Administrator for East
Timor. I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira de Mello.


