Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): We wish first of all to thank you, Sir, for your
skilful leadership of the Security Council during the month
of June, and to extend to you our best wishes on your
forthcoming departure from New York.

The Russian Federation is gravely concerned at the
complex situation in Liberia and at the continued fratricidal
armed conflict in that country, which has brought countless
disasters to the civilian population and which threatens the
further destabilization of the situation in the region.

We note with regret that half a year has passed since
the signing of the Accra agreement, but that the Liberian
parties have not implemented its basic provisions, thus
demonstrating a clear disregard for the future of their own
country and for the aspirations of its people, a people
essentially held hostage to the personal political ambitions
of the leaders of the armed factions.

The continuing political impasse in the Liberian
peace process is a sign of a dangerous trend, also
manifested in the Liberian parties' disregard of the
numerous appeals issued by the international community
and by African regional organizations, in particular the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and of the vigorous efforts aimed at the
speedy achievement of a political settlement in that
country. The situation that has now arisen there compels
us to think seriously about the need for a thorough review
of the role of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) along the lines of the proposals set
forth in the Secretary-General's report.

The Russian delegation voted in favour of the
resolution that has just been adopted, doing so on the
basis of the premise that it is adequate to deal with the
real state of affairs in Liberia. It contains an extremely
clear-cut and stem warning to the effect that the Security
Council will not permit any further disregard of its
decisions and does not intend to renew the mandate of
UNOMIL if the concrete provisions necessary for the real
launching of the peace process in Liberia have not been
complied with by 15 September. At the same time, the
resolution makes clear the international community's
readiness actively to promote the peace process in that
country, including a period of post-conflict peace-
building, if the conditions that have been set are fulfilled.

Obviously, the restoration of peace and national
reconciliation in Liberia is first and foremost a matter for
Liberians themselves. We venture to hope that this time
the Liberian parties will correctly assess the full
seriousness of the international community's intentions
and carefully weigh all the consequences, and will not
miss what might be the last real chance for a speedy
settlement of the political crisis in Liberia.

