Mr. Grandi: A few weeks ago, I was in Bangladesh,
at the border with Myanmar, witnessing the most
rapid refugee exodus since the massive population
movements of the mid-1990s. It was a stark illustration
of what happens when the root causes of conflict and
violence are not addressed and when the relationship
between a State and some of its people breaks down.
The result is a human tragedy on a dramatic scale.

Around the world, countries that border crisis
zones are struggling to absorb the social, economic
and political shocks of large-scale refugee movements,
while the broader consequences of unresolved conflicts
reverberate across and beyond regions. Protecting
refugees is a binding obligation, reflecting core
principles and shared values, but it is also a contribution
to regional and global stability. That is why I am
grateful to the Council and the Italian presidency for
the opportunity to address the Council today.

My predecessor's last comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council as High Commissioner for Refugees
was in January 2009 (S/PV.6062). In that briefing, he
shared his concern that we might be entering a period
of deepening and interlocking crises. Almost nine years
on, that bleak prospect has become a stark reality. The
number of people who are forcibly displaced worldwide
is now approaching 66 million, up from 42 million in
2009. That includes 17.2 million refugees under the
responsibility of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), representing a
70 per cent increase since then.

A succession of major new crises has caused
massive displacement across virtually all regions. The
cataclysmic conflict in Syria has driven 11 million
people from their homes. Syria and Iraq today account
for a quarter of all those forcibly displaced globally.
New crises have developed in Libya, Mali, Ukraine,
Yemen and the Lake Chad basin. Many have unfolded
in ungoverned spaces, driven by varying combinations
of poverty and underdevelopment, environmental
degradation, inequality and persecution. In northern
Central America, gang violence has become a main
cause of displacement. Situations that appeared to have
stabilized, including some that had seen voluntary
repatriation movements, as in Burundi, South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, have been affected
by fresh crises, triggering new refugee outflows.

At the same time, protracted crises have remained
entrenched. Refugees fled Afghanistan almost 40 years
ago, but more than 2 million remain in Iran and Pakistan.
The terrorist attack in Mogadishu last month was a
grim illustration of the instability affecting Somalia.
Some Somali refugees are returning and need support,
but 800,000 still live in sprawling settlements or cities
across the region. Young Afghans and Somalis are
moving further afield as part ofmixed migratory flows.

The sharp rise in forced displacement reflects
weaknesses in international cooperation and declining
capacity to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts.
Competing interests are being pursued through proxy
wars instead of being resolved through diplomacy
and dialogue. Neglected local crises gather pace and
become transnational, with broader implications. The
focus is on short-term interests rather than on long-
term collective stability.

Have we become unable to broker peace? I ask this
question here in the Security Council - whose raisons
d'etre are peace and security - because I see the direct
impact of these failures every day on the lives of tens
of millions of people who have been forced to abandon
their homes, with grim prospects ofbeing able to return,
sometimes for generations. When I meet refugees, their
first question is not about food or shelter, but about
peace and security - because it is security, and peace,
that will convince them to return home.

And weaknesses in international solidarity are
also eroding protection for those who flee. Many
refugee-hosting States, particularly those neighbouring
conflict zones, keep their borders open and generously
host thousands - sometimes millions - of refugees.
But certain States - often those least impacted by
refugee flows, and often wealthy ones - have closed
their borders, restricting access to asylum and deterring
entry.

Last year's Summit for Refugees and Migrants,
and its concluding New York Declaration, called for
comprehensive responses to refugee flows, extending
beyond humanitarian action and leading up to a global
compact for refugees. Since then, important steps have
been taken in pursuit of this vision by Member States,
development institutions such as the World Bank,
civil society and the private sector. We are making
significant progress, but a full response to today's
massive displacement can be achieved only through
action to restore security, resolve conflict and build
peace. I wish to draw the Council's attention to five
areas where I see particular scope for the Council's
engagement.

The first area is prevention. Prevention is possible.
Decisive action last January helped resolve a political
crisis in Gambia and allowed refugees to return home
quickly. We need more such concerted efforts. Early
action is critical to addressing the causes of conflict
and to avoiding deepening displacement crises.
Displacement, on the other hand, is a symptom of a new
or worsening crisis.

A current example is the Central African Republic.
Ongoing conflict along religious grounds has once
again driven over 1 million people from their homes,
with internal displacement up 50 per cent since
January. I fully support the Secretary-General's call for
fresh efforts to build peace through dialogue, and his
reminder to the international community to support the
courage and resilience of the Central African people.

The situation in Burundi also demands renewed
attention. There are 420,000 refugees from Burundi
in the region. The Government of Tanzania has been
publicly encouraging returns, and UNHCR is working
closely with both Governments to ensure that these are
voluntary, safe and dignified. But without concerted
action to build stability inside Burundi, further
conflict, as well as internal displacement and refugee
outflows, may occur. Responding to refugee crises in
Africa, generally speaking, continues to be frustrating,
as they are often generated by conflicts suffering from
a deficit of political attention, and they are made more
difficult by a serious deficit of resources.

A second area relates to the critical role of
peacekeepers. In the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo,
as in other countries, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in that country has played an
important role in enhancing security and enabling
displaced people to progressively rebuild their lives.
However, fresh and ongoing conflict is driving further
displacement. Over 100,000 Congolese refugees have
fled in the past year alone, and internal displacement has
swelled to over 4 million people - 50 per cent higher
than just two years ago. As displacement escalates, we
count on the Mission to once again play an important
role - for example, in increasing access and enhancing
security in Kasai, as humanitarian efforts are scaled up.

And, as in other operations, such as in South
Sudan, Darfur Mali, and the Central African Republic,
peacekeepers contribute to the safety of humanitarian
staff and help enhance our access, including through
security escorts, health facilities and evacuations.
We must preserve the neutral, impartial character of
humanitarian action, but these examples show that it
is often necessary and indeed possible to work with
peacekeeping missions in a manner that draws on our
diverse strengths for the protection of civilians we are
all mandated to serve. That is a key perspective for
the Council to consider in its discussions over mission
mandates.

A third and growing area is addressing complex
migratory movements in fragile, unstable situations.
These frequently take place where institutions are weak
or absent and violent extremism and criminal networks
have taken hold. Along the Central Mediterranean
route to Europe in particular - stretching from
sub-Saharan Africa through Libya to Italy - refugees
and migrants continue to face grave exploitation and
abuse. Together with the International Organization
for Migration, we are working on a comprehensive set
of protection and solution interventions in countries
of origin, transit and asylum, addressing the drivers
of these movements, strengthening the capacity of
countries to address refugee and migratory flows,
and expanding resettlement and other legal pathways.
Lack of security, especially in Libya, complicates these
efforts, but working in coordination with the United
Nations Support Mission there, we are expanding our
presence and making progress.

In parallel, strong, collective action is needed to
tackle the horrific abuses perpetrated by traffickers
and to identify and prosecute them. I commend the
important initiatives already undertaken by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the European
Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation,
the European Union Naval Force in the Eastern
Mediterranean and others. I wish to ask the Council to
also consider the use of sanctions against known senior
figures and companies engaged in trafficking.

Fourthly, sustainable peace is critical to securing
solutions to displacement. Very few displacement
situations in the past decade have been brought to
a definitive conclusion. One was in Cote d'lvoire.
Early, resolute political intervention by regional
actors brought to a grave political crisis a close. That
enabled more than a quarter of a million refugees
and large numbers of internally displaced persons to
return home. But that is an exception, sadly. Only half
a million refugees worldwide returned home last year.
The peace process in Colombia offers hope, but has not
yet translated into significant solutions for refugees and
the internally displaced.

In Myanmar, security and the establishment
of respect for human rights and the rule of law in
Rakhine state are essential prerequisites for the return
of refugees. Progress on citizenship for the stateless
Rohingya is absolutely crucial, as will be community
reconciliation and investment in inclusive development,
benefiting all communities. The recommendations
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State are a
recognized blueprint in those respects.

It is critical that the United Nations, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the international
community at large work constructively to assist both
countries. UNHCR stands ready to provide support and
expertise, including through the joint working group
discussed in bilateral talks between Bangladesh and
Myanmar. We believe that our role is critical to ensuring
that international standards are met and returns are
sustainable. I seek the Council's support in conveying
that message to the concerned States.

In South Sudan, the promise brought by
independence has been tragically squandered.
One-third of the population is displaced and abandoned
by its political leaders. Two million South Sudanese
refugees are now in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Kenya,
the Sudan and Uganda. More than half a million
arrived this year alone. The pressure on host countries
is immense.

The situation of the 2 million internally displaced
people in South Sudan is also dire. More than 200,000
live in overcrowded, poorly serviced protection-of-
civilian sites. Together with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, we are trying to identify alternative
solutions so that the displaced can start to carve out
a more stable existence. The support of the Security
Council for that effort will be important, but what is
crucial is to break the political stalemate.

The announcement by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development of a high-level revitalization
forum is welcome. I urge the Council to press further
for time-bound, meaningful actions that can bring
about a joint ceasefire upheld by all parties and the full
and inclusive implementation of the 2015 Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan. I fear that failure to do so will mean that
humanitarian efforts will soon reach their limit and
more people will die.
Finally and linked to my last point, protection
must be sustained while solutions are pursued,
including through support to host countries. Here,
I turn to Iraq and Syria, where we are moving into a
new and complicated phase. In Iraq, despite military
progress, grave protection challenges, including new
displacement, forced evictions and revenge attacks,
must be overcome to prevent further displacement and
allow for return. Investments in security have prevailed
so far, and with reason. Peacebuilding, recovery and
stabilization are now critical to bringing communities
together and guaranteeing a conflict-free future for a
diverse nation.

In Syria, civilians continue to bear the brunt of
major military confrontations at key strategic locations.
Meanwhile, fragile ceasefires and shifts in territorial
control have restored relative calm to some parts of
the country. Although there has been substantial new
displacement, many internally displaced people and
much smaller numbers of refugees have returned home
this year, often to places devastated by the conflict.

Signs of resilience are starting to emerge, and it is
important that those be nurtured, especially if progress
on de-escalation is achieved in parallel at the Astana
talks. Meanwhile, significant obstacles to sustainable
return persist, including ongoing military operations,
insecurity and other protection risks; a lack of legal
status and documentation; housing, land and property
challenges; destroyed shelter and infrastructure; and a
lack of services and livelihoods.

International protection and support for Syrian
refugees in neighbouring countries must be sustained
during this uncertain period. Yet, funding for refugee
and resilience programmes has dropped, with only
49 per cent of the funds needed received so far in 2017.
As a result, the situation of Syrian refugees deteriorates
and pressures for onward movement continue to grow.
My appeal is that, as the members of the Council focus
on the different tracks, hopefully leading to peace in
Syria, they do not lose sight of the need to support
refugees and countries hosting them. We must resist
the pressure for premature returns, as that would be a
destabilizing factor in that fragile context. On the other
hand, voluntary and supported returns - when the time
comes - will be a key contribution to sustainable peace.

I wish to share my appreciation to the Security
Council for the visits it has undertaken to meet
refugees, internally displaced people and other crisis-
affected communities. As I am sure those present will
agree, listening to their voices is a profoundly moving
experience, and also a powerful reminder of the
responsibility that we all share to ensure that they are
protected and their plight is resolved.

As I address the Council, millions of severely
traumatized children, their lives blighted by atrocities
witnessed and deprived of education, are facing an
uncertain future. Women are struggling to care for their
children on their own, in makeshift shelters with little
privacy, with their partners dead or missing. Elderly
people see their lives drawing to a close in a country
that is not their own. Thousands of people are stranded
at borders, frustrated and confused by arbitrary and
dehumanizing treatment and new barriers to entry, and
suffer deep scars from the persecution they fled and the
mistreatment they suffered in their flight to safety.

International cooperation has the power to bring
about real change to their lives. I am fully committed to
ensuring that the UNHCR plays its role, and I know the
same is true of UNICEF, the World Food Programme,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other trusted humanitarian partners. But giving
hope to millions of uprooted people and avoiding a
repeat of the recent massive outflows will ultimately
rest on political solutions. We and they, the uprooted
people, are counting on the leadership of the Council to
help deliver those solutions.

