Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, my delegations
wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Dr. Hala and Ms. Khoulani for their briefings, which
provided insight on this very important issue. Indonesia
wishes to highlight three points.

First, we agree that the progress on the issue of
detainees and missing persons is indeed important and
could send a positive signal to the Syrian people and
the international community. Indonesia appreciates the
determination of the Astana guarantors to advancing
their efforts within the context of the relevant working
group, of which the United Nations is also a member.
The working group is indeed needed to build confidence
and trust among the Syrian parties, and we hope that
the Group will generate more concrete results on this
particular issue.

Secondly, since this is already a complex issue,
Indonesia believes that we should genuinely improve
the ongoing efforts without complicating the situation.
Certainly, we should also avoid politicizing the issue,
as that would lead us nowhere. A constructive approach
based on enhanced communication and dialogue is key
in that regard.

Thirdly, it remains Indonesia's view that the
international community should strengthen its efforts
to achieve and support a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process with full respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. We will always support a comprehensive
settlement to the Syrian issue through negotiations and
peaceful means.

In the same vein, I wish to recall the legal obligations
of all parties under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, as well as all relevant
decisions of the Security Council, and, of course, the
need for every country to promote the human rights of
its citizens.

We also take note of the briefing by Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo with regard to the efforts
of Special Envoy Pedersen to prioritize the situation
of detainees, abductees and missing persons, as well
as the activities of the working group on this issue.
Although the work of the working group is still limited,
we believe that we are moving in the right direction and
need to nurture that development.

In conclusion, let me also reiterate my delegation's
full support for Special Envoy Pedersen's mandate in
advancing the political process in Syria and leading the
way to a peaceful resolution of the conflict, based on
resolution 2254 (2015).

