Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation considers
the assassination attempt on the life of the President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, in Addis Ababa, in June 1995, as
requiring our most serious attention. We believe that this
act has created concern among the international community,
bearing in mind the profound interest the international
community attaches to the question of international
terrorism and to the safety and security of Heads of State
or Government.

I should also like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our steadfast position that Indonesia is firmly against
international terrorism and strongly condemns all acts of
violence. It is our view that such acts constitute the most
flagrant violation of human rights. Consequently, from the
beginning, when this matter was brought to the Council, my
delegation has made it clear that we unequivocally condemn
the assassination attempt on the life of President Hosni
Mubarak and that the perpetrators of this act of violence
should be brought swiftly to justice.

With regard to the prevailing situation, it seems that
the Government of the Sudan has not yet fully fulfilled all
its obligations with regard to the efforts undertaken by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). We are, however,
aware of the fact that the Sudan had indeed already taken
some steps and is still continuing its efforts to fulfil its
obligations under Security Council resolution 1044 (1996).
It is pertinent to note that the Sudan had extended
invitations to the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity to visit Khartoum and had requested
Interpol's assistance in looking for the suspects. These steps
reflect the positive attitude of the Government of the Sudan,
which needs to be acknowledged by the international
community. It is therefore incumbent upon the Government
of the Sudan to redouble its efforts with a view to fulfilling
the provisions contained in resolution 1044 (1996).

In order to ensure compliance from the Government of
the Sudan with the Security Council's demands, the
Indonesian delegation believes that it would have been
more appropriate to deal with the situation in a gradual
manner, by way of a presidential statement, rather than a
draft resolution containing elements of sanctions. This
indeed would have been our preference. A step-by-step
approach would, in our opinion, have provided the
opportunity and the time necessary for the Government of
the Sudan to respond positively to the requests of the
Council. By responding positively and urgently to these
issues, the Sudan would be making important
contributions to confidence-building measures and would
be demonstrating its peaceful intentions towards its
neighbours.

We also believe that close cooperation between the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity,
Ethiopia and the Sudan is of the utmost importance if the
matter is to be resolved in a peaceful manner. In this
respect, it is our fervent hope that the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity, as the regional
organization directly concerned, would, and indeed
should, make substantial contributions towards the
resolution of the issues, in the interest of all its member
States. It would also be appropriate for the Council to
consider the letter of the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, dated 21 April 1996, contained in document
S/1996/311, pertaining to this matter. If, however, after all
avenues have been explored and all efforts exhausted, the
Council ultimately assesses that the Government of the
Sudan has still not fully complied with its requests, only
then should the Security Council consider adopting further
measures to ensure implementation of resolution 1044
(1996).

While my delegation considers the draft resolution
before us as supporting the thrust and objectives of the
statements adopted by the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution on 11 September
1995 and 19 December 1995, we cannot but express our
concern that this text goes beyond our expectations. We
are fully aware of the serious and untiring efforts exerted
by various delegations, and welcome the cooperative spirit
demonstrated by all members in their attempt to
accommodate various amendments addressing the
concerns of not only the Council members, but also the
parties involved. It is nevertheless unfortunate that it still
contains measures which constitute sanctions.

As a matter of principle, Indonesia has always
maintained the View that the imposition of sanctions as a
means to bring pressure to bear on some Governments is
a matter of the utmost seriousness. The imposition of
sanctions should be considered only after all means for
the pacific settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the
Charter have been exhausted and thorough consideration
has been undertaken of the long-term and short-term
effects of such sanctions. Sanctions are not meant to be
punitive, but it is widely acknowledged that, irrespective
of their objectives, they do affect the innocent population.

 

The adverse humanitarian impact therefore deserves our
serious consideration and must be given primary attention.

We retain our understanding that in order for a
resolution to achieve the desired results and for it to
become a truly effective tool for rectifying the situation, by
persuading the party concerned to comply with the
obligations under the resolution, it is imperative that it not
only properly address the concerns of the issue at hand, but
also maintain strict adherence to those basic principles to
which we all aspire.

In conclusion, I wish to express my delegation's
understanding of some paragraphs contained in the draft
resolution. With regard to operative paragraph 1 (a), my
delegation is of the View that the matter of extradition is a
legal one and only involves two States. In the case before
us, the Sudan can extradite to Ethiopia only those suspects
who are in its territory.

With regard to operative paragraph 8, our
interpretation is that it does not prejudge whether further
measures will be taken by the Council. The adoption of
further measures by the Council will be determined only by
its assessment of the situation and of the conditions
prevailing after the 60 days' re-examination period has
elapsed.

Let me conclude by stating that under these
circumstances, and in the light of the observations I have
just expressed, my delegation will vote in favour of this
draft resolution.

