The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Lithuania.

Let me start by thanking the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his report on small arms and
light weapons (S/2015/289) underpinning today's
discussion. I would also like to thank the United Nations
Commissioner for Human Rights for highlighting the
very important human dimension of the issue at hand,
and Mr. Karamoko Diakite' for his personal testimony,
which provided an eye-opening perspective on the
real-life impact of small arms and light weapons.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later today by the observer of the European
Union.

The subject of small arms and light weapons does
not often appear on the Security Council's agenda,
and yet it is a matter of life and death every single
day for hundreds of thousands of people in conflict-
affected zones, with civilians and in particular women,
children, refugees and the displaced facing increased
risks caused by the much too easy availability of such
arms. Deplorably, more than half a million people,
including 60,000 women and girls, die every year as a
result of the violence caused by small arms. Even very
basic daily tasks, such as fetching water from a remote
well, gathering wood for cooking and foraging for
food in war-ravaged areas, are fraught with increased
risks of being attacked, terrorized, robbed of meagre
belongings or raped at gunpoint. Children even as
young as pre-teens are recruited by force to become
soldiers and made to kill and maim with small arms in
order not to be killed themselves.

The World Bank estimates that more than
900 million small arms and light weapons are in
circulation globally, while the quantities of weapons
amassed by terrorists, armed groups and criminal
networks are almost impossible to assess. It is
undeniable that terrorists, other armed groups and
criminal networks have accumulated vast arsenals of
both light and heavy weapons by seizing them from
Government forces, diverting them from legal trade
and smuggling or tapping into civilian-owned stocks.
Illegal arms trading and smuggling support criminal
networks and finance terrorist activities, spreading
death, chaos and forced displacement as terrorist groups
expand their sway. The international community must
fundamentally and urgently address this threat, since
every day we spend arguing about concepts takes a
very real toll in human lives.

Since the last Council debate on small arms (see S/PV.7036), we have seen some major advances made
in systematically addressing the illicit trade in small
arms. In December 2014, the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)
entered into force. To date, that landmark Treaty has
been signed by 130 Member States and ratified by 67.
We encourage all remaining States to accede to the
Treaty without delay and proceed with its ratification as
quickly as possible. Its scope includes small arms and
light weapons, and it will become an important tool for
countering the illicit trade in small arms and increasing
the transparency of their transfers. Most importantly, it
will help prevent arms falling into the hands of human
rights abusers and those who violate the rules of war.
It is vital that the international community, including
the Security Council, contribute to its effective
implementation.

In 2013, the Council adopted the landmark
resolution 2117 (2013), establishing a framework for
United Nations action on small arms-related issues. But
as new challenges emerge and conflicts proliferate, we
believe that it is urgent for this framework to be put into
practice through concrete measures that can translate
the Council's efforts to tackle the devastating effects of
the illicit arms trade into more concrete action. Let me
focus on what we would like to see done.

First and foremost, the United Nations should never
lose sight of the fact that the fundamental aim of its
actions is the protection of human beings - human
lives. Behind every disarmament, demobilization and
reconciliation (DDR) programme there is a former
combatant with a gun who is out of work and has a
family to feed. Behind every security sector reform
programme there are civilians who have lost faith and
trust in the police and the army, because they are often
the same men who were just recently killing, raping
and torturing. Behind every direct victim of small arms
there are more who suffer the indirect consequences,
whether they are widows raising their families alone or
orphaned children roaming the streets, an easy prey for
child recruiters and human traffickers.

Secondly, all the numerous tools at the disposal
of the United Nations - peacekeeping operations,
special political missions, country teams and sanctions
committees - should be further encouraged to work
as one in fighting the illicit arms trade. Peacekeeping
operations should share information with sanctions
panels and help to implement arms embargoes. All
traditional arms control measures, such as DDR and
security sector reform, should be part of integrated
strategies encompassing interventions aimed at
strengthening community security, managing conflict
and mitigating armed violence. No DDR effort or peace
and reconciliation process can be expected to succeed
when porous borders provide an endless supply of new
weapons.

Thirdly, the Council should be more open,
particularly with regard to arms embargo
implementation, to involving neighbouring States and
regional actors and using open briefings to keep the
wider United Nations membership regularly informed
about the work of the Sanctions Committees.

Finally, the Council should contribute to the
effective implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty.
United Nations assistance to Member States in
developing transfer control systems and physical
security and stockpile management and preventing
diversion will be reinforced by universalization and
robust implementation of the Treaty. Furthermore, the
ATT reporting mechanism will result in the increased
transparency of small arms transfers and will become
a valuable source of information for United Nations
activities.

In that context, Lithuania has proposed the adoption
of a new Security Council resolution that would focus on
practical steps for preventing the illicit transfer of small
arms. The draft text contains significant additions to
resolution 2117 (2013), making it more action-oriented,
operational and systematic in tackling the issue of small
arms and light weapons and the risks and threats they
pose to those in conflict-affected zones. Over the past
week, we have held a series of intense consultations and
bilateral discussions with the fundamental goal in mind
of alleviating the damage, harm, suffering and loss that
small arms cause to civilian populations affected by
armed conflicts, and the devastation and barbarity of
armed, criminal and terrorist groups.

We believe that a consensus on quite a number
of important new elements has emerged as a result
of our work together. We urge delegations to build on
those elements of convergence and to continue their
exchanges in good faith and flexibility, but also with a
due sense of urgency, so that we can quickly conclude
negotiations on that important document. What I ask is
that we not throw the proverbial baby out with the bath
water. We can make a difference in the lives of those
women, girls, boys, elderly and displaced people who
often have no recourse or defences other than the resolve
and determination of the international community to
act on their behalf. We should and we must.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I would like to remind speakers that they should
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. As usual, delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the full
texts in writing and to deliver condensed versions in the
Chamber. I appeal to speakers to deliver their statements
at a normal speed so that proper interpretation can be
provided. And I would like to inform all concerned that
we will be carrying on this open debate right through
the lunch hour, as we have a significant number of
speakers.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Minister for
Direction of Arms Control of the Ministry of Interior
and Police of the Dominican Republic.

