Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by thanking the French presidency for its briefing,
which furthers a conversation that the Security Council
has been holding on the Sahel in recent months, as well
for the initiative of visiting the Sahel region. I would
also like to thank the four briefers for their respective
contributions to our debate.

I will turn first to the critical situation in which the
Sahel currently finds itself. The security threats, which
flow from terrorism and illegal trafficking and which
coincide with a fragile political development context,
jeopardize the peace and security of the entire Sahel
region and the future of that region of the world. This is
a concern shared by the entire international community,
as attested to this morning by the speakers at this
table. Italy shares those concerns, both as a member
of the Security Council and the European Union and
as a country that is focused on, and connected to, the
Mediterranean, where the transregional dimension of
instability in the Sahel reveals its tragic magnitude
and pushes us to strengthen our relationship with the
countries of the region.

The response of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which aims to counter
terrorism, trafficking in drugs and human beings
through the establishment of a Joint Force, has the full
political support of the Council and of the international
community. The Council's visit to the region a few
days ago confirmed the shared commitment of the G-5
Sahel countries to take ownership of their problems,
the progress made in recent months in setting up the
Joint Force, and what remains to be done for the full
realization of this initiative.

Therefore, the question before us today is how
we can support the Joint Force to enable it to fulfil its
mandate. The Secretary-General provides us with four
options in his report (S/2017/869), which the Security
Council should address with the same courage and
ambition that was evident in their development. We
believe that the Security Council, in addition to any
collegial choices that it may make, must be driven
by its moral responsibility to provide, as soon as
possible, predictable support to the Force, based on the
fulfilment of certain conditions that the G-5 countries
will be called upon to fulfil, such as ensuring respect
for human rights.

Against that backdrop, we must work together to
further increase the effectiveness of the concept of
operations, the coherence between the military strategy
and the development and stabilization strategy, the
equipment and the financial viability of the Force in
order to clearly identify the obligations of every actor
with a View to cooperation that develops along a defined
and progressive path.

The added valued of multilateral support, which
is the only way to ensure a coherent, coordinated and
consistent framework for intervention, must also include
the important potential of bilateral contributions,
especially in view of the donors conference to be held
in Brussels in December.

It is clear that the security response embodied
in the G-5 Sahel initiative to create a credible peace
and security architecture should be combined with
development initiatives at national and regional
levels. The Secretary-General recalls in his report
his determination to revitalize the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We would like
to express our full support for such revitalization,
which could lead to the strengthening of international
coordination and integration of the various initiatives
that are being carried out in the Sahel region.

The only credible way to ensure lasting peace and
stability in the Sahel is by tackling the root causes
of instability through measures that are capable of
addressing the transregional challenges affecting
the region. We support such an approach within the
European Union. In that regard, I would like to mention
the migration trust fund initiative, which combines
addressing the deep-rooted causes of the migration
phenomenon with a regional perspective.
The Sahel is not only a challenge for the United
Nations, but also an opportunity. Over the coming
months, we will be in a position to assess, first, the
ability of peacekeeping to address new challenges;
secondly, the success of the United Nations in developing
coherent and coordinated regional strategies with other
initiatives at the local level; and, thirdly, the capacity
for integration and cooperation among the United
Nations and the peace and security initiatives led by
African countries. On the latter point, the international
community, and in particular the United Nations, which
bears responsibility for peacekeeping, must not shy
away from investing both politically and financially in
effective and long-term African ownership.

Italy is ready to play its part in these endeavours, as
well as through its upcoming presidency of the Security
Council in November, following France, during which
time we are ready to continue our deliberations on the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force and on the Sahel as a region writ
large. During our presidency, we intend to hold an open

debate on security challenges in the Mediterranean,
which is a subject that I have already alluded to and is
deeply intertwined with what is happening in the Sahel.

