Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We do not
deny that the Security Council should address the
situation in the Sudan and the events in Darfur. Nor do
we deny that it should focus its attention on matters of
international peace and security. But if the real purpose
is to find a solution to this problem, we do not like the
Council adopting a series of unwise resolutions that
might make the situation worse, instead of improving
it.

The Government of the Sudan is more interested
in solving this problem. The Government of the Sudan,
which has been trying patiently for years to resolve the
oldest war in Africa, does not consider it difficult to
resolve the matter of Darfur. The question that arises
here is: why have the Abuja negotiations stood still,
without making any progress? Why did no negotiations
take place for more than a month, at a time when the
Sudan had announced that its Vice President was to
lead the negotiations? The answer is very simple and
very clear, and it does not require any deep thought or
high intelligence. The other side is waiting for the
Council to wield a stick so that it can continue to do
what it has been doing. But the more sticks that the
Council uses to try to resolve the problem, the more
complicated it will make it.

The Council talks about support for the African
Union. Yet once again it has adopted a resolution that
complicates the situation for the African Union. It will
complicate the situation on the ground. The Council
will be responsible for that.

The sponsors of the resolution know the situation
on the ground. We have kept the lines of
communication open, and they know what has been
going on.

Why is this happening? It is happening because
there are other issues and domestic political matters
that are more important than solving the question of
Darfur. There are conflicts concerning the International
Criminal Court. There are certain pressure groups and
drumbeaters who put pressure on Governments. We
know that; it is a fact.

The African Union, as affirmed by one of the
major delegations in the Council, is the only body that
can deal with Darfur. There is no country that has the
same force. But we are complicating the situation for
those who would like to put troops on the ground. Why
is all this happening?

During negotiations on the resolution, the
sponsors of the draft refused to show even a little
flexibility with a View to reaching consensus. They
justified that by referring to a congressional resolution.
But there are other resolutions in Congress, and their
content is stranger than that of the resolution that has
been adopted. This resolution is thus a resolution of the
United States Congress - a Congress that does not
know the history of peoples, does not read the history
of other nations and does not know about the cultures
of other peoples, because it does not read about those
cultures. If it read about those cultures, it would not
understand them. If it tried to understand, it would not
be able to do so, because the mentality of the Congress
is one that looks at other cultures in a different way.

This resolution goes against the position of
Africa, whose forces are in the Sudan and are suffering
from the situation. The African position is open to
negotiations aimed at resolving this problem. The
African position is informed by the culture of Africa
and all the complexities of the situation.

But all the concerns expressed by the African
Union were neglected. Its stance was neither unilateral
nor contentious; it emanated from three lengthy and
important meetings held by the African Union, which
culminated in the submission of a paper to the Council.
If members of the African Union decided to vote in
favour of this resolution, they had the right to do so;
they are sovereign countries and completely free. But
that in no way represents the African position. The
African position was set out in the documents sent by
the African Union to the Council. However, the
Council decided to ignore that position, because
African culture has no meaning and the African way to
solve problems is not important. Indeed, other cultures
come here to tell us what we have to do.

I do not have much more to say. I do, however,
want to say that I hold the Council responsible for
having adopted these unwise and irresponsible
resolutions.

