Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Before I begin my statement, I would like to
express the Republic of Equatorial Guinea's full support
for the brotherly Libyan people. We also welcome the
presence of Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
concerned about the situation in Libya, particularly
with regard to the humanitarian and security situation,
which continues to deteriorate.
We note that, since April this year, violence and
growing instability have resulted in hundreds of
civilian deaths and thousands of displaced persons.
That situation benefits not the Libyan people but those
who prefer to maintain the status quo in order to keep
control of the country and principally of its resources.
For that reason, we call once again for unity on the
part of the Libyan people, and we encourage them to
bring about understanding and peace, which will make
possible stability throughout the country and make the
Libyans themselves the owners and masters of their own
destiny. We call on the parties to establish a ceasefire to
that end and to allow access of humanitarian assistance.
We invite them to return to the path of political dialogue
as the only solution and to resume the United Nations-
led process.

In that vein, we would like once again to praise the
work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
headed by Mr. Ghassan Salame, as well as that of the
African Union. We also demand that the parties to and
participants in the conflict respect human rights and
international humanitarian law.

We emphatically condemn the attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including those on health
centres, medical personnel and related facilities, and
on schools and detention centres. We reiterate that
such actions represent violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law and could constitute
war crimes. We are also concerned at the situation
of the migrants and refugees who are trapped in the
country and who are victims of inhumane treatment.
All ofthese issues require in-depth consideration by the
Security Council with the utmost objectivity in order to
seek a real and practical solution to this conflict, which
could have been averted.

To conclude, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
wishes to reiterate its non-recognition ofthejurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court for reasons that are
known to all.

