Mr. Serrano: Let me start by thanking Brazil for
organizing today's debate on the interdependence
between security and development. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and Ms.
Sarah Cliffe of the World Bank for her remarks on the
World Development Report, which we look forward to.
I also thank all of the speakers who have addressed the
Council today.

The candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates of
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and the
European Free Trade Association country of
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.

I would like to approach the complex
interrelationship between security and development
from three angles: first, security as a precondition for
development; secondly, development as a precondition
for security; and, finally, respect for human rights as a
precondition for both security and development.

In the short run, security is a precondition for
development. In more than half of the post-conflict
countries conflict flares up again within five years after
a peace agreement and destroys any hope of
development. Peacekeeping missions can help keep
violence at bay, especially if they are multidimensional
and join forces with other United Nations actors
through an integrated strategic framework while taking
into account the need to ensure the impartiality,
neutrality and independence of the humanitarian
entities.

The European Union remains committed to
further improving the performance of these missions,
both from New York and in the field. In New York, we
remain a staunch supporter of, and an active
contributor to, the Peacebuilding Commission, which
can provide peacebuilding counsel to the Security
Council - for example, on how to tie the activities of
its missions into the wider peacebuilding effort in a
country. In addition, the European Union looks forward
to a strategy for critical early peacebuilding tasks
undertaken by peacekeepers that features joint United
Nations planning and a clear United Nations division
of labour based on competence, track records and
ability to deliver. Also here in New York, we look
forward to a results-oriented Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations that makes headway with an
effective strategic framework for the protection of
civilians and with the constructive dialogue on a robust
approach to peacekeeping, among other things.

In the field, aside from our own 13 political,
civilian and military missions, we make financial
resources available for projects to buttress United
Nations peacekeeping missions. This has, for example,
helped the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti with the development of justice and police
manuals; the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur with the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants;
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad with the training of police in Chad;
and the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste with capacity-building in the security sector. All
those are crucial steps towards making those countries
safe for development.

In the long run, development is a precondition for
security. Many of the poorest countries are also the
most fragile ones, and each percentage point more
growth means a percentage point less of a risk of civil
war. We need to work on long-term solutions,
mainstreaming conflict prevention into our
development policies. We need to work on sustainable
development, food security and on addressing all the
root causes of conflict. That is what the European
Union is doing.

Poverty eradication is at the heart of the Treaty of
Lisbon. More than 50 per cent of the money spent to
help developing countries comes from the European
Union and its member States, making it the world's
biggest aid donor. The Millennium Development Goals
serve as one beacon of our aid policy, and national
ownership serves as another. Of course, national actors
can only take charge if they have the capacity to
manage the myriad relationships with the international
community. That is why the European Union has
decided to help the Peacebuilding Support Office put
together a special database, which can serve as the
basis for developing national aid-information
management systems.

Human rights is the third pillar of our world
Organization. Both in the short and in the long run,
respect for all human rights and for the rule of law,
apart from an end in itself, is also a precondition for
both security and development. Security without
respect for human rights and the rule of law is not
security. There can be no human development without
human rights. As the United Nations Development
Group's most recent report on human rights
mainstreaming argued, respect for human rights helps
reduce inequality and discrimination, which often
underlie development problems.

The European Union strongly backs the
mainstreaming of human rights, including gender
equality, in the work of the United Nations - for
example, through the recently established
mainstreaming mechanism of the Development Group.
More frequent presentations by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights at the Security
Council would be a good way to further mainstream
human rights in its work. The European Union supports
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in its efforts to integrate human rights into all
components of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Let me conclude by saluting the adoption of
today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/4), which
builds on an already important doctrine on this issue,
including the 2005 World Summit Outcome and the
Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and
Development. The European Union looks forward to
further following up such declarations on the
interdependence between security, development and
human rights, translating them into international
action.

