Mr. Maitland (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. On behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, I
would like to express our sincere appreciation to you
for convening this important discussion in the Security
Council. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem, has deteriorated so
dramatically since the last open debate that it has
become essential for the Council, as custodian of
international peace and security, to reassess its efforts
to bring peace to that region.

The occupation of Orient House and other
symbols of Palestinian national identity constitutes a
flagrant violation of the formal commitments made by
Israel in the context of the Oslo process. The Israeli
guarantee to respect the inviolability of official
Palestinian institutions was one of the fundamental
building blocks of the ensuing peace process. Israel's
recent provocative actions threaten the very basis on
which the parties have pursued their search for peace
over the past eight years.

The Non-Aligned Movement once again confirms
that the Palestinian question remains the permanent
responsibility of the United Nations until it is
effectively resolved in all its aspects. It is the Security
Council's duty to ensure that the Palestinian flag flies
once again over East Jerusalem.

The Non-Aligned Movement has repeatedly
drawn the Council's attention to the dangerously high
levels of frustration and violence that are being
fomented by Israel's policies of closures, blockades
and restrictions on the movement of people, goods and
resources. Palestinian civilians are still being prevented
from reaching their places of work and worship, and
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate
because essential supplies and funds for basic services
are being withheld. As members of this Council well
know, the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, expressly prohibits the collective
punishment of a civilian population.

The Non-Aligned Movement once more reiterates
its call on Israel to respect international humanitarian
law and to cease its acts of military aggression against
the civilian population of Palestine. Security Council
resolution 1322 (2000) calls on Israel to abide
scrupulously by its legal obligations with respect to the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. The present situation
necessitates the reconvening of the Conference of the
High Contracting Parties on measures to enforce the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, as called for at the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly.

The Non-Aligned Movement has long affirmed
that the question of Palestine constitutes the core of the
Middle East conflict. The attainment of the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and to an independent State with East Jerusalem as its
capital is pivotal to the achievement of a sustainable
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The
principle of land for peace, as articulated in Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
remains valid today.

The Movement believes that peaceful negotiation
is the only means of ensuring lasting peace, security
and stability in the region. We urge the parties to take
the required steps to ensure the cessation of hostilities,
to restore calm and to adopt measures to re-establish
mutual trust.

The framework for the resumption of negotiations
between Israel and Palestine already exists in the form
of the Egyptian-Jordanian proposals, the
recommendations of the Mitchell report and the
understandings regarding a ceasefire facilitated by the
United States. What is lacking is a credible
multinational presence on the ground to monitor any
ceasefire that may be called by the parties and to serve
as a visible symbol of the international community's
concern for the safety and human rights of the peoples
of Palestine and of Israel.

The Security Council must demonstrate its
commitment to upholding international peace and
security by acting expeditiously to set up a credible
multinational monitoring mechanism to verify the
implementation of agreements. The fate of the people
of Palestine and Israel can no longer be left in the
hands of extremists on both sides.

