Mr. Eitel (Germany): Most often when the Security
Council meets to discuss the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina the reason for our meeting is another painful
turn of events, with more human suffering and a further
deterioration of the situation.

Today we meet under different circumstances. Today,
as the German Foreign Minister, Mr. Kinkel has said, a
light of hope and peace has become Visible at the end of
the tunnel of despair. Our delegation, therefore, is grateful
to the delegation of the Russian Federation for having
requested this meeting.

A few hours ago we all witnessed the first meeting of
the Foreign Ministers of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in
Geneva. Germany welcomes the constructive deliberations
and outcome of this meeting. These talks under the auspices
of the Contact Group have confirmed that there is a
realistic chance for peace.

What is now urgent is to proceed with firmness and
determination on the path to a peaceful settlement. We
therefore again urge the leadership in Pale to bring about
an end to the air attacks against military targets of the
Bosnian Serbs. As they have been told by the competent
United Nations authorities, very precise steps must be
taken, including an end to attacks on Sarajevo and other
safe areas and the withdrawal of Bosnian Serb heavy
weapons from the total exclusion zone around Sarajevo,
without delay; in addition, unrestricted use of the Sarajevo
airport must be made possible.

Unfortunately, there have been assertions which
cannot go unanswered, albeit briefly. We have read and
heard that the air attacks are of a retaliatory or punitive
nature. This cannot be true. As we all know, punishment,
once decided upon, is independent of a culprit's
subsequent behaviour. He may regret his deeds. He may
change his behaviour. But the sentence will be executed.
Here, the situation is quite different. All sides,
including the Bosnian Serbs, are aware that when the
Bosnian Serbs comply with the demands I have just
mentioned, the air attacks will end. That is why the air
strikes are clearly not of a punitive nature. They are
coercive and enforcement measures.

What is being enforced is international law, in the
form of decisions by the competent United Nations organ,
that is, the Security Council.

The Security Council itself has, by resolution 836
(1993), provided the basis for military action. It
authorizes Member States to take,

"subject to close coordination with the Secretary-
General and the Force, all necessary measures,
through the use of air power, in and around the safe
areas...to support the Force in the performance of its
mandate" (resolution 836 (1993), para. 10).

The air attacks of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) were requested by the United
Nations. They are aimed at purely military targets.
Moreover, the use of force, as I have said, is of a limited
nature. Its objective remains attaining the compliance of
the Bosnian Serb side with the legitimate demands I have
mentioned.

 

We join all the other members of the Council in
welcoming as a first great achievement the outcome of the
Geneva meeting. It will be, above all, the civilian
population in what has become a theatre of war that will
benefit from this peace effort.

Germany has a fundamental interest in putting an end
to the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. Today, after the
meeting in Geneva, we are hopeful that we can pursue the
negotiations for a peaceful settlement with better chances
for success. For our part, we will spare no effort to achieve
this goal, which has eluded us for so long.

