Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): Ijoin previous speakers
in thanking Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita
for her comprehensive update on the situation in South
Sudan, as well as her tireless efforts and those of her
able team to bring about peace in Africa. Allow me to
make the following observations and recommendations.

Like other delegations, Kazakhstan welcomes the
signing of the Khartoum declaration of agreement by
the parties to the conflict. We highly commend the
concerted efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), as well as the mediation efforts
of the leadership of the Sudan and Uganda, which
helped secure the peace deal. However, much remains
to be done to achieve lasting peace and stability in
South Sudan. The conflict has ruined the economy
and millions of people have fled their homes in order
to survive. Military action has intensified ahead of the
rainy season and there is widespread violence against
civilians. Aid workers and the personnel of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) have
remained but the humanitarian aid operation remains
disrupted and nearly half of the population suffers from
starvation and malnutrition.

Against that backdrop, Kazakhstan hopes that the
peace agreement will help build trust between the South
Sudanese parties and prevent further escalation of the
humanitarian and economic crisis in South Sudan. We
are pleased to hear that President Kiir and Mr. Machar
have respectfully committed to implementing the
agreement. We expect that their words will become
deeds.

We look forward to the cessation of all hostilities
and to the facilitation of humanitarian access
and expect that the parties will strictly adhere to
international law, including international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and refugee law.
We also expect that a revised bridging proposal will be
concluded by the end of the current Khartoum talks.
We also believe that political negotiations should take
place in parallel with intercommunal reconciliation and
confidence-building among local populations, as well
comprehensive strategies in economic development and

resilience-building, with the full engagement of women
and youth.

With regard to the upcoming negotiations on the
renewal of the South Sudan sanctions regime, we
look forward to receiving the report of the Secretary-
General requested in resolution 2418 (2018). We
reiterate that the position of countries of the region and
regional organizations, namely, IGAD and the African
Union, should be taken into account in the Council's
deliberations on any additional measures. It is of critical
importance that the Council remain united in support
of IGAD and African Union efforts.

In conclusion, we strongly condemn the recent
attack on UNMISS, which resulted in the killing of
a Bangladeshi peacekeeper. We express our deepest
condolences to his family and to the people and the
Government of Bangladesh and call on the Government
of South Sudan to investigate the attack.

I conclude by thanking UNMISS for implementing
its mandated tasks under very difficult circumstances
and by commending the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, Mr. Shearer, and
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Haysom, on their tireless
efforts and commitment to seeking a solution to the
crisis in the country.

