Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting and to commend you for presiding over it. We
also welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.

At the outset, we would like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller, and the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Ambassador Apakan, for their
valuable briefings on the situation in eastern Ukraine.

In this statement we will focus on the political,
security and humanitarian situations. On the political
and security situations, we express our concern about
the renewed fighting in eastern Ukraine, especially
with reports of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
documenting a large number of violations of the
ceasefire agreement, using weapons that should have
been withdrawn according to the Minsk agreements.
The presence of such weapons, in an environment
marred by lack of confidence and insecurity, contributes
to the escalation of violence.

Moreover, the Donetsk filtration station, which
supplies drinking water to more than 300,000 people
along both sides of the line of contact, is a case in point.
In that regard, we call on all parties to immediately
cease hostilities, fully abide by the ceasefire agreement
and avoid any provocative acts that could lead to
increased tension.

The State of Kuwait stresses the importance of
respecting the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. We hope that all parties will fully implement
resolution 2202 (2015) and the Minsk agreements. The
parties should also find a comprehensive and balanced
solution to the crisis through dialogue, especially
within the Normandy format. In that regard, we would
like to commend the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
for its efforts on the ground, particularly its endeavours
to facilitate the dialogue between all parties to the
crisis. We would also like to urge Ukraine and the
Russian Federation to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis and demonstrate greater political will, not
only to uphold the ceasefire and implement previous
commitments but also to relaunch comprehensive and
sustainable negotiations.

With regard to the crime of the downing Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, which claimed the lives of 298
innocent civilians, the State of Kuwait stresses the
importance of abiding by resolution 2166 (2014), which
calls for carrying out an international investigation
according to the guidelines regulating international
civil aviation. The resolution also demands that
Member States cooperate fully with the efforts aimed
at establishing accountability.

On the humanitarian situation, more than four
years into a crisis that has led to the killing and injuring
of thousands of people, there are still 1.6 million
internally displaced persons, half of whom are elderly.
They are facing tremendous challenges, including a
shortage of food, medicine, heating, and education
for their children. There are 3.4 million people in
need of humanitarian assistance and protection. The
shelling along the 457 kilometre-long line of contact
adversely affects the people living in the area, 40 per
cent of whom suffer daily and directly as a result of the
shelling. Nearly 1 million people who cross the line of
contact every month - an area known to be the most
contaminated by landmines in the world. We emphasize
the need for ensuring the delivery of humanitarian aid to
all conflict-affected areas in order to improve the living
conditions of the people, especially in the light of the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait calls for finding a
peaceful solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine, in line
with Security Council resolutions and the agreements
signed between the parties concerned, including the
Minsk agreements. These agreements represent the
appropriate framework to settle the crisis in its regional
dimension, and through mediation efforts by parties
respected and recognized by both parties to the conflict
and the international community at large.

