Mr. Gonzalez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the delegation of Paraguay, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Chile's presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and to thank
you for inviting the entire membership to this open
debate on inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security. This theme, which
is of itself important and relevant, becomes even more
so in the context of the post-2015 development agenda
now being formulated at the United Nations. I would
also like to express special thanks to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Antonio de Patriota, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Leymah
Gbowee, the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize laureate, for their
briefings to the Council this morning.

The Republic of Paraguay takes a holistic view
of international peace and security and its relation
to inclusive development. Protecting people is the
foundation of security, an issue that must be guaranteed
by the rule of law. My Government believes that,
in order to ensure the full enjoyment of basic rights,
and with that international peace and security, States
must adopt public policies that ensure sustainable and
inclusive development for all, without discrimination.
The United Nations should also ensure that the post-
2015 development agenda is an ambitious plan and
that its principal bodies integrate their action into that
vision. Security should be a commitment on the part
of each and every State through a structure designed
to enhance democratic institutions in States, based
on the mandates of international instruments. In that
regard, democracy should continue to be a fundamental
pillar, because while without it there may be economic
growth, the same cannot be said for viable social or
economic development.

Paraguay attaches great importance to the work of
regional organizations in that task. Democracy, the rule
of law and social inclusion are also being worked on in
the inter-American system. At the fourty-fourth general
session of the General Assembly of the Organization
of American States in June, the Asuncion Declaration
reaffirmed our commitment to international instruments
that promote, protect and observe human rights,
particularly economic, social and cultural rights. The
Declaration affirms that, while we still have challenges
in terms of poverty and extreme poverty, education and
inclusive and high-quality health care, among other
factors, we must intensify our efforts to overcome those
conditions and avoid their consequences.

Finally, the importance of the relationship between
inclusion and situations that pose a threat to international
peace and security is clear. We therefore believe we
should be more ambitious and forceful in promoting
gender equality, equal opportunity and universal
access to social protection services, with particular
emphasis on vulnerable and marginalized groups, so
that all the benefits of sustainable development reach
all sectors of our societies, while building institutions
and democratic governance. The Security Council
should therefore incorporate this approach decisively
in all its debates and decisions.

