Mr. Danon (Israel): On behalf of Israel, I
congratulate the incoming members of the Security
Council. I hope that this year the Council will engage
in factual and constructive dialogue regarding the
situation in the Middle East. I also congratulate the
delegation of the Dominican Republic on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month.

Two days ago, the Iranian regime committed a
grave act of aggression against Israel. The Iranian
Quds Force fired a medium-range surface-to-surface
missile into northern Israel from a position that was
in close proximity to the Israeli border. Israel's Iron
Dome air defence system intercepted that missile
successfully. Israel responded by targeting Iranian
military infrastructure in Syria, including intelligence
command and control centres, weapon warehouses
and training facilities. Israel holds the Syrian regime
responsible for the missile that was launched against
Israel from Syrian territory.
The international community and the Security
Council must condemn Iran for that act of aggression.
The firing ofthat missile proves, once again, Iran's deep-
entrenchment in Syria. Let me be clear: Iran must fully
withdraw its military presence and militia forces from
Syria without conditions. It must do so immediately.
Israel does not wish for any escalation, but Israel is
ready and able to protect its citizens and its sovereignty
from the Iranian threat. Anyone that threatens to wipe
Israel off the map will be held fully accountable.

When it comes to countering terrorism, you must
follow the money. When the world united against the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, we asked two fundamental questions. Where
do they get their money, and how do we cut off their
supply? By asking the right questions and following the
money trail, the world was able to diminish the threat
of terror.

When it comes to countering terrorism in the
Middle East today, the international community must
apply the same strategy. It must follow the money. In
our region, the money trail of terror leads back to one
common supplier. The world must acknowledge that
supplier - the source that is the epicentre of modern
terrorism. It must face the harsh reality that that source
is a United Nations Member State. That Member State
is proliferating a plague of terror from which no one is
immune. Fortunately, in recent months, we have seen
nations and unions of States from the Middle East to
Europe and beyond beginning to take steps towards
finding a remedy, but a remedy is not enough. We
need to take preventive action. It is high time that the
world stop the source, the main supplier and sponsor of
terrorism - Iran.

After the signing of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, the international community was
optimistic. It thought that Iran would use the billions
of dollars it received to invest in its people, and maybe
its infrastructure, reform its economy and rejoin the
community of nations. That was wishful thinking. Iran
has used the money to finance terrorism throughout
the region and around the globe. The Iranian payroll
emboldens the worst of terrorists. The money trail
starts in Tehran. It reaches the border with Iraq. It
stretches across the Arab Gulf to Yemen. It extends to
the tyrants in Damascus. It lands in the bank accounts
of its proxy Hizbullah. Iran is bankrolling a coalition of
terrorists around the world. Its ultimate goal is to preach
and export Ayatollah Khomeini's radical doctrine and
further the Iranian policy of expansionism. With the
Iranian regime's complete backing, Hizbullah - the
Iranian proxy - is turning Lebanon into a launching pad
for terror. If those here do not believe me, they should
believe Nasrallah - the head oinzbullah - who stated
proudly that all of Hizbullah's funding for weaponry,
and even food supply, come from Iran.

On 19 December 2018 (see S/PV.8432), I presented
right here undeniable evidence of Hizbullah's use of
private property throughout southern Lebanon to build
terror-attack tunnels underneath the Blue Line into
Israel, in clear violation of Israel's sovereignty. As the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and several Member States have stated, those tunnels
violate resolution 1701 (2006). The Lebanese army
has taken no action in response, allowing Hizbullah
to continue building those tunnels undisturbed. I also
revealed the existence of four terror-attack tunnels
beginning in Lebanon and ending in Israel. I outlined
Hizbullah's grand plan to take over the Israeli Galilee.

Every year, Iran provides $1 billion to its Lebanese
proxy - Hizbullah. The Iranian regime has invested
millions of dollars into each Hizbullah terror-attack
tunnel. This is a result of the Iranian money trail
when the world is silent. This is what happens when
the world relies on wishful thinking. On 20 December
2018, Israel began a new phase of Operation Northern
Shield. Operation Northern Shield was a defensive
measure on our side of the Blue Line to destroy the
terror-attack attack tunnels. Israel neutralized one
tunnel by sealing it off with cement. When the cement
overflowed from the other side, the evidence was
crystal clear. Hizbullah's terror tunnel had begun inside
private property in Lebanon, stretched underneath the
Blue Line and infiltrated Israel's sovereign territory.
Even then, with striking evidence, UNIFIL is still
not fulfilling its mandate. On 26 December 2018, the
Israeli Defense Forces discovered a fifth terror tunnel
beginning in Kfar Ayta ash Shab, Lebanon, and ending
in Shtula, Israel. Just last week, on 13 January, Israel
discovered a sixth terror tunnel - the largest and
most elaborate so far - spanning from Kfar Ramyah,
Lebanon, into sovereign Israel. Operation Northern
Shield has concluded, but Israel will continue to take
any and all necessary defensive measures on its side
of the border, including to neutralize all terror-attack
tunnels violating its sovereignty. Israel will defend its
people by any means, on the ground and underground.
There is no price tag for the safety of our people.

If one follows the bloody trail of money starting in
Tehran, one will arrive at the terror tunnels in Lebanon
and Gaza and their weapons warehouses in Syria. It
is now trying to infiltrate Judea and Samaria as well.
The Iranian regime's obsession with Israel is not just
well known, it is expensive. Seven billion dollars are
directed annually to the never-ending attempts to
destroy Israel - $7 billion. In Syria alone, it invests
$4 billion dollars every year to help the Al-Assad
regime. Iran gives $1 billion in aid annually to its
Shiite proxy. Iran also gives hundreds of millions of
dollars to its proxies in Iraq, and tens of millions of
dollars to rebels in Yemen. On Israel's border, Iran
supports Hamas and Islamic Jihad in Gaza with well
over $100 million every year.

The Palestinian observer did not mention anything
about the connection between Palestinian terrorist
organizations and Iran. Allow me therefore to do so.
Iranian money has ended directly in the pockets of
Hamas and Islamic Jihad in the Gaza Strip and Judea
and Samaria. Iran, in partnership with Hamas and with
the help of Hizbullah, is pushing to build a military
front in Judea and Samaria from which to attack Israel.
The Iranian trail of terror unifies the efforts of Saleh
Al-Arouri, who is the Deputy Political Chief of Hamas.
He works very closely with Saeed Izadi, the Head of
the Palestinian branch of the Iranian Quds Force, on
behalf of Qasem Soleimani, Commander of the Quds
Force of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard. The end goal
of that gang is to establish terror networks throughout
the Middle East. With the help of Al-Arouri and Izadi,
Iran is trying to turn Judea and Samaria into the fourth
military front against Israel. With Iran's blessing,
Hamas is also growing closer to Hizbullah and sharing
its preferred terror tactics, including the tunnels,
which we now see in southern Lebanon. Hamas is also
building a major military front in Lebanon, using it as
another base from which to terrorize Israel.

All ofa sudden, Iran is now speaking publicly about
training Palestinian terrorists. High-profile Hamas and
Islamic Jihad terrorists are meeting with high-ranking
officials in Tehran. On 22 December 2018 - a few
weeks ago - Hamas co-founder Mahmoud al-Zahar led
a Hamas delegation to Tehran. As Saleh Al-Arouri said,

"The aid Iran provides to the resistance is not

merely symbolic. Nobody but Iran gives us any

military support".
On 31 December, Ayatollah Khamenei rang in the new
year by meeting with the head of Islamic Jihad, Ziad
Al-Nakhalah, in Tehran. For his new year's resolution,
Khamenei promised Al-Nakhalah that the Palestinian
State would be established in Tel Aviv. I have news
for Mr. Khamenei. He will not meet his new year's
resolution - not this year, not ever.

In the light of those meetings, it is odd that in that
same week the Iranian Foreign Minister, Mohammad
Javad Zarif, claimed with the utmost confidence,

"When did we say we want to annihilate Israel? Find
one person that has said so. Nobody has said that".

In fact, the entire Iranian regime has said that for 40
years, since 1979. For 40 years, Iranian missiles have
borne the inscription, "Death to Israel", and it is written
in Hebrew. The so-called moderate Iranian President
calls Israel "a cancerous tumour". The Iranian Supreme
Leader threatens to annihilate Israel himself and place
the Palestinian State in Tel Aviv.

The Iranian machine of terror does not stop even
for a moment. It is attempting to close in on us on four
fronts, but it stands no chance against Israel. We will
never let Iran win - not in Syria, not in Lebanon, not
in Judea and Samaria, not in Gaza, not anywhere. The
world cannot keep living in a rose-coloured reality. Iran
is attacking Europe. It is entrenched in States on the
other side of the planet. I am sure the Ambassadors of
France, Belgium and Denmark know that, if Iran strikes
their countries once, as it did in recent years, it will
strike again. The European Union has taken a crucial
step forward by imposing new sanctions on Iran. It is
now the Council's turn to take that leap.

Israel means business. We know what Iran seeks
to accomplish and we share it with our allies. We know
the international community can rise to the occasion
and join us in the fight against Iranian terrorism. We
know that the world can answer the call of the Iranian
people, who deserve a brighter future. We are waiting
for the Security Council to designate Hamas, Hizbullah
and Islamic Jihad as terrorist organizations, because
weakening them is the first step to dismantling the
epicentre of terrorism that sits in Tehran. We know
the world is capable of responding. But, if we must,
we will respond alone. We will defend our democracy,
safeguard our sovereignty and protect our people.
As former Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin
once warned,
"If an enemy of our people says it seeks to destroy
us, believe him. Don't doubt him for a moment.
Don't make light of it. Do all in your power to deny
him the means of carrying out his satanic intent".

If Israel must act, Israel will not hold back.

