Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania,
Turkey and Croatia; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Serbia and Montenegro; and the European Free
Trade Association countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
align themselves with this statement.

Three and a half years after the adoption of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the European
Union welcomes today's opportunity to address, under
your presidency, Sir, the subject of the illicit flow of
small arms and light weapons. The number of illicit
small arms and light weapons in circulation, as well as
the number of the victims of those weapons, remain
unacceptably high.

The European Union also welcomes the
opportunity to discuss the Secretary-General's most
recent report on the initiatives undertaken to implement
his recommendations concerning the ways in which the
Security Council can contribute to the reduction of the
illicit trade in small arms.

The European Union supports the Secretary-
General's appeal to develop long-term strategies to halt
the scourge of the illicit proliferation of small arms.
The 2001 Programme of Action is one such strategy,
and the European Union is actively working towards its
implementation at the national, regional and global
levels. The European Union underlines the importance
of establishing a group of governmental experts soon
after the 2006 Programme of Action Review
Conference, in order to consider further steps to
enhance international cooperation in preventing,
combating and eradicating illicit brokering in small
arms and light weapons.

The European Union welcomes the
recommendations of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change, which recognizes the explicit
need for States to accelerate and conclude negotiations
on legally binding agreements on the marking, tracing,
brokering and transfer of small arms, as well as to
ensure transparency in the submission, on a yearly
basis, of complete reports on all the elements of the
Register of Conventional Arms.
The European Union has been a strong supporter
of the Open-ended Working Group to negotiate an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons. A great deal of progress has been
made since the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General in 2002 and since the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 58/241.

The second session of the Open-ended Working
Group was held two weeks ago in New York. The
European Union and other States stated and confirmed
their priorities with respect to the various issues - the
nature of the instrument, its scope and definition, the
marking and tracing of small arms and ammunition,
record-keeping and international cooperation. The
European Union notes the progress made during those
negotiations, although it deplores the fact that the
participating States remain divided on the two major
issues - the nature of the instrument and the inclusion
of ammunition. Additional efforts are needed in that
context.

The European Union recalls that it is working
towards the adoption of a legally binding instrument on
the identification and tracing of small arms and light
weapons to supplement the United Nations Firearms
Protocol. The European Union also stresses the need
for the inclusion of provisions relating to ammunition.
Indeed, illicit small arms depend on a steady supply of
ammunition to continue wreaking havoc. If we can
stem the flow of ammunition, we can make those
weapons fall silent.

The European Union believes that the Security
Council has an important role to play in tracing illicit
small arms and light weapons and related ammunition.
Peacekeeping missions and sanctions committees
mandated by the Security Council should, as a matter
of principle, be empowered to initiate tracing requests
for illicit weapons and ammunition found in the course
of their operations or collected in the context of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

The European Union believes also that Interpol
has an important part to play in the implementation of
the future instrument on the identification and tracing
of small arms and light weapons. The European Union
calls for the conclusion of a cooperative agreement
between the United Nations and Interpol addressing
relevant legal and technical issues, with a view to
enabling Interpol to fulfil that mandate.

Violations of Security Council arms embargoes
contribute greatly to the spread of destruction and
suffering in conflict areas and must be strongly
condemned. The EU therefore supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations on improved enforcement of
Security Council sanctions, especially arms embargoes.

The European Union welcomes the
recommendation made by Mr. Annan to pursue more
vigorously and expeditiously the use of arms
embargoes to countries or regions threatened by,
engaged in or emerging from armed conflict, and to
promote their effective implementation. Furthermore,
the European Union supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Council be encouraged to
establish monitoring mechanisms that would enable the
detection of deliberate violations by Member States of
United Nations arms embargoes.

All EU Member States are bound by the EU Code
of Conduct on Arms Exports, which is a very
comprehensive international arms export regime. It is
aimed at improving the exchange of information
among Member States and at enhancing mutual
understanding of their export-control policies,
including provisions on requirements relating to
thoroughly checked end-user certificates, appropriate
documentation or some form of official authorization
issued by the country of final destination.

The EU fully supports Mr. Annan's
recommendation in that area. The Code of Conduct has
allowed our member States to set high common
standards for the management of conventional arms
transfers, and it is currently being renewed to enhance
its effectiveness.

The European Union welcomes the efforts being
made to build regional support for better control over
small arms transfers. It welcomes also the important
work being done in various forums to discuss and
improve common standards for arms transfers at the
national, regional and global levels. Such standards
must be based on existing responsibilities under the
relevant provisions of international law.

We support the efforts made by the Secretariat to
encourage Member States to participate in the Register
of Conventional Arms. The European Union reiterates
its call on all States to submit timely returns of imports
and exports to the Register, including information on
military holdings and on procurement related to
national production.

The European Union welcomes the emphasis on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes in post-conflict situations in the
Secretary-General's report on small arms, and we note
the increased focus by the Council on this issue. It
agrees also that specific measures are needed for the
collection and disposal of illicit or surplus small arms
and light weapons in the context of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

The European Union's Action Plan on Africa
outlines the support that the European Security and
Defence Policy can offer African peacekeeping
capabilities, including providing relevant African
organizations with "on call" teams able to plan and
implement actions in the area of DDR and security
sector reform. The EU is willing also to train military
personnel and civilians to participate in DDR
programmes, including aspects specific to the subject
of child soldiers.

The European Union is determined to help other
partners, with the common goal of moving matters
forward. Through its joint action on combating the
destabilizing accumulation and spread of small arms,
the EU provides financial and technical assistance to
countries, groups of countries and international and
non-governmental organizations that request such
support. Since 1999, through that joint action, we have
taken 14 such actions in Eastern Europe, in Latin
America and the Caribbean, in Asia and in Africa. The
total sum committed so far is almost 13 million euros.

Among the priorities set by the Council, specific
attention has been given to the destruction of existing
stockpiles of small arms and to support for regional
moratoriums in Africa. In that context, the European
Council decided, on 2 December 2004, to give its
fullest support to the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States to strengthen its
moratorium and to replace it with a mandatory
convention. In addition, 48.7 million euros were
committed in 2003 alone, from the European
Development Fund, to support small arms and light
weapons projects in Africa. Through that fund, the EU
is financing several programmes aimed at the
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
into society and others geared to the collection and
destruction of weapons.

In addition, the member States of the European
Union contribute individually to many assistance
projects and programmes aimed at controlling the illicit
trading and use of small arms and light weapons,
particularly in African countries.

While we have noted recent positive
developments, may I conclude by calling for continued
relentless efforts on the part of the international
community as a whole to make the best possible use of
existing and future instruments in order to put an end
to the uncontrolled accumulation of illicit small arms
and light weapons, so as to help prevent senseless
violence in future.

For its part, the European Union will continue to
work towards that goal by relying on international
cooperation, financial and technical assistance
programmes and effective arms control.

