President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo (spoke in Spanish): It is my pleasure and honour to address the
Council for the first time on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea. We thank the United States of
America for convening this debate and congratulate it
on its excellent work as President of the Council.

Disarmament is one of the longest-standing
objectives ofthe United Nations. It was the subject ofthe
first Security Council resolution (resolution 1 (1946)),
adopted on 25 January 1946, under Article 47 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Council adopted
that resolution 72 years ago, and to this day the world
is still in the midst of an arms race that leads many
States to feel obliged to equip themselves with all types
of weapons for their defence, including weapons of
mass destruction. Moreover, such nuclear arsenals not
only aggravate tensions between States and undermine
efforts for peace, but also threaten the very existence
of humankind. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
neither possesses nor intends to possess weapons of
mass destruction; it has adopted measures to guarantee
the strict implementation of the commitments
and obligations undertaken with the international
community in the area of non-proliferation by acceding
to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty.

The promotion of nuclear disarmament must be a
priority on the agenda of the international community.
Two years from now, we will celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which entered
into force in 1970. That international instrument made it
possible to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons
to countries that did not then possess them, but it was
not as successful in eliminating those weapons from the
nuclear arsenals of nuclear-armed States, which have
always strongly resisted implementing their nuclear
disarmament commitments. The expenses incurred
by the nuclear Powers to maintain and, in some cases,
modernize their arsenals exceed the combined budget
of all the countries of the African Union and some
other regions.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
constitutes a threat to international peace and security
and commits the Council to its role of working to
prevent the production and spread of such weapons.
To counter the proliferation and use of weapons of
mass destruction, it is essential to implement and
comply with international non-proliferation treaties
and resolution 1540 (2004); to support the Proliferation
Security Initiative and the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism; to prohibit all nuclear weapons
testing; to share information among States and
international organizations; and to implement joint
control systems for the verification, inspection and
monitoring of nuclear arsenals and research plants by
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
in collaboration with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, which should also include their security and
destruction. In addition, negotiations with nuclear-
weapon States should be encouraged to effectively
reject the nuclear weapons option. At the same time,
their security should be guaranteed and the right of all
parties to the peaceful use ofnuclear energy recognized.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is highly
alarmed because of the paradox that what the United
Nations says and what each country actually does
within its sovereign prerogative takes place in a context
of lies, deceptions, hypocrisy and a lack of solidarity.
Just two days ago we devoted a special summit to the
honour the thinking of the South African leader Nelson
Mandela, in which we all agreed to reject any kind of
confrontation and resentment and that, thanks to his
legacy, a world of peace, security, development and
well-being for all could be achieved. Nevertheless,
many States appear to choose to wage an arms race that
runs counter to the noble ideals of the Mandela summit,
which all of us accepted and applauded.
Weapons of mass destruction can be banned and
their use made unthinkable. All that is required is the
necessary will on all sides. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea expresses its firm support for pursuing efforts
towards the negotiation and adoption of binding
legal instruments leading to effective, irreversible
and verifiable nuclear disarmament with a view to
achieving the goal of the complete elimination of all
nuclear weapons. The international community of
nations should also be deeply concerned about the
humanitarian consequences and global effects of any
nuclear detonation, be it accidental or intentional, and
must cooperate at the international security level to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring the means to
engage in nuclear terrorism.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is committed
to the use of nuclear energy only for peaceful purposes
and under the supervision of the IAEA.

I shall conclude by pointing out that in our region
of Africa there are no weapons of mass destruction,
nor have they ever been used, which, for us, indicates
that weapons of mass destruction are the result of
the illegal trafficking of weapons, terrorism and the
conflicts on our continent. That is why there is a need
to support the African Union in its desire and initiative
to obtain funding for peace missions led by Africa on
a case-by-case basis. I strongly appeal to the members
of the Security Council to ensure that this support
materializes, since it will ultimately contribute to
international peace and security, which is the main
objective of the Security Council.

