Mr. McNee (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I would like to extend my
thanks to France for convening this important debate
today, and to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing this morning and for all his very dedicated
efforts for the protection of civilians.

This year's debate looks forward to the upcoming
tenth anniversary of landmark achievements in
advancing the protection of civilians in the Council
stemming from resolution 1265 (1999) - a resolution
that was groundbreaking in proposing actions to
address both legal and physical protection concerns.
Since this issue was first brought onto the Council's
agenda, important progress has been made. Canada
applauds efforts to ensure that the protection of
civilians becomes part of our collective consciousness.
Nonetheless, critical gaps remain between key
principles and the daily actions taken to respond to
protection challenges - gaps keenly felt by civilians
in conflict situations around the world.

Civilian populations caught in armed conflict
often account for the majority of casualties as indirect
victims and, more sobering still, as deliberate targets.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the recent
escalation of fighting has led to the displacement of
hundreds of thousands of people, as well as to a serious
increase of sexual and gender-based violence. In Sri
Lanka, civilian populations continue to face unending
displacement as they move ahead of shifting front lines
to avoid crossfires.

In Afghanistan, over a quarter of a century of
conflict has taken a heavy toll on the population and
serves as a potent reminder of why our support for the
Afghan Government is so important. Needs-based
humanitarian action remains a key priority for Canada.
Working with international partners, we remain
focused on saving lives, alleviating suffering and
building self-reliance among the most vulnerable of the
Afghan populace.

Looking ahead, there is much that the Security
Council and all Member States can do. We have at our
disposal a sophisticated normative legal framework
based on international law and Security Council
resolutions that lay out a set of mutually reinforcing
commitments on the protection of civilians and
responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security. But we must move from
commitments by the Council to practical action. This
can be done by bolstering the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms which will assist in responding to given
situations with the right tools in a timely and effective
manner. Canada is particularly interested in progress
on efforts to report rapidly to the Council when
humanitarian access is denied or deliberately hindered.
We applaud efforts to bring such instances to the
Council's attention more systematically.

Humanitarian workers are also increasingly
targeted, as we have seen in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and Afghanistan;
those are acts that we strongly condemn. Ensuring the
safety of humanitarian workers is vital. We call on all
parties to conflicts to respect the neutrality, impartiality
and independence of humanitarian workers who
undertake critical life-saving work, often at great
personal risk.

It is important to strengthen the capacity of the
international humanitarian system to address protection
issues through mechanisms such as the protection
cluster. Humanitarian and resident coordinators, as
well as United Nations staff, must be confident and
steadfast in raising protection concerns with relevant
parties to conflict. The deployment of protection
experts through the United Nations Protection Standby
Capacity Project has become an important and
successful element in filling capacity gaps in the field.

(spoke in French)

The Council and the broader United Nations
membership have a role to play in ensuring that those
who commit serious violations of international law be
brought to justice. Here, the work of the International
Criminal Court is critical in fostering accountability. It
is also vital that protection issues be translated into
clear and achievable operational guidance for military
and civilian actors. Those upon whom we entrust
protection responsibilities must have the knowledge
and training required to effectively fulfil this role.

The aide-memoire on the protection of civilians
serves as an important framework for defining threats
that arise to civilian populations. Practical tools of this
type facilitate effective responses to protection
challenges. We support efforts to revise this important
document.

For those affected and displaced by conflict, our
actions matter far more than our words. Protection of
civilians must be a priority. It is no easy task to resolve
these issues or translate international legal norms into
practical and realistic commitments. Nothing that is
valuable in life is ever easy. But it is our collective
duty to ensure that civilians everywhere will be
afforded the basic human dignity that each individual
deserves.

