Mr. Gadio (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to extend my warm and fraternal
congratulations to you, Mr. President. We are very
proud to see you, an African, in a leadership role at the
Security Council - which finds itself at a major
crossroads in this month of March 2003. May God
continue to guide and inspire you in your sensitive but
noble mission.

My delegation associates itself with previous
speakers in commending the very wise and appropriate
choice of today's topic, which sums up a concern
shared in the West African community, given that we
are determined to find long-lasting solutions to the
twin problems crucial to peace and security in our
subregion. Those problems are the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the activities of
mercenaries.

Before going any further, I would like to invoke
and embrace the memory of our fallen friend and
companion Mr. Kofi Panou, former Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Togo, who fought at our side for
peace and security in our subregion and on our
continent.

The eruption of identity-based and irredentist
movements, the increased appetite for certain natural
resources - both on and beneath the ground -
domestic, social and political schisms and trans-border
conflicts have resulted in the illegal influx of a large
number of small arms and light weapons into West
Africa and in the rise of mercenary operations. Those
weapons are accessible, inexpensive and easy to use.
There are over 500 million such weapons throughout
the world, and they have been employed in every
conflict to beset West Africa. Wherever they have
appeared, they have brought with them death and
desolation, undermined efforts at economic and social
development and compromised attempts at conflict
resolution that have been the result of implementing
acidulously negotiated agreements. Moreover, they
have always served to promote the rise of both
domestic and foreign criminal gangs, which have been
lured by the appeal of easy money obtained through
extortion and murder.

That picture is made all the more sombre by the
recent emergence of mercenary war dogs who have
come from distant and neighbouring lands, often
brandishing the title of agents of "military companies".
That euphemism is hardly convincing, judging from
their terrible ability to be disruptive in the countries
where they are brought to work. West Africa has
already been a theatre of operations for those pathetic
individuals, who have illustrated the hideous damage
they can do in their flagrant denial of fundamental
human rights in places such as the Biafra region of
Nigeria, Benin and Guinea.

We must make no mistake about it. As stated in
1997 by Mr. Enrique Bernales Ballesteros, Special
Rapporteur on mercenaries for the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, mercenaries have the
terrible ability to "undermine the maintenance of
public order, the sovereign exercise of State authority
and a nation's territorial integrity". Added to those
burdens are the economic disruption and the fratricidal
division of the mercenary phenomenon.

Faced with all those dangers, it is welcome that
both the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union have been
proactively developing appropriate instruments. In fact,
for a number of years, West Africa has been giving
high priority to combating the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects. The
determination of the leadership of our subregion was
embodied in the 1998 adoption by the ECOWAS Abuja
Summit of the Moratorium on the Import, Export and
Manufacture of Light Weapons. That important
progress was supported by the establishment of the
Programme for Coordination and Assistance for
Security and Development (PCASED), which, along
with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), aims at establishing a culture of peace and
security in the ECOWAS region. In that connection, we
would like to commend the excellent leadership of our
countryman Mr. Ibrahima Sall. We encourage him to
continue his fight as he makes his appeal to the
international community for more resources.

I can only add to that incomplete list by
mentioning the Organization of African Union's
adoption of the Convention for the Elimination of
Mercenarism in Africa, which is one of the most
important instruments available to combat this terrible
phenomenon.

Five months after the Security Council held a
public meeting on small arms and light weapons the
Guinean presidency had the very good idea of re-
examining this point, adding a question that goes hand
in hand with it: mercenary activities. In so doing, at a
time when the international community's attention is
riveted by the Iraqi crisis, Guinea was quite right to
recall just how pressing this critical problem is in West
Africa, since it has a direct impact on the lives of
millions of people.

Senegal, all the same, believes that an end must
be put to the subregional omerta - the code of silence,
which continues to be the hallmark of political regimes
in our subregion who, in plain sight of all, have
mastered the art of spreading this widespread curse of
small arms and those who use them - professional or
apprentice, large or small - whom we call
mercenaries. We know these regimes. The international
community often points a finger at them. The supreme
irony of it all is that we are the ones who sometimes
come to the defense of such regimes.

West Africa also calls for United Nations
inspectors and international fact-finding commissions
that will be able to prove without any shadow of doubt
the bloody crimes of some political regimes in the
subregion so that those regimes can be ostracized from
the community of civilized and peaceful nations and
disarmed or neutralized, one way or another. There lies
the only legitimate debate today for the millions of
displaced persons, children crippled by shameful mines
and inconsolable weeping mothers from countries that
have been abruptly overwhelmed by rebellions that
destroy our already fragile futures.

While commending warmly my friend and bother
Francois Fall, I would like to emphasize several other
measures that my delegation believes should be taken
and that the international community should initiate or
support so as to stop once and for all the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons and mercenary
operations.

First, there is a need to strengthen and strictly
apply all instruments concerning the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and mercenary activities
and to review the Organization of African Unity
Convention on mercenaries, given the new
manifestations of this scourge and its links to terrorism.
There should also be a mechanism to identify and trace
the illegal flows of small arms and light weapons.

Secondly, there is a need for transparency in
commercial and brokerage activities linked to arms; a
ban on centres for training specialized mercenaries in
subversive activities, who are discretely called "private
military companies"; measures to bring to justice
mercenaries involved in criminal activities related to
terrorism and to extradite them, in keeping with
domestic law and international instruments.

Thirdly, there is a need to promote programmes
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants, who might be tempted to engage
in mercenary activities.

Fourthly, monitoring the transfer of small arms
between States that produce and those that purchase
them should be strengthened, in particular by using a
twin tracking and marking system.

Fifthly, a special United Nations mechanism
should be established to control inspections for West
Africa, complemented by the creation of international
commissions of inquiry, certain of whose conclusions
could be submitted to the International Criminal Court.
Senegal would particularly like to hear the opinion of
members of our forum, especially our development
partners on the Security Council.

In conclusion, real progress still must be made if
we wish to extract our subregion from the quagmire of
the dual ills of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and mercenary activities. Let us hasten to act,
rather than always react, so that the shadowy network,
which shamelessly brings together unscrupulous arms
merchants and blood-stained mercenaries allied with
some of our leaders, will dissolved once and for all and
so, that West Africa, reconciled with itself, finds again
the virtuous path to peace and prosperity.

On this hopeful note, Mr. President I congratulate
you again on choosing this a critical topic. I wish you
success in your presidency, with so many pressing
items on the Security Council's agenda this month.

