Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to thank
you for having convened this meeting. We also thank
Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, and Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their
briefings this morning.

The increasing variety of challenges that the
world is witnessing requires that efforts be made that
are commensurate with their scope and their impact
on international peace and security. It seems that the
lessons learned in the context of international efforts
to deal with conflicts and crises have been insufficient,
and we are now paying the price for the spread of these
challenges, which include terrorism.

The continued consideration by the Security
Council for many years of the situation in the Middle
East reaffirms this. We welcome the holding of regular
meetings by the Security Council on the situation on
the Middle East; however, we believe that achieving
peace in the region is dependent on respect by the
parties for the provisions of international law and
requires refraining from actions that are catastrophic
for international peace and security.

The international community has agreed on the
basic criteria for resolving the crisis in the Middle East.
The realization ofpeace in the region requires the defeat
of terrorism in a context of international legitimacy and
the implementation of all peace initiatives. That means
that there is no alternative to the establishment of a
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace
and security on the basis of the June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the Arab Peace Initiative.
This requires that an end be put to the Israeli occupation
of all occupied Arab territories and to all settlement
activities, the lifting of the siege of Gaza, protection
for the Palestinian people, the return of refugees and
the realization of the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination.

The success of any peace initiative will require
Israel to desist from its policy ofimposing a fait accompli
on the occupied territories, in violation of international
law. Such actions by Israel are all null and void and will
not lead to a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
In addition, addressing the dire humanitarian situation
in Gaza will have a positive impact on peace efforts.

When we speak of the situation in the Middle East,
we cannot ignore the current situation in Syria, which
represents the greatest challenge to the international
community. The repeated failures to put an immediate
end to the Syrian crisis will lead only to the continuation
of flagrant violations of international law and to
instability in the Middle East, thus affecting Syria's
territorial integrity and the unity of its people as well
as the security and stability of the region and the world.

However, the efforts made by the international
community and the International Syria Support Group,
as well as the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2268 (2016), have not had the desired effect.
The Syrian regime continues to violate international
law, targets civilians, uses weapons with indiscriminate
effects and commits massacres in all areas. It exploits
divisions in the Security Council and continues its
violation of international humanitarian law against
civilians in Syria, in total disregard of their impact
on the region and the world, using the United Nations
and other forums to change the facts on the ground
and manipulate the situation, as it has done recently
in Aleppo.

This humanitarian disaster has seemingly not been
enough for the Syrian regime to change its policies.
The Syrian people have become fodder for war in the
absence of an international consensus. We are aware
of the seriousness of the challenges facing the Security
Council with regard to the Syrian crisis and of how they
prevent the Council from taking immediate measures
to put an end to the violations and massacres being
committed in Syria. The Security Council is required,
today more than ever, to immediately step in to protect
civilians in Aleppo and other parts of Syria.

The only way to guarantee an end to the violence
is through the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). The only solution to the crisis is a Syrian-led
comprehensive and inclusive political process that
would enable the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people to be realized, implement in full the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and lead to a peaceful
transfer of power and the release of all detainees and
prisoners, as well as allow international assistance to
reach all those in need.

We will continue our efforts, along with the rest of
the international community, to ensure the realization
of the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

