Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am pleased to see you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over the Security Council. I welcome the
presence of the President-elect of Haiti, Mr. Preval. I
congratulate him on his electoral victory and wish him
every success in his efforts to improve the lives of all
Haitians. We also welcome other participants, our
eminent guests and the briefings given at today's
meeting.

We regard as generally successful the first round
of national elections in Haiti, which are intended to
restore constitutional law and order in the country. We
expect that the Haitian Government, drawing upon
appropriate international support, will do everything
possible to ensure that the second round of legislative
elections and the subsequent local government
elections take place in accordance with democratic
norms and standards and within the planned time
frame.

It is essential that all political forces in Haiti
accept the outcome of the forthcoming elections, in the
interests of promoting the political process over the
long term. In the post-election period, all political
forces in Haiti, guided by the country's vital interests,
must work more actively to promote national
conciliation and political dialogue and to strengthen
State institutions.

If there is to be long-term stabilization of the
situation in Haiti, reform of the law enforcement
structures is key. It is particularly important that we
promptly implement the framework plan for reforming
the Haitian police in order to create an effective and
functional police service. If that plan is to be
implemented, there must be greater interaction between
the national police and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Despite the great importance of international
assistance to Haiti, the primary responsibility for
strengthening stability and advancing the peace process
continues to lie with the Haitians themselves. Without
true desire or energetic efforts on the part of the
Haitian people to improve daily life in their country, a
long-term positive outcome in Haiti will not be
possible. The new Haitian leadership has the main
responsibility for engaging in productive cooperation
with the international community.

In that connection, we commend the efforts of
MINUSTAH and its head, Mr. Valdes, whom we thank
for his briefing today. In particular, we note the
Mission's important role in successfully organizing and
holding the first round of national elections. We pay
tribute to all peacekeepers who have given their lives
for the cause of peace in Haiti. We are also grateful to
the Argentine delegation and to the Group of Friends
of Haiti for the draft Security Council presidential
statement, which we fully support.

