Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Since this is
the first time the delegation of Egypt is participating in
the work of the Security Council under your presidency,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of your duties. I would also like to
express our sincere wish that you have every success
at the helm of the Council. I am extremely delighted as
well to see you leading the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We are confident that your experience as an active
spokesperson on behalf of one of the main groups
dealing with intergovernmental negotiations for
Security Council reform will undoubtedly augur well
for your chairmanship of the Working Group.

I would also like to commend your initiative in
convening this open debate on the working methods of
the Security Council at the beginning of this year and
at the beginning of your chairmanship of the Working
Group. This is an opportunity for all States Members
of the United Nations, including members and
non-members of the Council, to express their opinion
as to how to move forward, based on progress made in
recent years on the working methods of the Security
Council. This includes the update of note S/2017/507
of the President of the Security Council under the
Japanese chairmanship of the Informal Working Group.

The broad participation in today's debate
demonstrates Member States' ongoing interest in
developing the working methods of the Security Council.
It shows their conviction that, when the Security
Council fulfils its mandate of maintaining international

peace and security, it would be acting on behalf of all
States Members of the United Nations, as stipulated in
article 24 of the Charter. The practical implementation
of Article 24 requires continuous strive to develop the
working methods of the Security Council in order to
ensure that it becomes more democratic and inclusive
in its decision-making process and that it involves
the participation of all its members - permanent and
elected - so that the Council becomes more open and
transparent in its interactions with Members of the
Organization and responds to their concerns and ideas.

All of these issues were a prime target for Egypt
during its participation in the Security Council.
Egypt participated in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
in updating note S/2017/507, which is a compilation
of all innovations in terms of the working methods of
the Security Council. I would briefly like to talk about
five points.

First, the functioning of the Security Council is a
collective responsibility that requires full participation
by all its members - both permanent and elected - on
an equal footing. It calls for a fair distribution of duties
and functions, including in drafting Council documents
by the penholder. Through such a fair distribution, the
decision-making process would be more democratic
and inclusive, and Security Council resolutions would
represent all its members' opinions in a balanced fashion
and would also take into consideration the experience
that some members have with certain issues, situations
or crises that are taking place in the particular regions
to which those countries belong.

Secondly, the discussions between the members of
the Security Council must be transparent and inclusive.
Information should be available to all members, who
would be able to participate in discussions on issues
under consideration. Sufficient time needs to be
allocated to studying draft resolutions and other texts
before they are submitted for adoption.

Thirdly, given the complicated nature of conflicts
on the Security Council's agenda, there is a need for
comprehensive approaches that take into consideration
the different dimensions of the conflicts throughout
their different stages. That would ensure an ongoing
response from United Nations organs in terms of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Political solutions would always be given priority. It
is also important to highlight the advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and its contribution
to the work of the Council in terms of the conflicts on
its agenda. The programmes of work of the Security
Council and the PBC must be coordinated to ensure
that the Council receives the PBC's contribution at the
right time and before the Council considers the issues
concerned. The procedure for proposing informal
informative discussions with the PBC on issues that are
on the Council's agenda must also be streamlined.

Fourthly, and in the same vein, we consider it very
important to develop close coordination between the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries in
the context of peacekeeping operations to ensure the
greatest understanding possible between the Council
and those countries in reviewing the mandates that
their troops have to implement on the ground and the
means of overcoming the complex challenges that those
troops face.

Fifthly, the complicated and interconnected nature
of threats to international peace and security requires
close cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union.
We therefore commend the contents of note S/2017/507
on the annual joint consultative meetings between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union. We underscore the importance
of the informal interactive dialogues between the two
Councils, which should be held more often. The note
also mentions implementing joint missions to the field
by the two Councils.

Our term in the Security Council enabled us to
get to know the functions and working methods of the
sanctions committees. They are one of the instruments
that the Council has at its disposal under the Charter of
the United Nations to manage threats to international
peace and security. The Council has made significant
progress in developing the concept of sanctions. They
changed from being comprehensive measures to become
more intelligent and effective at reducing their negative
and unintended impact on civilians and countries that
are not parties to the conflict.

The specific nature of the different threats to
international peace and security means that any
sanctions regime must be designed in a way that is in
line with the nature ofthose threats, and therefore deals
with those threats according to available data. Of course,
the specific nature does not mean that accumulated
expertise and lessons learned need to be disregarded
in each new case. It is therefore important to form a
genuine partnership among the Security Council,
Member States and stakeholders through mechanisms
and channels that allow the parties to be heard and their
opinions to be understood. That is one of the tools that
would enable more progress within current and future
sanctions regimes. That is also an opportunity for the
Council to discuss this matter on a regular basis and to
adopt necessary measures.

In conclusion, Egypt has sought to make a positive
contribution to the efforts to develop the United Nations
sanctions regime. In July 2017, Egypt organized an
Arria Formula meeting to shed light on the experiences
of three brotherly African nations and to understand
the impact of sanctions on the restoration of stability
in those countries. During the Egyptian presidency of
the Council in August 2017, a briefing was also held to
discuss the same issue (see S/PV.8018). Those meetings
showed the need for more efforts to be made to improve
United Nations sanctions regimes. Egypt was keen to
circulate a report to the Council with a summary of the
meetings, as well as ideas and recommendations from
a national perspective that resulted from that fruitftul
dialogue with Council members. We believe that
multilateralism is a collective effort based on progress
achieved. We hope that the report will be a positive
contribution to any future effort aimed at improving
United Nations sanctions regimes.

