I would like to thank Special Adviser Khan for his insightful briefing and continued efforts in Iraq. We begin by welcoming the enhanced cooperation between the new Government of Iraq and the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), noting that such cooperation has resulted in important agreements concerning action on key activities, including the excavation of mass grave sites, support to Iraqi authorities with respect to witness protection measures and the implementation of UNITAD's evidence digitization project. The mutually reinforcing relationship between the Iraqi Government and UNITAD facilitates the implementation of UNITAD's mandate and provides necessary support to the Government of Iraq, with respect for Iraq's sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence. We recognize the constructive engagement of UNITAD with national authorities, such as the Ministry of Justice and the Supreme Judicial Council, which has led to an agreement on the provision of support to Iraqi investigative judges pertaining to the development of case files for the prosecution of members of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We cannot overstate how critical those confidence-building and capacity-building measures are in sustaining peace and enhancing stability and security in Iraq and, by extension, the wider region. A stronger Iraq can be built only from within. At the same time, we emphasize that the international community has a role to play in supporting Iraq in its reconstruction and development. We encourage the Iraqi Government to take a victim-centred approach as it works to secure accountability for the crimes of ISIL and its affiliates, which have assaulted the people of Iraq. To that end, we welcome the fact that the Council of Representatives has formally commenced its consideration of legislation to establish a legal basis for the prosecution of ISIL members for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We urge the authorities to build on that momentum and finalize their work. UNITAD plays a critical role in Iraq, as was recognized by the Council in its unanimous adoption of resolution 2544 (2020) in September. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes UNITAD's steps towards discharging its mandate, as well as its engagement with diverse parts of Iraqi society, including religious actors, survivor groups, non-governmental organizations and community leaders. We also welcome the critical work of the Sexual and Gender-based Crimes and Crimes against Children Unit. Witnesses play an important role in facilitating UNITAD's work, and we commend the steps that have been taken to ensure their protection. Attempts to strengthen UNITAD's trauma-informed approach to all interviews, including the role of the Witness Protection and Support Unit, must be commended. In conclusion, we emphasize that, unless perpetrators are held accountable and justice secured for victims, sustainable peace in Iraq will not be possible. The primary responsibility for that rests with the Iraqi authorities. However, all States and actors at the international and regional levels are encouraged to support Iraq. We reaffirm our support for Special Adviser Karim Khan and his team, whom we thank for their dedication, and express our hope for a secure, prosperous and stable Iraq.
