Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The humanitarian
situation in Iraq is a matter of serious concern to my
delegation. The sanctions imposed against Iraq by the
United Nations have inevitably had adverse effects on the
nutritional and health situation of the people of that
country. The primary purpose of the resolution we are
about to adopt is to help alleviate the deterioration in this
situation and alleviate the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
people. It is for this reason that my delegation will join
others in voting in favour.

 

Considerable efforts have been made during the past
few days to blunt what some consider to be the rough
edges of the draft resolution by taking into account the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq to accommodate
Iraq's national sensitivities. It is our sincere hope that the
fifth preambular paragraph, subparagraph 8 (a) and
paragraphs 10 and 18 have addressed some of the concerns
expressed by the Government of Iraq. My delegation would
not, of course, be surprised if Iraq does not like the
resolution or if it does not agree with everything contained
in it, but we hope they will accept the spirit reflected in it
and implement it for the benefit of the Iraqi people. Of
course, we would be terribly disappointed if the resolution
is consigned to the graveyard like resolutions 706 (1991)
and 712 (1991), because that would not make Council look
good.

The third preambular paragraph clearly states that what
the Security Council is doing is providing

"a temporary measure for the humanitarian needs
of the Iraqi people"

while their country is still subject to mandatory sanctions.
There can be no doubt that this "temporary measure"
cannot satisfy the needs of the people of Iraq: the needs of
the people of Iraq can be satisfied only when Iraq has
satisfied the requirements of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In other words, the ball rests squarely in Iraq's
court.

We have noted with satisfaction the full cooperation
that the Government of Iraq has extended to the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) in most of the
areas in which the Commission has been working. We hope
that the remaining issues will be resolved in the not-too-
distant future so that Iraq can awake from the nightmare of
sanctions.

