Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
organized this timely debate on the situation in Iraq in
the presence of His Excellency Vice-President Abdal
Mahdi, whom we welcome. We listened to his briefing
with attention and great interest. We thank the
Secretary-General for the detailed and concise report
presented by Mr. Qazi. Our thanks go also to the
representative of the United States of America for his
briefing.

The situation in Iraq remains very grave. The
level of violence reached in the country continues to be
worrisome in many respects. At the national level, that
violence, while hampering all national reconstruction
efforts based on the International Compact with Iraq, is
helping to exacerbate political and religious tensions,
posing enormous risks for Iraq's unity and territorial
integrity. At the regional level, it is an element of
strong destabilization in a region already beset by great
social and political tensions. At the international level,
violence is undermining the assistance efforts agreed
upon by the international community, particularly
through the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the Multinational Force.
We firmly condemn this orgy of violence. We
believe that nothing can stop its devastating effects
unless the Iraqi political class comes to its senses and
all types of external interference in Iraqi affairs cease.

The impossibility of a military solution to the
Iraq crisis becomes more obvious every day. Only an
inclusive and responsible dialogue will make it
possible to address the many challenges facing Iraqi
society. My delegation calls for the organization of
such a dialogue, which would lead to national
reconciliation on the basis of the following concerns:
equitable sharing of national resources and wealth;
realistic power-sharing; the establishment of reliable
security forces that can eventually replace foreign
forces; the dismantling of sectarian militias, other
armed groups and the flow of weapons into Iraq;
consideration of the question of refugees and internally
displaced persons; the establishment of a system for
human rights protection and a reliable judicial system;
and, finally, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq.

Of course, it is up to the Iraqi Government to
create the conditions for such an approach. However,
the role of the international community and of all
interested parties is essential. In that connection, my
delegation supports the various initiatives under way to
reduce the violence and stabilize the situation in Iraq.
The holding of a conference on Iraqi security on
10 March 2007 in Baghdad is an encouraging first step
in terms of the participation that it attracted, as is the
decision to establish three joint committees responsible
for issues related to security, refugees and petroleum.

Thus, we welcome the recognition of the need to
involve all of Iraq's neighbours in any initiative to
stabilize the situation in the country and beyond,
throughout the Middle East. We look forward with
interest to the announced holding of a conference at the
ministerial level to provide follow-up to the Baghdad
talks.

All of this activity, if carried out with patience
and determination on the basis of the objectives I have
mentioned, should certainly help to reduce the violence
and to stabilize the country.

