Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): I would like warmly to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of this month's presidency of the
Security Council at this auspicious time of the year, when
everything is taking on a fresh look. I am convinced that,
given your wisdom and rich experience, you will guide
the Council's work to success. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Bakuramutsa, last month's President, for
having successfully conducted the work of the Council
during that month.

I should like also to take this opportunity to express
my regret at the departure of the members who left the
Council at the end of last year. I commend them for the
work they did in the Council, and I hope they will
continue to be concerned in the Council's work.

I wish also warmly to welcome our new partners -
the representatives of Botswana, Germany, Honduras,
Indonesia and Italy. We pledge our complete cooperation
with them in the Council's work.

The Chinese delegation would like, too, to welcome
warmly the Foreign Minister of Italy, His Excellency
Mr. Antonio Martino. We are glad to have him present
during our work today.

 

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
943 (1994), the situation along the border between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been stable. The three reports of the
Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY) transmitted by the Secretary-General to
the Security Council have stated that the cooperation
between the FRY Government and the International
Conference's Mission continues to be satisfactory; the FRY
Government continues to fulfil its commitment and the
border between the FRY and Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains effectively closed. We are pleased by this
development and we welcome it.

The Chinese delegation has all along supported the
political efforts of the international community, including
those by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY to
resolve peacefully the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are of the view that the efforts made by the FRY in
implementing Security Council resolution 943 (1994) are
aimed at urging the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace plan.
In the past month further measures have been taken by
the FRY to keep the border more effectively closed, which
is a great support for the work of the international Mission.
Therefore, the international community should encourage
the FRY Government to continue to fulfil its commitment
and to make further efforts to bring peace to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, so as to enable the parties concerned to take
further positive steps to advance the process of a
comprehensive political settlement of the conflict in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The Chinese delegation holds that the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia should be settled peacefully through
negotiations and dialogue. We in principle are not in favour
of settling the dispute there through sanctions or mandatory
measures, for that has been proved to be of no help to the
settlement of problems, but would, rather, aggravate
contradictions in the region, bring tremendous sufferings to
its peoples and cause serious damage to the economy of
third countries that implement the sanctions, particularly
those neighbouring the FRY. Similar concerns and views
were expressed by the Secretary-General in document
S/1995/1.

Based on that position, the Chinese delegation
supports the extension of the relevant provisions on easing
sanctions in resolution 943 (1994) and will vote in favour
of the resolution that we shall adopt. At the same time, the
Chinese delegation wishes to point out that there are some
elements in the draft resolution, relating to resolutions
757 (1992) and 820 (1993), on which the Chinese
delegation has, on the basis of our position of principle,
expressed reservations on previous occasions. Our
position on them remains unchanged today.

