Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): The Sudan and
South Sudan are at critical junctures in their political
transitions. We hope to see both Governments seize
the opportunities this offers for forging a lasting and
comprehensive peace in Abyei and Blue Nile and South
Kordofan states. We are therefore encouraged by the
recent talks between the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan and express our hope that this momentum
in bilateral relations will continue. Strengthened
dialogue is key to securing a lasting resolution to the
situation in Abyei.

We remain concerned that armed forces from both
sides continue to occupy the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone. We therefore commend the recent commitment
of both Governments to withdrawing all forces
from the Zone and we urge swift implementation of
that commitment.

The United Kingdom welcomes the first round of
preliminary peace talks between the Government of
the Sudan and the armed movements. We encourage
all parties to return to talks on 21 November, ready to
engage constructively and without preconditions. We
also welcome the Government of the Sudan's moves
to remove bureaucratic impediments on humanitarian
actors. We hope that this decision will be implemented
in full, enabling unfettered humanitarian access across
the Sudan, including in Abyei and the Two Areas.

Against that changing backdrop, we welcome the
continuing progress outlined in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/817) at the mission level, including on
human rights and judicial capacity-building. However,
we recognize the persistent operational challenges
the mission faces, including delays in issuing visas
and entry clearances for mission assets. We regret
that the civilian Deputy Head of Mission has not yet
been deployed, given the importance of this role in
supporting progress on the political track.

Like others around the table, we commend the
Government of Ethiopia for its contribution to the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We
condemn all attacks on mission personnel and reiterate
our condolences to the Government of Ethiopia and the
family of the peacekeeper who lost his life on 16 July.

As the security situation in Abyei remains fragile,
with an increase in criminality and the sporadic
presence of armed elements, we share the Secretary-
General's assessment that UNISFA continues to
have a vital role to play in maintaining stability. The
Council should ensure that the mission is adequately
resourced to deliver on its mandates, including through
strengthened civilian and police capabilities. That is
vital if Abyei and the Two Areas are to benefit from
the opportunities for peace created by recent political
developments at the national level.

