Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I had not intended
to take the floor today, but in the light of the previous
explanations of vote, I wanted to place on record the
United Kingdom's very strong support for the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and of all its Prosecutors, and in particular for Ms. Del
Ponte.

Under Ms. Del Ponte's stewardship of the
International Tribunal, the number of outstanding
fugitives has been reduced to a handful. I think that
that handful is actually numbered at four, though I am
open to correction. She has been responsible for seeing
delivered to the Tribunal some of the most prominent
indictees, including ones mentioned by name in this
Chamber. I am thinking in particular of General
Gotovina of Croatia. She has also been instrumental in
ensuring the voluntary surrender of Haradinaj from
Kosovo. Those are very important achievements.

We do not believe that it helps foster widespread
or regional support for the Tribunal for there to be any
07-50559

question over the support of the Security Council for
its work. I say that particularly in the light of certain
statements from one country in the region,
undermining the work that the Tribunal has been doing.

One of the particular concerns we have is that we
hope that the two most prominent indictees
outstanding - they are, of course, Karadzic and
Mladic, who are indicted for the murder of over 7,000
Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica in 1995 - will not
gain any succour from the result today, or believe that
they can continue to challenge with impunity the will
of the Chamber, the will of this Council and the will, I
think, of the international community that they be
transferred speedily to The Hague.

I would just like to recall that, in 2003 and 2004,
we in this Chamber adopted two resolutions under
Chapter VII, making clear that, should Karadzic and
Mladic be transferred or apprehended at whatever stage
of the completion strategy, or even after the completion
strategy, they will be tried by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia.

