Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset, on behalf of our
Head of State and Government, His Excellency Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, to express my delegation's most
sincere congratulations on Sweden's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council, a task that it
is carrying in a manner that reflects its skill and great
leadership qualities.

With a View to formulating more concise
observations on the issue before us, I will focus on
Africa, where, in the context of conflict prevention
and sustainable peace, we would make a critical note
that the United Nations must recognize the need
for and implement a Security Council reform that
acknowledges, inter alia, the claim made by the African
Union in keeping with the Ezulwini consensus and the
Sirte Declaration.

Peace and security are necessary conditions for
development, growth and stability. In pursuit of its
national interests, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
strives for peace and freedom and remains firmly
committed to supporting the Security Council in its
primary role of the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Since becoming a Member of the United Nations
on 12 November 1968, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea has not had the opportunity to serve as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council. We
are striving now to achieve that goal under the principle
of equitable geographical rotation, which underpins
the legitimacy of United Nations decision-making.
However, my country, as a Member State, promotes the
principles of the Security Council of peace and unity
through diplomatic cooperation and the use of peaceful
dialogue so as to mitigate the causes and consequences
of conflicts and threats to world peace.

The security challenges facing humankind today
are not exclusive to a given State, region or continent.
The rise in inter-State conflict and violence has become
a global phenomenon as conflicts have become more
complex and multidimensional.

To ensure that the mandate of the Security Council
is carried out in a cooperative manner, as my country's
Permanent Representative I have held more than
100 bilateral meetings with my fellow ambassadors
and concerned stakeholders to inform them about
Equatorial Guinea, in particular its role in the Central
African subregion and Africa at large.

In pursuit of international cooperation, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea has also worked with
intergovernmental organizations, such as the African
Union and its organs, civil-society organizations, the
Equatorial Guinean Child Aid Committee and others, in
order to achieve most of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). My Government is now working
tirelessly to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
many other initiatives that promote peaceful pluralism.

Equatorial Guinea's Horizon 2020 initiative, a
national socioeconomic development framework,
demonstrates our commitment to implementing conflict
prevention and sustainable peace through economic
empowerment. Our commitment to the initiative has
yielded commendable results - we achieved five of
the eight MDGs.

The commitment of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea to sustainable peace and security is evident
in its policy of multilateralism and collective
responsibility, and is bolstered by our participation in,
and support from, intergovernmental organizations and
working groups.

Through those programmes, we continue to
build consensus and avenues for partnership through
meetings, conferences and events on social, economic,
political, health and environmental issues. We have
hosted African Union Summits, the Africa Cup of
Nations, the International Conference on Africa's
Fight against Ebola, the UNESCO-Equatorial Guinea
International Prize for Research in the Life Sciences,
the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization's
Food Security Programme meeting, the Southern
Africa Summit, the Africa-South America Summit, the
Turkey-Africa Cooperation Summit, the Africa-Arab
World Summit and many other events.

According to the 2016 Global Peace Index report,
the state of peace in the world is abysmal and is at
risk. The report concluded that the world has become
somewhat less peaceful, as compared to previous years.
Violence is the consequence of human conditions, and
its psychosocial effects are pervasive. Daily, we read
the headlines and witness the effects of complex and
multidimensional conflicts - images of violence,
destruction and humanitarian crises that arise from the
precarious state of security. Men, women and children
are at risk as the result of decisions taken by internal
and external political actors and institutions.

Conflict resolution requires integrated approaches
to addressing the root causes and drivers of
inter-State violence. In Africa, statistics tell us that
through partnerships with subregional, regional and
intergovernmental organizations, such as the United
Nations and its organs, African States can create
responsible public institutions capable of achieving
inclusive development and sustainable peace.

Research shows that two thirds of the Security
Council's activities in recent years have been focused
on violence and conflict in Africa. However, Africa
is not fully represented in the governing bodies of the
United Nations and its organs, in particular the Security
Council. There are currently nine United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa. It is therefore
inconceivable and unjustifiable that Africa, which has
54 Member States in the United Nations and whose
problems account for more than 70 per cent of the issues
handled annually by the Security Council, does not yet
have a single permanent seat on the Council.

The failure to include African States when dealing
with issues relating to their affairs and security
creates sociopolitical and humanitarian conditions
that keep African States and institutions dependent on
insufficient and unstable foreign aid. Member States
must resist the temptation to mould other parts of the
world in their own image.

Moreover, the Security Council must recognize
that longevity in leadership depends on the model of
democratization. It can contribute to the maintenance of
peace and does not necessarily mean a non-democratic
Government. In the case of Equatorial Guinea, the
longevity of our leader has been a key factor for our
unity, morale and strength, and for the development of
key infrastructure and sustainable peace. Multilaterally,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, under the leadership
of President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, continues to
play a vital role in resolving conflicts in the region
with a View to ensuring peace and stability in Africa.
Accordingly, in the Global Peace Index report,
Equatorial Guinea is among the 10 most peaceful
countries of Africa. In addition, our literacy rate is one
of the highest in Africa, at 93 per cent and, as a result
of sound investments, my country can boast one of the
highest gross domestic products per capita in Africa.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
strives to promote comprehensive structures for the
maintenance of international peace and security through
diplomacy and compromise. The virtuous qualities
and values of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea rest
on the pillars of hard work, dynamism and innovation.
In our view, the effectiveness of the United Nations
needs to be enhanced. In that regard, we recommend
that the Security Council improve the monitoring and
coordination of responses among Member States in
order to minimize the impact of conflicts and continue
to promote peace and the maintenance of peace and
security worldwide.

I once again congratulate the new members of the
Security Council and hope that their efforts will bring
the world lasting peace in 2017.

