Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on the
way you have been conducting the work of this historic
session.

The Government of Mexico observes with
growing concern the re-emergence of violence in the
Middle East that today is threatening to spread. We
deplore the irreparable loss of human life, most of
these people being innocent civilians, and we reiterate
our firm belief that violence only begets further
violence. The peace process begun in Madrid and Oslo
had a promising start, fostering hope within the
international community that at last there would be a
solution to a conflict that has accompanied the United
Nations since its creation. However, the current
stagnation is a cause of dismay for peace-loving
countries such as Mexico.

For many years we have maintained that over and
above the age-old rivalry and over and above the harm
that one of the parties may have incurred from the
other, it must be understood that belonging to the same
region inevitably requires peaceful coexistence and
mutual respect as indispensable guidelines for peace.

We have recognized, in particular, the right of all
States in the region to live in peace within secure and
internationally recognized borders and the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and
independence.

Accordingly, today, we urge the parties to the
conflict to give proof of moderation and to resume
immediately the peace negotiations guided by the
principles to which they themselves have agreed. We
express our support for the recommendations contained
in the Mitchell report aimed at putting an end to
violence, at restoring confidence between the parties
and at resuming the peace negotiations immediately.

Moreover, we join in the appeal for the
establishment of monitoring machinery as proposed by
the Group of 8, to help the parties in the
implementation of the recommendations of that report,
and we reiterate our belief that it will be possible to
achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, but
only through dialogue and negotiation.

