Mr. Theron (Namibia): It gives my delegation
great pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over the work
of the Council. I wish to thank you for scheduling this
very important meeting. I also wish to congratulate
Ambassador Durrant of Jamaica for the excellent
manner in which she conducted the work of the
Council in November, and in particular for the focus on
African situations.

I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
all the ministers at this meeting.

My delegation wishes to reiterate its thanks and
appreciation to Ms. Ba-N'Daw for presenting us with
the report in April on the disturbing facts about the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and other forms
of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
with the recommendations. We also welcome the
addendum containing additional information prepared
by Ambassador Kassem and his team. Namibia has
submitted a formal response to the addendum to the
Security Council.

Namibia's support for the establishment and
mandate of the Panel was and remains intended to help
put an end to the plundering of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which are
being used to fuel the conflict. Our support stems from
a deep desire to preserve the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
for these reasons that on both occasions when the Panel
visited Namibia, the Government of the Republic of
Namibia rendered all necessary assistance and
extended full cooperation in facilitating its meetings
with all relevant Government authorities, as requested.
In this context, we welcome the expression of gratitude
from the Panel for the excellent cooperation, as stated
in annex I of the addendum. Namibia welcomes the
proposed extension of the Panel's mandate and pledges
its continued cooperation.

The naked aggression against the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by Uganda and Rwanda and the
accompanying suffering and hardship caused to the
people of that country were exacerbated by a process of
systematic looting and pillaging of the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of their country by
the very same forces responsible for the invasion. The
tragic effects of these crimes have been well illustrated
in the Panel report, as well as in other reports on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Unfortunately, the situation continues with
impunity today and is clearly directly linked to the
continued occupation of the country. Those countries
that have violated the sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have persisted in their defiance
of Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1304 (2000) and 1376 (2001).

It is worthwhile recalling the well-illustrated
statistics in the main report, showing the discrepancies
between the production of minerals and other resources
by these countries and their exports. Even more
specifically, the Panel, in paragraph 125 of the same
report, concluded that the economies of Rwanda and
Uganda have benefited financially from the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In contrast to the illegal exploitation by countries
that have violated the sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Panel has correctly
indicated that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has, as any sovereign State has
the right to do, in some instances relied on income
from the resources of the country to assist in its
defence against its aggressors. In the addendum, the
Panel acknowledged that most transactions by those
countries that came to the defence of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were done in line with normal
economic cooperation between sovereign States. They
were carried out through the establishment of joint
ventures and other well-established trade practices.

My delegation welcomes the recommendations in
the report aimed at putting an end to the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, it cannot support
recommendations in the addendum that attempt to
question or discredit sovereign decisions taken by the
legitimate Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Therefore, for my delegation, the
recommendation that the Security Council create a
body to review concessions, commercial agreements
and contracts concluded by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is unacceptable.

I now wish to make a few specific comments
about the utility of the Panel reports and to register
some misgivings of my delegation.

While we welcome the findings of the Panel, in
our view, in some instances it appeared reluctant to
state that a specific country was not illegally exploiting
the resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
even where overwhelming evidence to that effect was
submitted. Just as the Panel proved conclusively
through the publishing of statistics provided by
countries themselves, as well as by international
financial institutions, that Rwanda and Uganda are
engaged in the illegal exploitation of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the same kind
of information and procedures could have been used to
prove that other countries are not benefiting from the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources and other
forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Furthermore, whereas in the addendum the Panel
has extensively reported on transactions concerning the
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in contrast to its mandate of
investigating the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources and other forms of the country's wealth, the
addendum appears to have focused only on countries in
Africa. It would have been enlightening to have a
wider perception of the commercial transactions for the
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo involving actors outside Africa.

Finally, the reference in the addendum to the
personal decision by His Excellency President Nujoma
is wrong. While this has no relevance to the Panel's
mandate, I wish to point out that decisions of the
Government of the Republic of Namibia are taken in
accordance with the procedures outlined in the
Constitution of the Republic of Namibia and that those
were fully respected when this decision was made.

Let me repeat once again what we have said in
this Chamber - that Namibia's involvement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was at the
expressed invitation of the legitimate Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and not for the
exploitation of Congolese coltan, gold, copper, cobalt,
diamonds, timber or any other resources.

Namibia has repeatedly stressed the need for
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and for its
control over its natural resources. The illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, if not put to an end, will defeat
the efforts of the Security Council in that country. The
report of the Panel of Experts clearly identified the link
between the invasion of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the plundering of its resources and the
continuation of the conflict. This is at the core of the
Panel's mandate, and the Security Council should not
loose sight of this important link.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to impress
on the Security Council the need to ensure that the
countries that have invaded the Democratic Republic of
the Congo withdraw without delay, even if that means
adopting further measures in terms of its mandate
under the Charter. Any further measures decided on by
the Council should include the payment of reparations
and compensation to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by the invading countries. The Council cannot
afford its decisions being ignored continuously, since,
in allowing this, it risks serious damage to its
credibility.

The Panel of Experts had an important mandate.
The besieged Congolese people are counting on the
Security Council to help put an end to the plundering
of their resources and to assist in making peace in their
country a reality.

