The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
speak in my capacity as representative of Lebanon.

I would like to thank the Chairs of the three
Committees, the Ambassadors of Austria, Mexico and
Turkey, for their exhaustive briefings and for their
efforts alongside all the members of the Security
Council to promote international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism.

Lebanon welcomes the adoption of measures to
strengthen transparency and respect for human rights,
particularly the working methods of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).
Lebanon calls for further reforms to prevent the
Committee from being exploited to achieve goals other
than those for which it was established. We support the
amendments to the Committee's guidelines as outlined
in resolution 1904 (2009), and would insist on an
approach that takes nationality and State of residence
into account before listing or de-listing, particularly
since cooperation with the State in question is
necessary either to obtaining supplementary
information that they may be able to provide to the
Committee or with a view to applying or lifting the
intended sanctions. Lebanon feels that the revision of
the lists in accordance with resolution 1821 (2008)
should be a periodic process to ensure that they are free
of discrepancies, such as the names of deceased persons
or of people with no link to Al-Qaida or the Taliban.

Lebanon, like all Member States, hopes that an
ombudsperson will be appointed in the near future so
that this independent entity can contribute to ensuring
justice, transparency and dialogue between the
Committee and persons or entities requesting to be
de-listed from the list of those linked to Al-Qaida and
Taliban.
Lebanon also requests that we take a very close
look at the conflict between decisions passed down by
local or regional courts and the sanctions imposed by
the Committee. We note that, if sanctions are to be
legitimate, they must conform to international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and human rights treaties
and norms, even when the sanctions are of a preventive
nature.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), Lebanon welcomes the new
working methods it adopted early this year under the
chairmanship of Turkey with the aim of providing for
broader debate and scientific studies in the fight against
terrorism in a number of areas and States, and calls for
the participation of all Members of the United Nations,
given that the fight against terrorism is a collective
effort. Lebanon welcomes the efforts of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to fight
terrorism, and encourages it to continue working to
provide developing countries with technical assistance,
to pursue its dialogue with States in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001), and to maintain its
coordination with regional organizations.

Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), our meeting today coincides
with the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
No one can deny that resolution 1540 (2004) does not
just address nuclear non-proliferation but also deals
with chemical and biological weapons. Lebanon is
paying close attention to all necessary cross-border
measures and inspections in order to prevent
trafficking in such materials in conformity with local
laws and rules and relevant international law. We call
for the full implementation of multilateral treaties
aimed at prohibiting the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, particularly in the Middle East, in
order to maintain international peace and security and
to contribute to international efforts in the fight against
terrorism.

My delegation affirms the importance of helping
countries to strengthen their adherence to resolution
1540 (2004). The Committee undertook praiseworthy
work during the reporting period, and Lebanon will
continue to actively to participate in and support the
work of the three Committees.

In conclusion, let me say that Lebanon, so
battered by terrorism in its many forms, would like to
remind everyone that it is important to distinguish
between legitimate resistance to occupation and
terrorism. Lebanon reiterates its commitment to
cooperating with international efforts to put an end to a
scourge that threatens peace and security.

Despite the numerous resolutions and measures
adopted by the United Nations, acts of terrorism
continue throughout the world, taking innocent lives
and sowing chaos and destruction. We are all the more
convinced that the fight against terrorism means that
we need to seek out its root causes and eliminate the
factors that feed it. We need to eliminate areas of
tension and put an end to double standards in the
implementation of international resolutions. We need to
put an end to foreign occupation, injustice and attacks
on human rights and human dignity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of New
Zealand.

