Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): First, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over the Security Council for this month.
I am sure that your able leadership and experience
will produce positive results. Allow me to express our
appreciation for the convening of this high-level open
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, which was most valuable.

Terrorism is one of the most significant challenges
facing various communities, individuals and States,
whatever their religion or ethnicity may be. It is a
phenomenon that garners significant financing and
is an obstacle to development. Terrorism knows no
nationality nor country of origin. The Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia emphasizes once again, therefore, its
rejection and condemnation of all terrorist acts, in all
forms and manifestations, whatsoever their objectives
may be. They are heinous crimes rejected by Islam,
crimes without any basis or foundation. We reiterate
the fact that extremely violent hate crimes that terrorize
Muslims across the world are being committed. Some
believe that these Muslims are responsible for the
actions of terrorists. Such a belief is unjust, creates
discrimination against Muslims, and increases both the
danger of terrorism as well as its spread.

We reiterate the importance of our cooperation
and participation in international and bilateral efforts
to combat terrorism and its financing, as well as to
extirpate the roots of this phenomenon, in particular the
application of all Security Council resolutions relevant
to the fight against terrorism.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is working to combat
terrorism and has always rejected the phenomenon at
the national and international levels. We have grappled
with it nationally and condemned it internationally.
We have also worked to curtail its sources of funding.
Those efforts include the criminalization of acts of
terrorism, incitement to terrorism and travel to conflict
zones, and measures to address terrorism financing. My
country's efforts illustrate the importance of protecting
local communities against terrorists, and putting a stop
to terrorist cells. Security measures have enabled us to
be proactive in fighting attempts to spread terrorism
and to combat those who finance it, who represent an
equally important threat.

The Saudi public has roundly rejected terrorism.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has played a leading role
at the international level in calling on the international
community to combat terrorism. We have called for
the adoption of a global action plan in the framework
of international legislation so as to eradicate terrorism
and to uphold the sovereignty, security and stability
of countries. We have hosted several international
conferences on this topic, and participated in the creation
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
Furthermore, we recently announced our contribution of
$10 million to establish a specialized centre for nuclear
counterterrorism at the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) headquarters. Moreover, we announced
a contribution of €500,000 to the modernization of
the IAEA laboratories in Seibersdorf. In addition, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was one of the first countries
to support the international resolutions on nuclear
peace, having ratified the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material. We are also members
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
The Muslim world is the first to suffer from the
impact of official, organized terrorism arising from the
occupation and seizure of land and property, as well as
terrorism that uses religion as a pretext. There has been
a failure to denounce the official organized terrorism
perpetrated by Israel and the impunity it enjoys with
regard to the crimes committed by its colonial army
and terrorist settlers. Those crimes include systematic
killings, occupation, Judaization and ethnic cleansing,
all ofwhich may constitute war crimes or crimes against
humanity. The failure to condemn such terrorism
ultimately leads to its exacerbation and spread.
Moreover, the policy of double standards adopted by
some countries and the upholding of the interests ofthe
strongest - setting aside equality - are all factors that
serve to exacerbate violence, terrorism and extremism.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has adopted a very
firm position with its Arab brothers against the policy
of interference adopted by Iran in the Arab region. That
policy seeks to amplify conflicts and crises in the region,
export the revolution and create conditions conducive to
the spread ofterrorism, violence and terrorism that uses
religion as a pretext. That policy seeks to destabilize
the region and to support terrorists and intercommunal
conflicts. It also seeks to support militias, armies and
terrorist groups, such as Hezbollah in Lebanon, and
other religious militias. Iran has also created terrorist
groups in Bahrain that are trained and financed by
the Guardians of the Revolution. Furthermore, Iran
continues its attempts to smuggle explosive materials
and weapons into Yemen. That is a flagrant Violation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Following the exacerbation of the terrorist threat in
various Muslim countries, we announced the creation of
an Islamic alliance composed of 34 countries to combat
terrorism. The alliance will be an effective international
partner at all levels - cultural, ideological, financial
and technological - to strengthen security. The alliance
will be a solid force against terrorist organizations.
Moreover, my country is ready to participate in any
international effort to eradicate Da'esh and Al-Qaida in
Syria and any other country.

On numerous occasions, my delegation has warned
about the despicable crimes perpetrated by spoilers in
Syria and foreign groups that use religion as a pretext

there and create conditions conducive to the spread
of the actions of Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front, and
have exacerbated terrorism in the region. I wish to
call attention to the fact that in spite of the unstinting
efforts made to stop acts of aggression in Syria, which
have been committed in violation of resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016), Syrian forces have violated the
cessation of hostilities 900 times, leading to the deaths
of more than 150 civilians. Furthermore, Syrian forces
have targeted hospitals, schools and civilians, and used
such indiscriminate weapons as barrel bombs. They
continue to besiege civilians and impede the transport
of humanitarian assistance. The pursuit of such actions
could undermine the agreement on a cessation of
hostilities.

We reiterate that the fight against terrorism
in Syria and the region is inextricably linked to a
political solution on a provisional Government entity,
in line with the first Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). Such an entity would have operational global
prerogatives and lay the foundations for the future
of Syria - a Syria that rejects terrorism, violence,
intolerance and extremism, and that has no place for
those who have killed Syrian people.

The protection of civilians against occupation
and systematic killings, the rejection of the spread
of sectarian and ethnic conflicts, and the upholding
of international instruments are not merely moral
obligations; rather, they are vital prerequisites, the
absence of which would lead to the spread of terrorism.
Such actions should enjoy priority among international
counter-terrorism efforts. My country's delegation will
therefore maintain its international cooperation in order
to ensure the security and stability of the region and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

