The Secretary-General (spoke in French): Let
me offer a special welcome to President Gnassingbe
and thank him for having taken the time to come to
New York to preside over this important meeting.

Despite the encouraging progress in certain
countries with regard to the development of peace and
security, stability in West African and the Sahel region
is of increasing concern, and with good reason.
Organized crime, drug trafficking and piracy are on the
rise. The sudden upheaval in Libya is having
repercussions such as the influx of weapons. A growing
food crisis rooted in drought, high food prices and
conflict currently affects millions of people, and the
situation could become still worse.

There are reports of links between insurgent
groups, criminal groups and terrorist organizations.
There is even fear that we could see in this region a
crisis of the same magnitude of that affecting the Horn
of Africa. That must be avoided at all costs.

This meeting is thus very timely, and I commend
the initiative of Togo in using its presidency of the
Council to highlight the urgency of the various threats.

(spoke in English)

Transnational organized crime, including drug
trafficking, affects peace, security and stability
wherever it occurs. It undermines the authority and
effectiveness of State institutions, erodes the rule of
law and weakens law enforcement structures.

As West Africa remains a transit point for drug
traffickers between South America and Europe, the
potential for instability will continue to grow. This is
horrendous for the people of the region of the
Economic Community of West African States. It also
presents a serious challenge to the peace operations in
the region authorized by this Council.

To address the issue, we are working closely with
the authorities in Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia
and Sierra Leone in the context of the West Africa
Coast Initiative. We have begun to build transnational
crime units trained by United Nations police. But this
is merely the beginning of what we must do.

The Governments of the region will need the
support of regional organizations and the wider
international community to build and sustain the
required capacity in information-sharing, prevention,
investigation, law enforcement and border
management. This should unfold in parallel with the
creation of alternative sustainable livelihoods and
addressing the challenges of poverty, human insecurity
and underdevelopment. We must also strengthen the
capacity of peace operations in the region by
embedding specialized units in our missions to
complement the efforts of host State police and other
law enforcement agencies.

I am especially disturbed by reports of terrorist
activity. The assessment mission I dispatched in
December 2011 to look at the effects of the Libya crisis
on the Sahel found that terrorist groups, such as
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, have begun to form
alliances with drug traffickers and other criminal
syndicates. Such alliances have the potential to further
destabilize the region and reverse hard-won democratic
and peacebuilding achievements. The growing
incidence of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea exacerbates
the situation.

The consequences of inaction could be
catastrophic, especially for oil-producing countries that
are frequently targeted for their high-value petroleum
assets, and for countries - both coastal and in the
hinterland - that rely extensively on their ports for
national revenue. Just last week, off the coast of
Nigeria, an incident of piracy resulted in the murder of
the ship's captain and engineer.

The Council will recall that in November 2011 I
deployed an assessment mission to the Gulf of Guinea
to assess the threat and help the Government of Benin

in formulating its response. The mission highlighted
that any comprehensive maritime security strategy to
combat piracy should be encompassed within a wider
transnational organized crime response. This should
include drug trafficking, illicit fishing, illicit dumping
of toxic waste and illegal or clandestine immigration or
migration. As the Council continues its discussions, I
would like to reiterate the assessment mission's
recommendation that a regional summit of Gulf of
Guinea heads of State be convened as early as possible
in 2012 with a view to developing a comprehensive
regional anti-piracy strategy.

The United Nations is already deeply engaged in
helping the countries of West Africa and the Sahel to
combat crime, drug trafficking, piracy and terror. We
have seen this toxic brew in other regions, in Africa
and elsewhere. We must now be ready to do even more
to keep the situation from escalating. The warnings are
there. The trends are clear.

We have a responsibility to cooperate even more
closely with Member States, as well as with regional
and international organizations. Our common goal
must be to ensure durable peace and stability in West
Africa and the Sahel region.

