Mr. Mladenov: At the outset, on behalf of the
United Nations family in Jerusalem, I would like to
extend my deepest condolences and sympathies to the
families of the victims of the abhorrent terrorist attacks
in Paris, Beirut and the Sinai. These tragic events
serve to reinforce the reality that the extremism and
terrorism that have infected many parts of the Middle
East are no longer constrained by barriers. They can
strike anywhere, anytime, and pose a grave threat to
international peace and security. Against that backdrop,
we cannot separate the Israeli-Palestinian conflict from
this global threat. Establishing a Palestinian State,
while addressing Israel's substantial security concerns,
would yield major dividends not only for Israelis and
Palestinians alike, but for the entire region.

Over the past month, there were 36 reported attacks,
including stabbings or attempted stabbings, shootings or
car-rammings, by Palestinians against Israelis in Israel
and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. They left
at least 7 Israelis dead and 37 injured, including today's
attack in Tel Aviv and just now in the settlement of Gush
Etzion. The two apparent sniper attacks in Hebron on
7 November, which would be the first oftheir kind since
the current escalation began, and the brutal drive-by
shooting south of Hebron on 13 November, which killed
a father and his son, are worrying signs of escalation
from the use of knives to the use of firearms. Of the
suspected Palestinian assailants, 24 have been killed.

According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, during the reporting period, in
clashes across the West Bank and Gaza, 11 Palestinians
were killed and over 3,500 injured, with 7 others injured
in settler-related violence. I must once again reiterate
the resolute condemnation of the United Nation of all
terrorist attacks, and I call on political, community and
religious leaders on all sides to speak out against terror
and all forms of violence.

Since our last briefing (see S/PV.7521), the epicentre
ofviolence has moved to Hebron, which, like Jerusalem,
has holy sites revered by both Muslims and Jews and has
been a cause of friction for decades. Hebron is the heart
of the Palestinian economy. Its vitality is unmistakable
and its vast potential for growth is broadly recognized.
It is the West Bank's largest city with a population
of some 170,000 people. It is also an industrial and
commercial engine. Annual exports to Israel amount
to over $240 million. The city's continued development
is thus integral to the economic viability of a future
Palestinian state.

I recently visited Hebron, and a walk through the
old city evokes a starkly different image - streets
barricaded and unnaturally cut off, houses emptied
of life and activity, lives caged in by metal grids and
turnstiles. Over the past 20 years, the city's Palestinian
and Jewish populations have been physically separated.
The economic impact of the violence raging in and
around Hebron has been severe for the entire district.
Once thriving markets are now eerily abandoned.
Over the past decade, hundreds of shops located in the
Israeli-controlled H2 area have been shut down either
by military order or due to lack of business. I plan to
return soon to Hebron with the United Nations country
team to discuss with the Governor and the Mayor what
programmes we can initiate to support the recovery of
the area and promote community dialogue.

Ending the violence and de-escalating the overall
situation in Jerusalem, Hebron and other areas must
remain our immediate priority. But as the Secretary-
General has consistently stated, this cannot be achieved
through security measures alone. All parties must play
a part in implementing measures that could have a
positive impact. These include immediate efforts by
all political, religious and community leaders to stop
the hate-fuelled incitement that glorifies the murder of
Jews or that brands all Palestinians as terrorists. Recent
understandings on upholding the status quo at Haram-
Al Sharif/Temple Mount must also be implemented.
It is necessary to address the apparent impunity for
settler violence against Palestinians. The sanctity of
burial rituals must be recognized, and Palestinians
should be allowed to bury their deceased without
unnecessary delay. In Hebron, restrictions should
be eased and the main commercial artery should be
reopened, in accordance with the 1994 protocols. Steps
to bolster security coordination between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority must be strengthened in order
to prevent any further deterioration of the situation.
Finally, the use of firearms by Israeli security forces
should be employed only when less extreme means are
insufficient to address an imminent threat of death or
serious injury.

It is critical to also deal with the threats that kill
the prospect of a two-State solution. The reality in
which a settler State is emerging in the occupied West
Bank must be reversed if hope is to be reignited. I am
concerned by the decision announced on 18 November
to issue tenders for 436 housing units in the East
Jerusalem settlement of Ramat Shlomo - the first such
tender announcement in over a year. Equally worrisome
are the five punitive demolitions of the family houses
of alleged perpetrators of terrorist acts, carried out by
Israel over the past week. I reiterate that settlement
activity and punitive demolitions are illegal under
international law. They also deepen mistrust between
the parties and further aggravate an already highly
tense environment.

In a troubling development, Israeli forces have
carried out several raids on hospitals, including at
Al-Makassed hospital in East Jerusalem and at Al-Ahli
hospital in Hebron. My Deputy and United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory has called on the authorities to respect health-
care facilities and the right of all individuals to receive
health care.

During the reporting period, the security situation
in Gaza was relatively calm compared to the West
Bank, despite three fatalities as a result of clashes
near the border fence. That having been said, however,
seven rockets were fired toward Israel, three of which
impacted Israeli territory, without causing fatalities.
Palestinian militants also test fired 14 rockets at the
sea. The Israel Defense Forces responded with six air
strikes and three limited incursions into the Gaza Strip.
On at least four occasions, Israeli forces opened fire at
Palestinians at sea, resulting in injuries to at least two
persons. In a worrying development, Israel intercepted
the attempted illegal transfer of 450 litres of toluene
diisocyanate, a hazardous substance that can be used
for the production of a large quantity of rockets.

I call on all factions on the ground in Gaza not
to engage in activities that risk destabilizing the
situation and undermining the reconstruction process,
particularly as the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism
continues to function effectively. In October, a
new stream was introduced to simplify access to
construction materials to finish housing units that
had been started but not completed prior to last year's
conflict. Under this stream, over 6,000 applicants have
so far been introduced into the system. In a welcome
development, in mid-October Israel removed aggregate
from the list of dual-use materials. The good news,
however, has been tempered by the addition of other
items, including timber, to the list this year. These
additions hinder Gaza's reconstruction, and I call on
the Israeli authorities to reconsider their decisions.

Based on developments on the ground, the current
conditions make a return to negotiations a challenging
prospect. Trust must be rebuilt and, to that end, bold
and significant steps on the ground must be taken in
order to tangibly improve lives and irreversibly move
towards the end of the occupation and the establishment
of a Palestinian State. In the period before an eventual
return to negotiations, the parties and their international
partners must pursue measures that strengthen their
institutions, economic prospects and security. This will
require substantial policy changes on the ground by
Israel.

The Middle East Quartet remains the principal
international entity to support and encourage
negotiations towards a comprehensive and just resolution
of the conflict. The Quartet envoys plan to travel to the
region in the coming period to engage directly with the
parties. Meanwhile, we continue to look to the Security
Council for any additional guidance on developing a
new peace architecture for resolving the conflict.

Turning to the wider region, the Council was briefed
yesterday on developments in Lebanon, including in
Beirut. I will therefore not add anything on that issue.

Let me say, however, that the Syrian conflict for its
part continues to take a devastating toll on the Syrian
people and beyond, and poses an ever graver threat
to international peace and security. For all of these
reasons, the Secretary-General is greatly encouraged
that in Vienna the international community has
finallyre-engaged in searching for a political settlement
to the Syrian conflict based on the transition elements
of the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). It
is important that key international and regional players
follow through on their commitments by actively
insisting that their Syrian allies engage constructively
in all ofthese areas. This is vital in order to give political
backing, leverage and credibility to our efforts.

Turning to the Golan, the situation remains volatile,
with clashes between Syrian Government forces and
armed groups, shelling and occasional air strikes
continuing in the areas of separation and limitation,
in particular in Ufaniyah, Jabbata al-Khashab and
Al-Baath in the central part of the area of separation.
In the context of these clashes, fire from the Bravo side
has impacted across the ceasefire line. On 13 October,
the Israel Defence Forces notified the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) that they
had retaliated to spill-over fire from the Bravo side by
firing three missiles at Syrian armed forces positions
in the area of limitation. UNDOF did not observe the
alleged firing from the Bravo side. These events have the
potential to escalate tensions between Israel and Syria,
jeopardizing the ceasefire between the two countries.
In these challenging circumstances, however, UNDOF
continues to use its best efforts to carry out its mandate.

In closing, let me say that I refuse to be convinced
that Israelis and Palestinians want to live by the sword
and in a state of perpetual violence. We owe it to
the people of that troubled land who, despite endless
setbacks and disappointments, have continued to
maintain hope that negotiated peace can be realized. I
can assure members of the Council that the Secretary-
General remains steadfast in his support of any effort
to restore the hope that a two-State solution can be
achieved through negotiations. But the long road ahead
will require leadership - leadership that has been
glaringly absent to date.

