Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to begin by congratulating China, a country with
which we enjoy friendly relations, on its presidency. We
also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority,
for his efforts in connection with the mandate entrusted
to him.

The crisis in the Middle East has been ongoing
for 70 years. There is no fair or lasting solution on
horizon, and the peace process is at a standstill. The
people in our region aspire more than ever to peace
and stability. At the same time, they are faced with a
new cycle of escalations in violence. The international
community should work as quickly as possible to put
an end to the violence and to restore hope and faith in
the peace process to the people in the region. The entire
world must work to bring about peace by countering
authoritarianism and extremism.

While the Security Council continues its efforts
to address the complicated issues in the Middle East,
we must also reinvigorate the peace process. All the
parties should demonstrate restraint and respect for
international law in order to create the necessary
conditions for a comprehensive, fair and lasting solution.

We recently witnessed the closure of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, which was declared a military zone. The
faithful faced numerous obstacles, and that impedes
peace and stability and prevents a solution to the
Palestinian question. Any attempt to undermine the
status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif must stop. The State
of Qatar has explained its grave concerns to Israel with
regard to the closure, for the first time since 1967, of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

The international community should also shoulder
its responsibilities in the face of all of these violations.
They are a provocation for the millions of Muslims
around the world and only serve the cause of terrorism
and fundamentalism around the world.

The escalation in violence must stop. We face an
explosive situation. We need to work very seriously to
achieve a peaceful solution to the Middle East problem.
That would have a positive impact not just for the
security of the Palestinians and the Israelis, but also
for establishing peace and prosperity in the region as a
whole. That would also make it possible to better fight
terrorism and extremism.

When we talk about the solution that we want, we
mean, of course, the solution that we have all known
of for a long time, that is, the two-State solution: a
Palestinian State and an Israeli State living side by side
in peace, in respect of the right of Palestine to create an
independent State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and in strict respect of Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The State of Qatar has spared no effort to find a
fair and lasting solution. We have made significant
efforts in political and humanitarian terms to create the
necessary and useful conditions that would allow for
progress in the peace process. Within that framework,
we have supported inter-Palestinian dialogue. In
addition, we have worked in coordination with the
United Nations because we know that this can have a
very positive impact for the achievement of peace.

The suffering of the Syrian people continues. The
Syrian people are paying a high price for the situation
in the country. We have not been able to achieve peace
thus far, and the Security Council resolutions on Syria
have not yet been implemented. The State of Qatar will
continue its efforts with various stakeholders and its
international partners. Let us use all of the necessary

resources to provide all of the aid that we can to the
brotherly Syrian people.

The State of Qatar is facing unilateral measures
from certain parties in the region. We will continue our
efforts in strict compliance with the principles of good-
neighbourliness, and we will do everything within our
power to strengthen peace and stability in the region
and around the world. We are working within the
United Nations and also bilaterally to fight terrorism.

We are pleased to see that the Emir of the State of
Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, continues
his mediation efforts to provide his support in the
ongoing crisis. We remain hopeful that all of the crises
in our region will be resolved in the framework of
international law.

