Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to join other
delegations in commending the French presidency for
its organization of today's important and urgent debate.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Violent extremism, religious and ethnic hatred and
intolerance have gained ground in recent months, in
particular in the Middle East. We therefore share the
concerns of the international community regarding the
widespread and systematic human rights violations
and persecutions by Daesh and other terrorist groups
and organizations. We are appalled by the misuse of
religion to fuel provocation, confrontation, religious
hatred and extremism. The victims of violence come
from many different ethnic, religious and minority
groups, as stated by the majority of speakers today. As
the recent report (A/HRC/28/l8) of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on actions of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has shown, the
grave human rights violations committed by ISIL and
associated groups have included killings, torture, rape,
sexual slavery, forced conversions and the conscription
of children.

Many women and girls belonging to various
religious minorities have been the victims of rape,
torture, sexual enslavement and forced marriages
with Daesh fighters. They have also been subjected to
forced conversion and other cruelties. The violence and
atrocities committed by Daesh have triggered massive
displacements ofpeople in Iraq in Syria. The extent and
nature of those crimes may already be seen as crimes
against humanity, war crimes, ethnic cleansing or even
genocide.

The international community must find a way to
end impunity for these crimes. In that regard, we would
like to underline the crucial role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in fighting impunity. We call on
all States in the region to accede to the Rome Statute.
The ICC also has an important preventive role, as the
launching of investigations could have an impact on
perpetrators or criminal groups. It is essential that the
Security Council refer the situation to the ICC.

We are also very concerned about the growing
number of incidents where Daesh has intentionally
destroyed important religious, cultural and historical
sites, such as archaeological sites, places of worship,
churches, mosques and shrines belonging to different
ethnic and religious groups and minorities in Iraq and
Syria. We have to do our outmost to preserve the rich
and ancient diversity of the cultures and religions that
have existed in the Middle East for over 2,000 years.

In formulating our response to the tragic events
resulting from international terrorism we should keep
in mind that we are dealing with a multifaceted and
fluid phenomenon that should not be directly associated
with any religion, race or belief. We should avoid
generalizations and the creation of stereotypes with
respect to particular ethnic or religious groups, as they
often lead to a Vicious circle of intolerance and hatred.
Civil society and the media have an important role to
play in such endeavours.

In addition, our response should not take a solely
repressive approach, as the conditions conducive
to the spread of violent extremism, radicalism
and terrorism need to be analysed and addressed
comprehensively with a view to tackling the root
causes of radicalization. We should also work towards
fostering a culture of respect and religious diversity,
particularly among the young. Our response should also
include humanitarian assistance to those fleeing their
homes in fear of terrorist groups and to those surviving
atrocities. Slovenia provides humanitarian assistance
in a continuous manner, following the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality, independence and
efficiency. We are focusing particularly on medical
rehabilitation and psychosocial assistance to children
who have been the victims of armed conflicts.

Slovenia would like the United Nations to be
better equipped and able to properly counter attacks
and abuses made on ethnic or religious grounds. We
welcome the Secretary-General's proposal to convene
an advisory panel of respected women and men and
prepare a plan of action aimed at preventing violent
extremism, but the plan of action should focus on
situations worldwide, not only in the Middle East. The
current need to efficiently tackle such threats may
give a new impulse for exploring ways to finalize the
draft of the United Nations Comprehensive Convention
on International Terrorism, which would include a
definition of terrorism.

