Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): May I underline how very
pleased I am to be here today in the Security Council
for the first time since my appointment as the new
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the United
Nations. I look forward to working closely with each
and every Council member and count on their support.
I also thank you, Madam President, for your kind
welcoming words. May I also note that it is particularly
opportune that I am starting my work with a discussion
on peace and security in Somalia. In Ethiopia it is a
subject that is very close to our hearts.

Let me thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Michael Keating, and the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Madeira,
for their briefings on the most recent developments in
Somalia. As this is Mr. Keating's last briefing, let me
also take this opportunity to express my Government's
appreciation to him for his dedicated service in support
of Somalia. We have enjoyed an excellent working
relationship and cooperation with him over the past
couple of years. We wish him all the very best in his
future endeavours. We also look forward to working
closely with his successor, Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
who has already been active in the region. We are
also grateful to the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her briefing on her
recent visit to Somalia, which focused on the role of
women in peacebuilding.

Today's discussion takes place against the backdrop
of significant and important developments in the Horn
of Africa. As rightly highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/800), my Prime Minister
undertook his first official visit to Mogadishu in June.
The outcome demonstrated the strong commitment of
both Ethiopia and Somalia to raise their relations to a
new level. The subsequent visit of President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo to Asmara for the first
time also heralded a new era between Somalia and
Eritrea, with the establishment of diplomatic relations
between the two countries. The trilateral summit among
Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia that took place in Asmara
early this month and the subsequent visit by the Foreign
Ministers of the three countries to Djibouti also led the
way for the opening of a new chapter in the relations
between Djibouti and Eritrea.

Overthepastfewmonths,wehave seenreconciliation
and the start of the process of normalization between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, Djibouti, the Sudan and Somalia.
The restoration ofpeace between and amongthe members
of our region is already providing for the possibility of
extended economic integration and a broader political
response. Yesterday, the South Sudanese parties finally
signed the revitalized peace agreement for South Sudan
at the Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in Addis Ababa. Ofcourse, that is
not the subject of our discussion today and we will take
it up at the appropriate time, but it also underlines that
the winds of change blowing across the Horn of Africa
have rekindled a new sense of hope and optimism for
regional peace and stability.
We welcomed the resolution of the political crisis
a few months ago between the executive branch and
the Federal Parliament in Somalia. It has brought about
some positive developments in the overall political
process in Somalia. Equally, we are very aware that
the political situation today is being dominated by
political tensions between the leadership of the Federal
Government and the federal member states. We strongly
agree with the Secretary-General on the urgent need
to find solutions to such issues through discussion
and dialogue. Fostering local, regional and national
reconciliation is critical for State-building in Somalia.
Similarly, the military standoff between Puntland and
Somaliland forces has escalated in recent months. If the
situation is not handled carefully, it has the potential
to further complicate the security situation. In that
context, we support the joint mediation efforts of IGAD
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
towards a negotiated resolution of the Somaliland and
Puntland stalemate.

With regard to the security situation in Somalia,
we remain very concerned about the series of attacks
perpetrated by Al-Shabaab and elements of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in Mogadishu and other
parts of the country. We strongly condemn their
heinous attacks and continue to stand firmly in support
of, and solidarity with, the people and the Government
of Somalia in fighting the menace of terrorism in
their country.

The swift implementation of the national security
architecture and the Somalia transition plan will dictate
the successful assumption of security responsibilities
by Somali forces and provide protection to the people.
At the same time, Somalia, of course, still needs
sustained support from the international community
in its efforts to achieve post-conflict recovery. In
that regard, we welcome the outcome of the Somalia
Partnership Forum held in Brussels in July and the
strong commitment expressed by partners to supporting
peace and prosperity in Somalia in a spirit of mutual
accountability. However, we would strongly emphasize
the need to translate commitments into concrete action
and, in addition, ensure the necessary coherence among
partners in providing support to Somalia.

The role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), in close cooperation with the Somali
national security forces, continues to be absolutely
vital. We agree with the Secretary-General that more
predictable support by the international community is
important to implement AMISOM's mandate effectively
and support Somalia on its path to peace and stability.
There is no doubt that AMISOM. needs increased
force multipliers and other sustainable logistical and
financial support. The AMISOM. Military Operations
Coordination Committee, which met in Nairobi last
month, discussed a range ofimportant issues and raised
crucial points. They require our close attention.

The commitment of the Government of Somalia
to progressively shoulder the lead role in providing
security for its people and implement reforms is highly
commendable. The Government has a realistic view
of the conditions-based transition to ensure that the
security gains, made with enormous sacrifices, are not
reversed. It deserves our full support.

Finally, may I also emphasize that we hope, and
have every expectation, that the high-level event on
Somalia we will be co-hosting, along with our partners
Somalia, the United Kingdom and Italy, during the
high-level week, will contribute to keeping Somalia
on the international agenda and help in mobilizing
the necessary future support for its peacebuilding
endeavours and its continued progress towards elections.

