Ms. Moses (Nauru): Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. Allow me to
also acknowledge the presence of Their Excellencies
the Heads of State and Government and ministers from
the small island developing States (SIDS).

My delegation aligns its statement with those
delivered by Maldives on behalf of the Alliance of
Small Island States and by Tonga on behalf of the
Pacific States.

It is much appreciated that the Security Council
is considering the root causes of conflict and not just
situations in which conflict has already broken out. A
holistic approach can be very useful for understanding
the larger context of any given challenge. And SIDS
undoubtedly face a unique and particular set of
challenges - challenges to our development, to our
security and even to our territorial integrity. Some are
due to the immutable characteristics of SIDS. We are
small, we are isolated, and we are vulnerable. Those
things will never change.

However, we also exist in the context of a global
economic and security system that is very much
manmade and is every bit as responsible for the current
situations in which we find ourselves. And that system
can be changed, if we want it to be.

Therefore, before going through a laundry list
of issues, it is important that we consider all of
the challenges facing SIDS in the context of three
overarching issues: global environmental governance,
global economic governance and global security
governance. Deficiencies in those areas are at the root
of the security challenges faced not only by SIDS but
by many other vulnerable developing countries around
the world.

Taking them in turn, the breakdown in global
environmental governance is most apparent in our
collective failure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
despite more than two decades of trying. Climate
change represents the single biggest threat to many
SIDS. Adaptation measures demand an ever-growing
percentage of our domestic budgets. Climate change
threatens to put an end to our sustainable development
and, in some cases, to our physical existence.

We see a comparably grave crisis brewing in our
oceans. Destructive fishing practices and overfishing
are depleting stocks at an alarming rate, while pollution,
acidification and coral bleaching are devastating our reef
systems. Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in
our waters amounts to nothing less than piracy, a topic
that the Security Council has addressed before. The
very foundation of our small island economies is being
quickly dismantled.

The international community knows the steps
required to address such environmental crises, but
we fail to take them. Often they are opposed by very
powerful economic interests or our urgency is not shared
by the larger countries. That brings us to the failures
in global economic governance. Countries have failed
to rein in a predatory financial industry that privileges
rampant speculation over sound investments. The
most vivid example of the industry's shortsightedness
would have to be its continued funding of new fossil
fuel exploration and development despite the fact that
over two-thirds of the known reserves must stay in
the ground if we are to preserve anything resembling
a safe climate. It is hard to believe that we have not
learned the lessons from the last financial crisis, which
saw similar levels of reckless speculation based on
fraudulent projections.

The richest and most powerful countries write
the rules that the rest of us must follow. The decisions
they make in the lofty political forums dealing with
international trade, finance and military cooperation
have far-reaching implications for our development
prospects. They hold the keys. They can open the doors
for us or they can close them.

What we have seen is that private profit is
privileged over public good; the wealthy are privileged
over the weakest among us. SIDS are constantly being
told that we must make our islands more attractive to
private investors, but there is scant evidence that the
investors are interested in improving our schools or our
hospitals or our basic infrastructure - all necessary for
sustainable development. We have attempted to meet
the stringent requirements set for good governance, but
then we see good governance getting undermined by
the same forces when precious resources are at stake.
Official development assistance is available sometimes,
but too often it comes with strings attached. We have
seen countless times how such leverage can be wielded
to dictate policy and undermine sovereignty.

Environmental impacts continue to grow much
faster than our capacity to deal with them, while a
large percentage of the world's population remains
excluded from the global economy. That inevitably
leads to greater human suffering, instability and,
in the worst cases, violent conflict. The number of
people displaced every year seems to move in only
one direction, up. Yet global security governance has
failed to respond adequately. In fact, the response
often seems to exacerbate the situation. Meanwhile,
vulnerable countries have been left to shoulder the
growing security burden with minimal assistance. On
every continent, the rich and the powerful contain the
problems in ever higher barbed-wire fences.

Global environmental governance, economic
governance and security governance: those three
inter-related systems and how they are reformed will
have an enormous influence on whether SIDS are able
to thrive or languish. Therefore, when we examine the
numerous threats facing SIDS, we should not ignore the
wider global context in which we are forced to operate.

