Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption today of
resolution 2314 (2016). Its short-term extension of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
was needed to allow additional time for the Council to
continue its consultations on a full renewal of the JIM's
mandate for another year.

The continuing need for the JIM. is painfully clear.
The pattern of chemical attacks in Syria continues.
The Fact-Finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is currently
investigating at least four cases that have arisen since
August. The OPCW will not itself be able to identify
the perpetrators of those attacks. Both the Syrian
Government and Da'esh have been blamed, and that
is precisely why we first created the JIM. and why its
work remains as important now as it was more than
a year ago, when we adopted its first mandate to fill
the gap in the international architecture for attributing
responsibility for the use of chemical weapons that had
been proven by the OPCW.

Thanks to the JIM's hard work, we know without
doubt who is responsible for killing and maiming
civilians in Syria with chemical weapons. It has now
been conclusively demonstrated that both the Al-Assad
regime and Da'esh have used chemical weapons against
civilians in Syria. Those weapons continue to be used
in flagrant violation of international norms and laws,
and at complete odds with basic human decency. Such
barbaric weapons had no place on the battlefield 100
years ago, never mind today. But in the light of the
continuing use of chemical weapons, it is imperative
that we retain the JIM, both to act as some sort of
deterrent and to determine who is responsible for such
attacks. It is simply not good enough to determine
whether chemical-weapon attacks have occurred
without knowing who was responsible. We need to
know who was responsible in order to bring them to
justice. As I have said on many previous occasions,
there must be accountability for every single person
involved in any use of chemical weapons, in Syria or
indeed anywhere else.

I agree with Russia that we should improve the JIM
and refrain from politicizing it, and that action should
be taken, including against any use of chemical weapons
by non-State actors. That is why much work has been
done, led by Spain and others, on strengthening our work
under resolution 1540 (2004). What I do not think we
should agree to is any distracting of the JIM. away from
its central mandate, which is to focus on the situation
in Syria. Yes, the countries neighbouring Syria should
cooperate with it - all countries should - but the JIM's
mandate concerns attacks that have happened in Syria,
whether perpetrated by the Syrian regime or Da'esh,
and that should continue. There is a big difference
between Syria, on the one hand, and countries such as
Iraq and Turkey, on the other. It is only Syria that has
used chemical weapons against its own people.

