Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the delegation of
Malaysia on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I also wish to pay tribute to
the Mission of Lithuania for its excellent stewardship
of the Council's work last month. I would also like to
say how much my country's delegation appreciates the
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2015/409), which has been presented
to the Council.

We fully align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the League of Arab States. We
also congratulate all Muslims on the celebration of
Ramadan.

A simple glance at the issues debated in the Council
concerning Iraq - the direct threat to international
peace and security, the threats to Iraq's national unity
and stability, the humanitarian crisis, the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters and the violations of the rights of
women - leads us to note that all of those phenomenons
stem from one single source, namely, terrorism. The
Council and the international community can bear
witness to the fact that Iraq is under threat because of
Daesh. We are all unanimous in recognizing that as an
international problem, because there is an international
coalition that supports Iraq in its efforts to combat that
international terrorist organization, which is putting
the region and even the entire world at risk.

Today we are addressing the issue of the protection
of children in armed conflicts. Regardless of the
reality - there are no actual conflicts in Iraq, because
there are no warring parties - Iraq is suffering
from the scourge of international terrorism, which
is affecting all of its citizens. The crimes committed
by Daesh fall under the six categories of the grave
Violations identified by the Security Council, namely,
the killing and maiming of children, the recruitment
and use of children as soldiers, sexual violence against
children, attacks on schools and hospitals, the denial of
humanitarian assistance and the abduction of children.
Daesh has also carried out the displacement of and
trafficking in Iraqi children in the regions under its
control.

My country's delegation would like to make the
following comments concerning the portion relating
to Iraq in the report of the Secretary-General. My
country's delegation subscribes to the report's finding
that underscores the exacerbation of the level of
violence in my country beginning in the second half
of 2014. There was, indeed, during that period an
unprecedented increase in accidents and security
incidents and violence targeting civilians in general
and children in particular, owing to the barbaric attacks
perpetrated against a large portion of my country by
the Daesh terrorist organization, especially after Daesh
occupied the city of Mosul and other Iraqi cities and
towns. Daesh has committed the worst crimes and
attacks against Iraqi children, which has reached
alarming levels in their cruelty and criminality and can
be classified as crimes against humanity, in accordance
with the reports drafted by the competent international
bodies.

Daesh has also targeted the educational sector in
many ways. It has closed many schools and put them
to use for their criminal ends. It has also changed the
educational curriculum by adding subject matter that
fuels hatred and incites violence and extremism and
terrorism so as to influence the beliefs and values of
children through miseducation and prepare them to
accept terrorist and extremist ideas with a View to
creating a new generation of terrorists and murderers.

Daesh recruits children by force to commit acts
of war in the service of that terrorist organization by
carrying out widespread brainwashing operations in
order to use children at a later point for suicide attacks
and in other acts of war and terrorist acts. Beyond the
above-mentioned crimes, the attacks by Daesh against
peaceful Iraqi cities have led to the greatest wave of
internal displacement that Iraq has ever experienced, as
civilians have fled the terrorist cruelty of Daesh. That
has increased the suffering of children in Iraq, who
have become displaced persons and have been deprived
of their education and a peaceful life in their cities.

The Government of my country affirms its
appreciation for the role played by the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and its role in monitoring
of the situation of children in armed conflict and
protecting them from the horrors of war. However,
we would like to express our reservations concerning
certain paragraphs in the report that do not faithfully
reflect the current reality in Iraq and that weaken the
international front of solidarity aimed at combatting
terrorism, as they lack precision and objectivity. In
fact, we have sent an official letter in that regard to the
Under-Secretary-General.

The Iraqi Government, has done its best, within its
resource constraints, to ensure the protection of children
and to promote their rights. The Iraqi law on military
service punishes anyone who uses children under 18 in
the military for any reason, because this deprives them
of their childhood. We would like to underscore that
three days ago, the Iraqi entity that deals with issues
related to children, under the leadership of Mr. Haider
Al Abadi, held a conference with broad participation
at the regional and international levels, including the
United Nations and other international organizations
involved with children, on the protection of children.
The conference focused on the need to move children
far away from conflict zones and to prevent their
recruitment in Iraq, highlighting the forced recruitment
of children by Daesh in the areas that they control.
Iraq also extended an official invitation to Ms. Leila
Zerrougui to attend the meeting.

To conclude, my delegation would like to reaffirm
that Iraq is currently the victim of the most horrific
attacks that this society has ever seen. Daesh is seeking
to change human values, thoughts and ideas to make
them extremist and barbaric, thereby victimizing all
of society. It is also trying to put an end to all of the
national and regional relationships on which Iraqi
society has always been based, as peaceful coexistence
was always its fundamental pillar.

We would therefore ask the international community
to support all of the segments of Iraqi society in foiling
these barbaric attacks, so that Iraqi children can return
to their families and live in dignity.

