Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for holding this important meeting and for the concept
note. We also appreciate the briefing by the Secretary-
General and that of Mr. John Prendergast, whom we
thank for his thoughts and proposals about targeted
sanctions. We believe that there is a need to further look
into them. The Security Council managed previously
to move from general sanctions to targeted and smart
sanctions. However, we believe that it is high time to
evaluate that experience more thoroughly.

Iwill cover three main aspects in my statement: first,
the causes and repercussions of corruption; secondly,
the role of the United Nations in fighting corruption
and in international cooperation; and, thirdly, the steps
taken by the State of Kuwait to fight corruption.

First, with respect to the causes and repercussions
of corruption, we know that our world today is suffering
from the spread of corruption to varying degrees. The
Secretary-General mentioned some facts and figures
that stress that point, especially in areas that suffer
from political or security turmoil. Corruption does not
exist in a vacuum. There are underlying economic and
social causes, such as poverty, oppression, inequality,
violations of human rights and a decline in levels of
social justice, as well as the absence of the rule of law.
All those create fertile ground for the proliferation
of corruption.

The increase in the levels of corruption in societies
negatively impacts the national security of countries,
similar to terrorism, violent extremism and organized
crime. Many examples and conflicts have proven that
there is a close link between the spread of corruption
and the intensity of conflicts. Corruption increases as
conflicts become more intense, which is why conflicts
become prolonged. The risk of corruption is not limited
to one country alone, but rather it threatens regional
and international security. The spread of corruption
deepens human misery, injustice and the misuse and
waste of public and private resources. Corruption can
destroy the economies of countries by diminishing
economic growth, slowing development and increasing
unemployment and poverty.

Secondly, with regard to the role of the United
Nations in fighting corruption, as well as in international
cooperation, the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, adopted by the General Assembly in 2003, is
considered a solid legal framework that includes a set of
norms, measures and rules that should be implemented
by all parties to the Convention in order to promote
its legal and regulatory systems to fight corruption. If
implemented, it will reduce the incidence of corruption,
especially since the Convention further states that the

United Nations would provide assistance to Member
States for capacity-building and the implementation
of programmes that promote transparency, integrity,
accountability and the rule of law. We therefore urge
Governments, the private sector and civil society to
take a collective stand against that phenomenon so that
we can attain ajust and more prosperous future for all.

In that regard, we underscore the need to strengthen
cooperation and coordination with regional and
international entities in order to promote measures to
fight corruption. We must establish regional networks
to fight corruption, strengthen cooperation, share
expertise and work towards the implementation of
United Nations conventions in several areas, such as in
the areas of extradition and exchange of information.
As the Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing,
corruption exists in all countries - large and small,
rich and poor, North and South.

Thirdly, in 2016, the State of Kuwait established an
anti-corruption authority to fulfil our obligations under
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
I will mention briefly some of the objectives that
the authority aims to achieve, namely, promote the
principles of transparency and integrity in economic
and administrative transactions; implement the United
Nations Convention against Corruption and other
international conventions and treaties on fighting
corruption; work on fighting corruption, reduce its
threats and repercussions and prosecute its perpetrators;
seize and restore assets and proceeds from corruption,
in accordance with the law; protect State institutions
from bribery, trading in influence and the misuse of
power; protect whistle-blowers about corruption;
promote the principle of cooperation and participation
with countries and regional and international
organizations; and encourage and operationalize the
role of civil society institutions and organizations to
fight corruption and increase society's awareness of
its risks.

In conclusion, we stress that the issue of fighting
and eliminating corruption is a common responsibility
that starts with the individual in particular and the
State in general. Corruption is a tool that allows its
perpetrators to achieve their purpose quickly, illicitly
and illegally. We can put an end to such a phenomenon
by educating societies and providing a decent life and
equality to all, and by Governments implementing
international conventions and treaties pertaining to this
issue, while above all strengthening and applying the
rule of law without discrimination.

