Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Ukrainian presidency for organizing this open debate
and the briefers for their insights.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement to be
deliveredby the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Resolution 2341 (2017), adopted today, will help
to create further impetus towards protecting critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. The resolution
comes at a time when there have been reports ofterrorists
making increasing and sophisticated attempts to find
access to and attack critical infrastructure. The need to
conduct security analyses for critical infrastructure has
become all the more important to enhancing resilience
and preparedness in the wake of some recent terrorist
attacks in international airports and the targeting of
other critical infrastructure.

Today's open debate has been useful in highlighting
a number of ongoing national and regional initiatives,
especially in the context of growing interdependencies
among critical infrastructure sectors. We take note
of the work being carried out in different critical
infrastructure sectors, including industry and supply-
chain management, civic amenities, cross-border
transportation and the cybersphere. Such work should
form a useful repository of good practices and help to
inform further legislative work that remains to be done
at the international level, particularly on cybersecurity.
The environmental consequences of terrorist attacks on
critical infrastructure, especially in densely populated
city centres, underscore the complexity of the challenges
before us.

In Bangladesh, our authorities concerned shall
continue to further study resolution 2341 (2017) in order
to identify existing gaps, challenges and strengths at
the national level in terms of addressing the possible
vulnerabilities of our critical infrastructure to terrorist
attacks. We remain mindful of the overwhelmingly
transnational nature of most threats to critical
infrastructure, and open to strengthening regional and
subregional cooperation to that effect. In the areas of
our evident capacity constraints, many Member States
in a comparable situation will continue to rely on the
United Nations as both a first responder and a consistent
provider of capacity-building assistance, including for
contingency measures.

In the context of building our national-level
preparedness, we have been working with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and various
relevant United Nations entities in the areas of nuclear
security, maritime and aviation security, combating
the financing of terrorism, and cybersecurity. Such
capacity-building work has been critical in terms of
making our concerned agencies and other stakeholders
better aware of the existing international legal and
normative frameworks. They have also helped to
conduct mapping of the various mutually reinforcing
strands of work by different entities that may benefit
from further coordination and coherence. We look
forward to drawing upon such work towards developing
a national strategic approach to pre-empting and
preventing terrorist attacks and threats against critical
infrastructure. The work done to protect infrastructure
from criminal acts and natural hazards should also
contribute to these efforts.

The primacy of risk assessment, early warning
and information-sharing in the protection of critical
infrastructure and civilians need notbe overemphasized.
Bangladesh remains areliable partner of the international
community in the area of information-sharing, in
conformity with our Prime Minister's zero-tolerance
approach to terrorism in all forms and manifestations.
We urge the Counter-Terrorism Committee, including
its Executive Directorate, to undertake consultations
with national and regional actors, while taking stock
of Member States' efforts, with a view to drawing on
evidence-based, substantiated information.

The critical importance of forging partnerships
between the public and private sectors has been
underlined by almost all delegations. Bangladesh
is keen to participate in and learn from relevant
international and regional forums bringing together
representatives from the public and private sectors to
promote synergistic approaches through their work. We
acknowledge the potential merit of further developing
certain international emergency-preparedness
standards that the private sector may be required to
comply with.

Against the backdrop of rapidly evolving
terrorist threats, we underscore the need to facilitate
knowledge-sharing and technology transfers in the
spirit of effective international cooperation and
partnership. While all Member States must continue to
assume their primary responsibility to address terrorist
threats to major infrastructure, much of our collective
success will critically hinge on the need-based support
to be made available to developing and least developed
countries by the concerned development partners,
including the United Nations.

