Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks the delegation of Malaysia for its
efforts in convening this important meeting.

The Chinese delegation also thanks Ambassador
Fowler for his very detailed briefing; for having paid two
visits to the countries concerned, and the region as a
whole, in order to conduct a broad exchange of views
with the parties involved in the question of Angola; and
for submitting a detailed and informative report. We take
this opportunity to thank him and his colleagues once
again for their effective and innovative work.

The situation in Angola has deteriorated in recent
days. The fighting between the Government and the rebels
is escalating. The humanitarian situation is worse than it
has ever been in recent years and is the cause of serious
concern to the international community. The international
community, and the Security Council in particular, have
been repeatedly called upon to take practical measures to
prevent the further exacerbation of the situation in Angola
and to contribute to the earliest possible settlement of the
conflict there.

It is broadly accepted in the international community
that UNITA bears the primary responsibility for the
current situation. UNITA has long refused to honour the
commitments it undertook under the Lusaka Protocol. It
uses the diamonds produced in the areas under its control
to subsidize illicit arms-trafficking. It has made repeated
provocations, launched attacks and killed civilians. It has
even gone so far as to attack United Nations humanitarian
personnel. It is only right that the international community
should condemn and sanction UNITA.

Regrettably, however, for one reason or another, the
Security Council's sanctions against UNITA have never
been effectively implemented. Far from being diminished,
UNITA's freedom to act has expanded. The number of
weapons at its disposal has increased, not decreased. Its
attitude has grown more entrenched, not enlightened. This
can only be a cause for concern and reflection.

We strongly appeal to the parties concerned to
implement the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
in letter and spirit and to stop providing arms or any other
form of assistance to UNITA. We support Ambassador
Fowler's proposal to strengthen the sanctions regime. It
is the first such proposal since the conflict in Angola
began that is comprehensive and forceful. We hope that
it will be adopted by the Security Council on the basis of
ample discussion and implemented as soon as possible.

Like other countries, China believes that
strengthening the sanctions regime against UNITA is not
an end in itself, but rather a means of creating the
conditions necessary to an eventual political settlement of
the question of Angola. We hope that the international

 

community will work as one and coordinate its actions to
ensure that the reinforced sanctions regime will persuade
UNITA to lay down its arms as soon as possible, cease
hostilities and embark on the road to national reconciliation
at an early date. We sincerely hope that the question of
Angola will be fully settled in the near future.

