Ms. Adamson: I thank you, Madam President, for
holding this open debate.

I am honoured to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves with
this statement. I will give a shortened version of my
statement, the full text of which is being circulated now.

I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing and would like to convey the EU's strong
support for his efforts to make the ability of the
United Nations to deliver on the ground more effective
and efficient.

I would first like to pay tribute to the thousands
of peacekeepers who have been putting their lives
in harm's way for more than 70 years. We owe them
a frank debate and determined action to ensure that
peacekeeping operations can effectively deliver on their
mandates and that our Blue Helmets are provided with
the means to perform. Recent reports, from the 2015
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
report (see S/2015/446) to the Santos Cruz and Cammaert
recommendations, highlight the need for change in
order to ensure successful peacekeeping operations
in very complex and challenging environments. We
concur with the Secretary-General's call for the United
Nations to become less risk-averse when it comes to
innovation and to continually test new ideas, building
on lessons learned.

The experience with the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) represents a combination
of efforts we have never seen before. The EU and
the United Nations have come together to support an
African Union-mandated African initiative through
a channelling mechanism for financial contributions
that also enables third parties to engage. By supporting
the G5 Sahel Joint Force in its efforts to tackle
terrorism, organized crime, people-smuggling and
human trafficking in the region and thereby improve
the overall security situation in Mali and beyond,
we are also acting in support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). At the same time, the EU is
providing financial reimbursement for MINUSMA's
support to the G5 Sahel, as well as supporting the G5
Sahel in establishing a human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework for its
operations. It is also important to note that resolution
2391 (2017) calls for international contributions. The
EU has delivered on that and we call on our fellow
United Nations Members to do the same.

Indeed, the importance of global-regional
partnership in peacekeeping has been underlined by
many speakers today. We continue to advocate for an
increased role for regional organizations within United
Nations-authorized interventions, facilitating rapid
deployment, when appropriate; complementing United
Nations operations or deploying in a bridging capacity,
for instance, in order to restore a safe and secure
environment conducive to the subsequent deployment
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation, as was
the case in the Central African Republic with the EU
military operation in the Central African Republic. We
also remain committed to giving full support to Africa's
efforts to manage its own security. The EU's support
will continue to cover all phases of the conflict cycle,
including African-led initiatives to engage in preventive
diplomacy and mediation, the operationalization of
the African Peace and Security Architecture and the
deployment of African-led peace support operations.

Together with the United Nations, we are deepening
our cooperation on topics of mutual interest as part of
our long-standing strategic partnership on peacekeeping
and crisis management. The ongoing process for
defining the follow-up to our priorities for the period
from 2015 to 2018 in order to strengthen this strategic
partnership on peacekeeping and crisis management
is therefore very timely. Another area in which United
Nations-EU cooperation has intensified and in which
the EU's added value and complementary role are
unmistakable is security sector reform. In the past few
years, the EU has undertaken a greater role within the
overall responsibility for coordinating security sector
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
well as of United Nations special political missions.

Going forward, we must become even better at
drawing on our respective expertise and comparative
advantages to mutually support each other in the field
and to ensure progress, including on implementing the
women and peace and security agenda in peacekeeping,
as well as working with other partners to generate
smart pledges. We should focus on areas where our
cooperation is likely to make a real difference on the
ground. It is equally important to be realistic about
what we can achieve and to manage expectations.

The reform initiatives launched by Secretary-
General Guterres on management, the peace and
security pillar and the development system will be
necessary enabling factors in the success of his efforts
to ensure that peacekeeping operations have a greater
impact. Even the most successful peace operations
cannot be a substitute for political processes. We
continue to stress the paramount importance ofpolitical
solutions to conflicts in order to address their root
causes and the drivers of conflict, including human
rights violations, as well as the priority that should be
given to prevention. Prevention and sustaining peace
must be thought of as a continuous process of which
peacekeeping missions are only one essential part.
The Council, together with other stakeholders, should
reconsider ways to build consensus around strategic
objectives for peacekeeping missions, the design of
mandates, the prioritization of tasks and how to best
monitor achievement. An effective feedback loop is as
crucial as the underpinning in-depth conflict analysis.
Strategic reviews should support the adjustment of key
operations through an assessment of the capabilities
and conditions needed for successful mandate
implementation. A comprehensive performance policy
for peacekeeping operations should also ensure that
necessary remedial actions are taken swiftly.

We would also like to underline the importance of
reducing the overall environmental impact of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. A lighter footprint
would enable cost efficiencies, as well as improving
safety and security both for troops and citizens of host
countries and, ultimately, mandate delivery.

We continue to underscore that the protection of
civilians must be at the core ofpeacekeeping mandates.
We also want to emphasize the critical role that United
Nations peacekeepers play in protecting children
in armed conflict. The effective implementation of
the protection of civilians as a whole-of-mission
effort requires better planning support for missions,
capturing lessons learned effectively and improving
analysis, alongside strengthening accountability for
the implementation of mandated tasks. Consistent with
clear mandates, peacekeepers must protect civilians and
be able to use force when civilians are threatened with
physical violence, while operations must be equipped
with the necessary tools in that regard.

Finally, the international community will continue
to address many challenging issues on the peacekeeping
agenda this year. The EU stands ready to continue to
constructively engage in that work.

