Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Sandra Honore,
for her very informative presentation, as well as for
her presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/ 157). We reiterate our full support for the
Special Representative and for the work being carried
out on the ground in Haiti. We would also like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Haiti for his valuable
observations.

(spoke in French)

I should like to have a voice such as that of the
Permanent Representative of Haiti. We may well call
him the Pavarotti of diplomacy.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would like to highlight a few points with regard to
the Secretary-General's report. First of all, we continue
to profoundly regret the fact that it has not been possible
to hold the elections that have been pending for so long
in Haiti. And we regret the fact that that has resulted
in the dissolution of the Haitian Parliament, which
occurred in January.

We welcome the recent approval of the legal
framework and the electoral calendar, and we believe
that that is a step in the right direction. Given the fact
that the elections have been pending for so long, we
hope that efforts will be redoubled and that additional
measures will be taken to ensure that the elections are
held this year.

As we have reiterated several times over the
past four years, elections are decisive. The proper
functioning of democratic institutions depends upon
the smooth conduct of elections. We are concerned that
the delay in the holding of the elections is seriously
affecting the system of checks and balances that allows
for the effective functioning of democracy in Haiti.

Secondly, we have noted that the settlement of
political differences through dialogue has been key
for the progress being made in various areas in Haiti.
On the one hand, we cannot hope for simple solutions
to extremely complex problems. On the other hand,
we know that the resolution of Haiti's problems lies
fundamentally in the hands of the Haitian people.
Nevertheless, the message that we would like to send
today is that it is that the Haitian leaders in the executive
and legislative branches, civil society and the private
sector must be up to the challenge and collaborate
and work together constructively for the country's
development.

We would like to emphasize the importance of
national strategies that bring about reconciliation
and that avoid winner-takes-all situations. Such
situations close the door to true consensus and
serious commitments. In that regard, we welcome the
initiatives, good offices and activities being carried out
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Thirdly, the report of the Secretary-General warns
specifically of the fact that the upcoming elections run
the risk of further exacerbating the political tensions
in the country. It is very important, in that regard, that
MINUSTAH continue its consolidation process. As the
Council we11 knows, a sound security environment is
essential for the satisfactory carrying out of the much-
awaited electoral process. We take note of the concerns
expressed by the Government of Haiti, and we think
there should be a favourable response to the requests set
out in the letter of President Martelly to the Secretary-
General, which the representative of Haiti reiterated
here today. We would like to echo the comments made
by the representatives of Spain, Venezuela, Chile and
New Zealand in calling openness in that regard.

The Secretary-General's report gives an overview
of the generally stable security situation in the country.
At the same time, it mentions an increase in violence,
civil disturbances and criminal activity. We note the
progress being made in increasing the capacity of
the Haitian National Police. And we are aware that
the National Police is not yet in a position to respond
effectively, without assistance, to incidents involving
instability and demonstrations. That is why the firm
support of MINUSTAH continues to be essential.
There are important functions that MINUSTAH should
continue to ensure, such as the management of Haitian
prisons. MINUSTAH must fulfil an increasingly
important role in terms of security sector reform, as
well as in terms of border control and security.

Fourthly, serious efforts atpeacebuilding mustbegin

while MINUSTAH is still present and can perform the
appropriate tasks and adopt measures to ensure that the
future transition of the Mission does not create vacuums
in security nor result in a decrease in the international
community's level of commitment and support. We
need to have an inclusive approach, especially on the
part of the troop- and police-contributing countries, in
order to ensure that those countries' views, including
Guatemala, are fully taken into account. Similarly, it
is necessary to ensure that the various stages of the
gradual withdrawal of MINUSTAH occur on the basis
of consultations with the Government of Haiti.

We note paragraph 55 of the Secretary-General's
report: any transition plan requires comprehensive,
broad-based discussions on how to change the mandate,
structure and nature of MINUSTAH in order to ensure
that its gradual withdrawal is linked with the country's
having developed much stronger institutions and
achieved significant progress towards lasting stability
and development. MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team must work together in a timely manner
to achieve a transition plan that aims to support the
Government's priorities for the strengthening of
stability and development with a view to an eventual
handover by MINUSTAH.

Fifthly, MINUSTAH is a success story, but that
is not the whole story. Security and lasting political
stability will be achieved only through the effective
presence of military and police, not simply through a
political process. Sustainable socioeconomic progress
is also needed. Much of Haiti's progress remains
fragile, especially after the terrible difficulties of the
past five years. The case of Haiti reminds us once again
that we should not consider security and development
as separate spheres. They are inextricably linked.

Finally, Guatemala remains firmly committed to
MINUSTAH and to Haiti. We believe that with the
constant efforts of the leaders of Haiti, the unshakeable
determination of the exceptional Haitian people and
the continued support of the international community
will ensure that Haiti can achieve lasting security and a
stable democracy rooted in socioeconomic improvement
for all. Haiti must choose its own path, and we all must
contribute to helping the Haitian people to achieve it.

