Ms. Adamson: I am honoured to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Albania, as well as Ukraine, the Republic ofMoldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for holding this open debate on this crucial topic at
a moment where the international situation poses
increasing challenges to the fundamental principles
underlying the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly respect for international law and the rules-
based international order.

One of the main objectives of the European
Union's external action is support for the rule of law
and the principles of international law, as well as
the preservation of peace and the strengthening of
international security, including through the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

These core objectives of the EU are reflected in
its Global Strategy, which identifies the integrated
approach to external conflicts and crises as one of
our priorities and strongly resonates with the overall
United Nations approach. It requires the EU to further
strengthen the way it brings together institutions,
expertise and instruments, and to work with its Member
States on prevention, peacebuilding, crisis response and
stabilization in order to contribute to sustainable peace.

Regarding the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
EU and its member States support all the means of
peaceful settlement referred to in the United Nations
Charter. We would like to see the Security Council
continue on a more systematic basis its practice of
holding early discussions on situations at risk of violent
conflict, with a view to identifying the possibilities
for early collective action to prevent violence. In this
regard, in situations where the Security Council could
act to prevent or stop violence, it should do so. In
particular, members of the Security Council should
not vote against a credible draft resolution on timely
and decisive action to end the commission of genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes, or to prevent
such crimes.

In the same vein, the Council could strive to make
greater use of the possibility offered by Article 34
of the Charter to investigate any dispute or situation
that might lead to international friction or give rise to
a dispute. The EU and its member States stand ready
to contribute to this process by establishing a regular
informal dialogue with the Security Council. We could
in particular look at how we could contribute to United
Nations action decided upon by the Council under
Chapter VI of the Charter and share our own experiences
as regards the peaceful settlement of disputes and
upholding international law, in the framework of EU
crisis-management operations. An example of such
informal dialogue between the EU, its member States
and the members of the Security Council was the recent
EU-United Nations seminar on sanctions, held by the
EU delegation in March. Such a format could also be
used to discuss the questions set out in the concept note
(S/2018/4l7/Rev.1, annex).

The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea also makes a pre-eminent contribution to the
strengthening of peace, security, cooperation and
friendly relations among all nations. The Convention is
recognized as the constitution of the oceans, reflecting
also customary international law, and the EU and its
member States urge all States to abide by its provisions.
All States must refrain from actions that are in violation
ofArticle 2, paragraph 4, of the United Nations Charter,
which prohibits the threat or use of force.

Turning to the question ofstrengthening compliance,
we would like to recall that the rule-of-law components
within United Nations peacekeeping operations play a
crucial role in integrating the promotion of justice and
the rule of law, including respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, in the States where
they are deployed. Clear and comprehensive mandates
as well as appropriate means are vital to the success
of these rule-of-law components. The Council should,
working with other parts of the United Nations system,
in particular the Peacebuilding Commission, the Rule
of Law Coordination and Resource Group, and the
Rule of Law Unit, pay particular regard to ensuring the
sustainability of rule-of-law assistance measures after
the termination of a United Nations operation.

The EU currently deploys 10 civilian missions,
which operate in the framework of strengthening
the rule of law, including in cooperation with United
Nations missions. I mention in that connection Mali,
Libya, Kosovo and Somalia. We would also like to
encourage the Security Council to support the Geneva
intergovernmental process on strengthening respect for
international humanitarian law.

For our part, in order to promote law and
international humanitarian law in a visible and
consistent manner, the EU has developed operational
tools in the form of guidelines on human rights and
international humanitarian law.

With regard to the most effective responses to
flagrant violations of international law concerning
international peace and security, the EU and its States
members stress the importance of complying with the
Charter and United Nations resolutions adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter. The Security Council has
a duty to act, when necessary, to restore international
peace and security, which it has sadly failed to do in
certain situations. We are of the View that, as applicable,
the Council should be more systematic in including in its
relevant resolutions, including those imposing targeted
sanctions, language regarding respect for international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
With regard to listing and delisting decisions, fair
and clear procedures are important. The EU urges the
Secretary-General, in accordance with resolution 1904
(2009), to swiftly appoint an Ombudsperson for the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, a post
that has been vacant for more than nine months.

We would also like to stress the importance of
ensuring respect for international law, including
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as
a fundamental basis of the struggle against terrorism.
Respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law, and efforts to counter terrorism,
are mutually reinforcing objectives. With regard to
the issue of accountability for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
the EU believes in strengthening international courts,
tribunals and mechanisms that serve that purpose and
promote the rule of law, especially in conflict and
post-conflict situations. In our view, peace and justice
must go hand in hand. We are of the opinion that the
Security Council's inability to take action regarding
situations such as that in Syria, including referring
them to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
seriously undermines the credibility and legitimacy of
the United Nations.

The EU and its States members have from the
beginning supported the International Criminal Court.
We encourage the broadest acceptance ofitsjurisdiction.
We also believe that when the Security Council makes
a referral to the ICC, the Council should demonstrate
support for it in instances of non-cooperation with the
Court by States and consistently and rigorously apply
its own guidelines on contacts with persons who are
the subject of arrest warrants and summonses. Looking
ahead towards the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute, we would like to note the activation of the
International Criminal Court's jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression as of 17 July.

Lastly, in a world faced with increasing and
complex challenges to international peace and security,
our working methods need to evolve accordingly. By
addressing situations earlier and in a more coherent,
integrated manner, and by mobilizing the entire toolbox
at our disposal, we can help transform our approach to
conflicts and crises and thereby further empower the
Security Council in fulfilling its core mandate. The EU

and its States members stand ready to assist the United
Nations and the Council in that process.
