Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I join previous speakers
in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. You
may rest assured of the cooperation of the Nigerian
delegation. We also appreciate the excellent work
carried out by Ambassador Takasu and his team last
month.

We welcome the presence of the Austrian Foreign
Minister and thank him for his statement to the
Council.

I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this important meeting on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, with a focus on the European Union
(EU). We appreciate the presence of Baroness Ashton,
EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, and thank her for her invaluable
briefing on the EU's contribution to the work of the
United Nations. Indeed, the briefing promotes the
United Nations commitment to enduring and
meaningful partnership with regional and subregional
organizations as emphasized in the Council's
presidential statement of 13 January (S/PRST/2010/l).

We welcome the practical and concrete steps
outlined by Lady Ashton to improve and formalize the
EU-United Nations relationship through such
instruments as the Joint Statement of EU-UN
Cooperation in Crisis Management. Considering the
scope of the challenges facing the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular, there is much to be
gained from continually strengthening the relationship
and maximizing the comparative advantages of the two
organizations.

By virtue of its security and defence mandate, the
EU has assisted tremendously in moving the United
Nations peace and security agenda forward. Its

operational capacities have been deployed in several
peacekeeping operations in Africa, Europe and Asia,
with notable outcomes in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chad and the
Central African Republic. EU-United Nations
cooperation has robustly enhanced global efforts to
manage crises, address urban planning and strengthen
the fight against all forms of discrimination.
Notwithstanding the notable progress made, there is
scope for improved cooperation in information
exchange, in the management of crisis situations, in
EU-United Nations joint decision-making and in the
compilation of lessons learned.

Peacebuilding is another area in which the EU's
efforts are appreciated. But they should be augmented
progressively. Support for mediation efforts and other
conflict-prevention tools and assisting African partners
in developing their own capacities should also be areas
of attention and focus.

The EU and the African Union (AU) have a
strong partnership and a shared commitment to
intensifying regional integration. By strengthening its
relationship with the AU and with individual African
countries, the EU is indeed promoting the goals of the
United Nations. EU-AU dialogue and cooperation have
made remarkable progress in several areas, including
good governance, the prevention and settlement of
conflicts, food security, the environment, regional
integration and trade. The dialogue is on the right path
but needs to be promoted in more concrete ways.

The EU's cooperation with subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Southern African
Development Community and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development should be deepened. It is in
that context that we welcome the fourteenth ministerial
meeting held in Luxembourg on 26 April in the
framework of the Africa-EU dialogue. It was evident
from the meeting that there continue to be significant
challenges on peace and security issues in Africa that
require closer cooperation between the EU and the AU -
mostly in promoting support for the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture. The Joint Africa-EU
Strategy and the general options for the Action Plan for
the period 2011 to 2013 also need enhanced
implementation measures.

Joint action and cooperation could also enhance
and promote the AU peace and post-conflict
reconstruction strategies in the areas of energy and
infrastructure, climate change, the Millennium
Development Goals, agriculture and food security and
the economic and financial crisis. The EU could also
consider an incremental buy-in into the United Nations
Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union.

