Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by joining others in welcoming Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov to the Security Council for his first
briefing. Let me also thank Ambassador Aboulatta and
Mr. David Scharia for their briefings on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC), and of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), respectively.

In his address to the General Assembly last week
(see A/72/PV.3), the Secretary-General identified
terrorism as one of the seven threats and challenges
that are undermining our efforts to achieve peace and
a better world. He also noted, however, that counter-
terrorism efforts have disrupted networks, reclaimed
territory, prevented attacks and saved lives. Nonetheless,
it is clear that if we are to overcome the threat to our
societies from terrorism, our work must be intensified,
not least in the area ofinternational cooperation.

The transnational nature of many terrorist operations
make the prevention of terrorist attacks by any one
country alone more difficult. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General's decision to establish the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) as
the first of his reform initiatives. We look forward
to working with Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
going forward. Sweden greatly appreciates the work
of the UNOCT, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate. CTED's
expert assessments and work to facilitate Member
States' implementation of the Council's counter-
terrorism resolutions is essential. UNOCT's ongoing
work to ensure implementation across all four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
as well as its bolstered capability to deliver capacity-
building assistance to Member States, also represents
invaluable support for national efforts.

Special attention is needed with regard to the
multiple roles played by women with regard to terrorism,
including those of perpetrator, supporter, facilitator,
Victim and preventer. Each of those roles requires
different approaches and strategies as part of our fight
against terrorism. It is important that CTED continue
its work on promoting the role of women in countering
terrorism and violent extremism. We recognize
CTED's important work on developing thematic work
streams on issues, such as gender and its inclusion in
assessments, dialogues and analytical products. Such
thinking must also be mainstreamed into UNOCT's
work. Sweden will continue to propose that references
to women, peace and security, as well as women's role
in relation to terrorism and violent extremism, are
included in relevant Council work, including in the new
CTED mandate.

As we said yesterday during our debate on
aviation security (see S/PV.8057), there is no room for
complacency in the fight against terrorism. The terrorist
threat is always evolving, and attacks over the past
year, including in Stockholm, have shown that we need
to be constantly vigilant. We must continue working
to improve our counter-terrorism efforts. Sweden is
committed to that work, as well as to working together
with our European Union partners to that end.

In a broader context, we also need to ensure
continued efforts to prevent the emergence of
radicalization and violent extremism. That work
should be aligned with our common United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as the Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. The newly
established United Nations Office of Counter Terrorism
will be instrumental in seeing that work through.

Among other actions, Sweden has supported work
by the United Nations Development Programme in
connection with the prevention of extremism, including
the recently released report, Journey to extremism in
Africa: Drivers, incentives and the tipping point for
recruitment. That report clearly shows that supporting
the social sectors in a participatory way at the local
level leads to hope and a sense of belonging that
counters violence and disruption. Inclusive societies,
education, growth and globalization are central to
those prevention efforts. Fully implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development can deliver that
inclusivity, which is required to help prevent violent
extremism and should be seen as integral to our efforts.

Let me conclude by also stressing that, of course,
the measures that we take against terrorism must always
comply with international law, including international
human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law.

