President Hollande (spoke in French): I should like
to begin by thanking President Obama and all of the
members of the Security Council for having expressed
their sympathy with the French people concerning the
suffering that they are experiencing. Herve' Gourdel
was a French national engaging in his favourite
pastime - mountaineering - in Algeria when he was
taken hostage on Sunday. His was an appalling murder;
he was beheaded.
This is not the first time that France has been
affected by terrorist acts. We have never given in.
Every time we have emerged stronger and with
greater solidarity. Other countries, too, have been
affected by this barbarism. Recently two Americans
and a British Citizen were executed in the same cruel
manner. Nationality in this respect is irrelevant. All
victims of terrorism deserve respect and deserve that
tribute be paid to them and to their memory. Religion is
immaterial here; all victims are equal, unfortunately, in
the face of the brutality of terrorism.

Terrorism is nothing new; we have been facing it for
years. But it has taken on another dimension; it is now
looking to conquer territory, to set up States, to subjugate
peoples. It is attacking civilian populations - women,
children. It has new names; it is no longer called just
Al-Qaida or Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, but Boko
Haram or Daesh. Daesh is the most recent incarnation
of this terrorist madness. It is a new phenomenon in
the sense that it aims to conquer and also to recruit a
growing number of our citizens, wherever they may
be, into its ranks. It is attracting people, often young
people, of all nationalities, and not just, as it is often
said, those of Muslim origin - even though Islam has
nothing to do with this fight.

None of our countries is safe from this threat.
Distance is irrelevant: there are temptations, and there
is the Internet, meaning that networks can organize.
Every day men, women and even children - whole
families - are leaving their homes to join Daesh's
fight. That is a threat to our own security. Earlier
President Obama referred to 15,000 foreign fighters.
Among them are 1,000 French nationals or residents
who are now in Syria or Iraq. That figure has gone up
50 per cent since the beginning of the year, and what
is true for France is true for the whole of Europe. Our
response must therefore be comprehensive, rapid and
lasting.

First, we must take measures in each of our
countries. France has in this respect has adapted its
legislation, and a bill is being discussed in Parliament
aiming to prevent, even prohibit, the departure of
individuals when we have serious grounds to believe
that they are travelling for terrorist purposes. There is
also a resolve to call into question terrorism propaganda
on the Internet, and hate sites will be shut down. Finally,
our legislation will aim to fight networks, because these
foreign fighters do not leave alone; they go because they
are part of a network, and other organizations deliver
them to the combat zone.

Today marks a milestone with the adoption by the
Security Council ofa new Chapter VII resolution. What
we have defined is a global strategy for combating
terrorism, embracing not merely the phenomenon
of foreign fighters but all the paths that lead young
people - sometimes not so young, but often very young
indeed - to go where they have no real reason to go.
We must strengthen our international legal instruments,
and today's resolution also sends the message that the
entire international community is resolute and united.
We are facing a shared threat and we have a shared,
multiple and military response. We must all take on
our responsibilities in that regard. France has done that
in response to the request of the new Iraqi authorities,
and I welcome the presence here today of the Prime
Minister of Iraq.

Our response must also be political, economic and
humanitarian. But our meeting is also a demonstration
of our willingness to fight every kind of trafficking,
because it is trafficking that finances terrorism, and
these groups have never been so powerful, so wealthy,
so well supplied and armed. So we need a response
capable of fighting not only the influences and the
recruiters but also terrorism's financial sources.

Finally, we must execute this strategy while
respecting law and liberty. We must do it while
respecting religions, including Islam. We must do it
by fighting the causes of terrorism - despair, poverty,
inequality and everything that breeds fanaticism. We
must do it without displaying weakness of any kind, but
at the same time with the intelligence that democracy
brings. When one is fighting barbarousness, force is not
only necessary, it is legitimate. But at the same time, it
is not enough. We must come up with political solutions
that can cut off the sources supplying those who spread
terrorism, and France will do its full part.

