Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): At the very
outset, let me commend Ambassador Denisov and
Mr. Ruperez for their very eloquent reporting to the
Council early this morning, which has to a great
measure set the trend of the discussions that have
followed. On a more general note, Sir, I congratulate
your delegation most warmly, for your skilful
leadership of the Council during the current month, and
indeed for providing an opportunity for the open
debate on this very important and crucial subject.

As the United Nations - mankind's greatest gift
to itself - approaches six decades of existence, we
recall that the single most important reason for its
founding was the maintenance of international peace
and security and ensuring global stability.

Today's debate assumes added significant as it
takes place against the backdrop of the trend towards
circumventing multilateralism in international affairs,
particularly in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We must reaffirm our unwavering
commitments and pledges to the centrality of the role
of the United Nations in establishing supremacy of the
rule of law in all areas of international relations.

Bangladesh's position on terrorism has always
been firm and consistent. It has condemned
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and remains an active coalition partner
in the war against terrorism. Bangladesh is party to
several conventions on combating terrorism adopted at
the international and regional levels, and we are
committed to their effective implementation.

We consider that the heinous acts perpetrated by
terrorists around the world pose a threat to
international peace and security, and condemn such
acts in the strongest terms. We believe that no cause
can justify such cruel acts directed against civilians,
including women and children. Our condemnation of
the recent brutal killing of innocent schoolchildren in
Beslan is a clear case in point.

We reiterate our call to convene an international
conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
define terrorism, to differentiate terrorism from the
struggle for national liberation of peoples under
colonial and foreign occupation and to conclude a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
The international community must also ensure that the
fight against terrorism is conducted in conformity with
the principles of the United Nations Charter, international
law and the relevant international conventions.

Bangladesh welcomed all 14 resolutions -
including resolution 1373 (2001) - adopted since
2001 aimed at putting a stop to that universal scourge.
Bangladesh is committed to those resolutions and
cooperates actively in implementing the mechanisms
created through those resolutions, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We also welcome the
unanimous adoption of Security Council resolution
1566 (2004).

Bangladesh considers that putting in place
enabling legislation that is in line with international
and regional conventions on terrorism is vital for their
implementation. The national parliament of
Bangladesh has passed comprehensive legislation in
that regard, including legislation on money-laundering,
designed to curb the financing of terrorism.

Bangladesh believes that in order to fight the
menace of terrorism effectively, it is important to take
a deeper look at its root causes and to try to address
them in a comprehensive fashion. Military response
alone cannot eliminate terrorism; it must be combined
with societal measures. We must therefore propagate
cross-cultural harmony among different civilizations
and across religious lines. The roots of poverty and the
conditions that foster depredation, exploitation and
deprivation should be addressed globally.

While our condemnation of terrorism has been
stated and restated in unambiguous terms, we must at
the same time not lose sight of the need to define
terrorism.

Our efforts to pre-empt extremist thoughts and
acts of desperation should focus on ensuring
sustainable development for all the people on Earth. It
is through a sincere and sustained focus on removing
the prevailing sense of deprivation and marginalization
among certain populations that we can try to
effectively reduce the threat to international peace and
security. Bangladesh calls upon all countries,
particularly the developed countries, to implement their
commitments for achieving the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015. It is our conviction that
the Goals can be best achieved against a backdrop of
disarmament, reduced military expenditures, proper
allocation of resources for poverty eradication and
effective confidence-building measures.

Bangladesh strongly condemns all attempts at
religious profiling of terrorism. Terrorism is a universal
phenomenon and should be addressed collectively, in
the best interests of humanity. We wish to reiterate that
terrorism cannot be attributed to religion, race,
nationality or civilization. Any attempt to do so, rather
than tackling the problem objectively, will only help
the terrorists by creating divisions among nations along
religious and racial lines.

Bangladesh remains seriously concerned at the
attempt by terrorists to acquire weapons of mass
destruction. That is, indeed, a grave development that
needs to be addressed collectively and with due
urgency. We call upon all Member States to
demonstrate the political will to re-energize the non-
proliferation and disarmament activities that have been
paralysed for several years. We must fulfil our
obligation towards non-proliferation, nuclear
disarmament and general disarmament in a transparent
and non-discriminatory manner under effective
international control. We believe that the most effective
way to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction is through the total elimination of
such weapons.

