Mr. Wittig (Germany): I also would like to thank
President Mbeki and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Menkerios for their comprehensive
briefings. I am also grateful for the statements made by
the representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan, in
which they reiterated their commitment to a peaceful
solution of all outstanding issues related to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).

Today, we received encouraging news. We
welcome the agreement on temporary arrangements
regarding Abyei achieved in Addis Ababa. We thank
the Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, President Thabo
Mkbeki, the African Union Panel and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios for their unremitting efforts to help the
parties agree on the issue of Abyei and on solutions to
the remaining CPA issues. Germany will continue to
support those efforts.

The agreement on Abyei opens the way to
addressing the pressing humanitarian issues. Now the
focus is on implementation, which is the real litmus
test. Of course, we will have to come back to the
content and implications of the agreement just
concluded in this Council, especially regarding the
interim security force.

The other urgent matter is the situation in South
Kordofan. The military escalation there is deeply
troubling. We have just heard the latest reports of aerial
attacks, tens of thousands of displaced persons, burned
homes, looted United Nations facilities and lack of
access for humanitarian aid. We strongly condemn the
continuous fighting by the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Sudan People's Liberation Army, especially aerial
bombardments and artillery shelling, and all attacks on
the civilian population. The obstruction and
intimidation of United Nations personnel are
unacceptable and must stop.

In the same vein, humanitarian access has to be
granted. We strongly urge the parties to the conflict to
immediately cease hostilities and refrain from further
violence. Further military action will have severe
consequences for the whole political and social
environment in the Sudan. We condemn the detention
and abuse last Friday by the Sudanese Armed Forces in
Kadugli of four unarmed peacekeepers who were on
patrol to assess the situation in town. This is not
acceptable.

We encourage the United Nations Mission in
Sudan in its efforts to protect civilians affected by the
hostilities, which requires a credible force posture. We
reiterate our strong support for the Mission under the
leadership of Special Representative Menkerios.

Remaining CPA issues must be resolved in a
peaceful and negotiated manner and in the spirit of the
Agreement. That includes not only a long-term definite
agreement on the status of the Abyei region, but also an
agreement on Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. That
is also the message that the German Foreign Minister
will convey to both parties during his visit to the Sudan
envisaged to begin on 22 June, which will bring him to
Khartoum, Juba and Darfur.

The Security Council has a unique responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security in the Sudan.
We must continue to support those interested in peace
and good neighborly relations. We must stand united
against spoilers of peace. We cannot accept that a
return to violence may become an option and that the
parties might use proxies in order to destabilize each
other. We must continue to follow the situation closely
and consider the situation whenever developments on
the ground so require.

