The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

I should like to commend Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their excellent briefings.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General and to the strategic assessment
mission, whose report (S/2018/1086), submitted to
the Council for analysis, reflects the interest of the
international community in the political developments
in Guinea-Bissau. Indeed, the request for an evaluation
of the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
expressed by the Security Council in resolution 2404
(2018), responds to the need to reconfigure the Office,
its mechanisms of action and its resources in order to
achieve greater effectiveness on the ground with respect
to the objectives assigned to it.

Cote d'Ivoire, aware of the complexity of the
scope of action of UNOGBIS, commends the efforts
of the mission to accompany Guinea-Bissau towards
a definitive way out of the crisis. Through its mission
of good offices and mediation between national
stakeholders, its role of coordinator of the activities
of the various international partners and its close
collaboration with the Economic Community of West
African States, the United Nations Office continues to
play a fundamental preventive role, thereby contributing
to the preservation of the institutional balance within
Guinea-Bissau.

However, my delegation notes with regret that, as the
Secretary-General has pointed out, the results achieved
are not commensurate with the resources deployed
and the degree of investment on the part of national
stakeholders. In that regard, the Secretary-General
offers the Security Council a range of proposals that
could contribute effectively to the gradual recalibration
of UNIOGBIS and redefine its priorities in the light of
the major imperative of implementing the peace and
security pillar in a more coherent, more flexible and
more efficient framework, in greater harmony with the
development and human rights pillars.

To implement that recalibration, the Secretary-
General proposes a three-phase reconfiguration of the
mission, to be completed no later than 31 December
2020, namely, the election period, the post-election
period and the transition and withdrawal of the Bureau.
That timeline should help mobilize the support of the
international community for the institutional reform
agenda. Cote d'Ivoire takes note with interest of the
recommendations and invites Council members to
appropriate these new lines of thought in order to make
the best possible use thereof for a definitive resolution
of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau.

My delegation regrets that legislative elections in
Guinea-Bissau were not held by the scheduled deadline
of 18 November 2018. That situation should not make
us lose sight of the progress made or constrain our
momentum and our determination to support the
Guinea-Bissau authorities in the process of ending
the crisis. To that end, my country urges the Council
to remain in solidarity, while supporting the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
and strengthening its support for the leadership of
ECOWAS. We applaud commitment of ECOWAS and
fully share the concerns it expressed in its 12 December
communique, including the urgent need to set a new
date for the parliamentary elections. In the light of that
requirement, President Jose Mario Vaz, by a decree of
20 December, set the date of the parliamentary elections
for 10 March 2019.

My delegation takes note of those latest
developments and urges all international stakeholders,
especially ECOWAS, whose next summit will be held
on 22 December, to assess the advisability of holding
the election on the scheduled date and to take all
necessary measures to support the people of Guinea-
Bissau in that process.

In addition, Cote d'Ivoire encourages the Bissau-
Guinean stakeholders to take definitive ownership of
their country's future by placing the national interest
above all else once and for all. Cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the perfectly coordinated action of the P5 group,
comprising the United Nations, ECOWAS, the African
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and the European Union which has enabled
the efficient mobilization of financial resources and the
registration of over 90 per cent of voters.

Moreover, my country is of the opinion that, in
the efforts to resolve the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the
international community must integrate the thorny
issue of combating drug trafficking and transnational
crime. As mentioned by the Secretary-General, a
comprehensive approach at the subregional level
could help to reduce the negative consequences of
such scourges. In that regard, my country recalls,
particularly within the framework of cooperation
between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and ECOWAS, the existence of the ECOWAS regional
action plan for West Africa for the period 2016-2020,
the implementation of which seeks to contribute, inter
alia, to the reduction of drug abuse, drug trafficking
and crime in the subregion.

Cote d'Ivoire commends the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and reiterates
its support to him in carrying out his mission.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its call on the
international community to continue supporting the
process to end the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. It also urges
Guinea-Bissau's political actors to do everything in
their power to restore peace in their country and achieve

its economic recovery by implementing the 2016-2020
Partnership Framework with the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Guinea-
Bissau.

