Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
fully shares the legitimate concern of the international
community in the face of the tragedy in Darfur. We are
profoundly outraged and upset by the heavy price that
the civilian population has paid, and continues to pay,
as a result of that fratricidal conflict. It is therefore
quite normal for Algeria to express its compassion and
solidarity with the victims of that tragedy, because we
understand that the nature of the relationship that links
us to the Sudan and its people imposes special duties
and responsibilities upon us. It is for that reason that
Algeria resolutely supports all the efforts of the
international community to resolve the crisis and to
prevent any further suffering for the civilian
population.

We have called for an African solution to the
crisis from the outset. We have contributed to, and
unreservedly supported, the African Union's approach
to a peaceful settlement of that crisis. We are doing
everything we can, within our means, to support those
efforts in the political, logistical and humanitarian
areas.

With regard to the political sphere, we have
maintained ongoing contact with the parties in the
Sudan and encouraged them to show restraint and to
cooperate fully with President Obasanjo's mediation as
part of the Abuja process, as well as with the Security
Council. We firmly supported the decision of the
African Union to deploy a mission to Darfur in order to
verify respect by all the parties for the Ceasefire
Agreement signed at N'djamena and the two Abuja
Protocols. We have also contributed by deploying
military observers to the field.

With regard to logistical support, in order to
facilitate the speedy and full deployment of the African
Union mission, whose presence in the field has been
useful and effective wherever it has been deployed,
Algeria has decided to make available to the African
Union three heavy-duty cargo aircraft to transport
troops and equipment, thereby contributing to
overcoming one of the obstacles facing the mission.

Lastly, with regard to the humanitarian
dimension, Algeria has contributed to efforts to ease
the suffering of the civilian population by providing
significant humanitarian assistance and by deploying a
medical mission comprising 36 doctors.

At the United Nations, Algeria is doing
everything it can to ensure that the Security Council
fully shoulders its responsibilities vis-a-vis this crisis,
including by supporting the efforts of the African
Union, while at the same time respecting its leadership
role and its resolve to succeed in this undertaking,
which is unprecedented in the history of our
continental organization. We are therefore pleased at
the decision of the United Nations to send an
assessment team to the Sudan, whose report we await
with great interest. Our contribution to the Council's
efforts is motivated by a concern to have this body
adopt a positive and balanced approach that takes
account of the complexity of the situation in the Sudan
and that respects that country's sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity. That was the vision the Council
enshrined in resolutions 1574 (2004) and 1590 (2005),
which were adopted unanimously.

It was in that same spirit that my delegation took
part in the discussion of the resolution that has just
been adopted by the Council. We had hoped that,
through today's important action, the Security Council
would have moved the conflict in Darfur a decisive
step closer to resolution. We therefore regret that it
could not do so unanimously - all the more so
because we know that there is a convergence of
opinion on the analysis of the situation and on the
urgent need to act to ease the suffering of the civilian
population, meet their expectations and relieve their
distress.

Indeed, there was consensus within the Council
on the need to send a strong message to the parties to
cause them to respect their commitments. There was
also agreement as to the objectives to be pursued
through the resolution: to bring the parties
unconditionally back to the Abuja talks, to put an end
to attacks against civilians, to remove all obstacles to
humanitarian assistance, to support the efforts of the
African Union and to strengthen the peace in the
South - utilizing the resulting momentum to resolve
the conflict in Darfur.

While we supported that approach, we and other
delegations made constructive proposals to rebalance
the text and to ensure that its message was completely
unequivocal. Those proposals were fully in line with
the position adopted by the African Group, set out in
the letter it addressed to the President of the Security
Council on 28 February 2005. Those proposals were in
complete harmony with the position adopted by the
African Group in its letter addressed to the President of
the Security Council on 28 February 2005.

We told the sponsors of the draft about our doubts
concerning the relevance and usefulness of certain
measures laid down by the resolution regarding the
evolution of the crisis in Darfur and the negative
impact they might have on the north-south peace
process. We also felt that the resolution did not take
into consideration the early signs of a trend - which
we hope will be a lasting one - towards both parties
respecting the ceasefire. The level of violence has
dropped significantly in the past few weeks, and in our
opinion the Council should have encouraged this
development.

We regret the fact that the sponsors of the draft,
against all expectations, decided to keep the text as it
was and made no effort to iron out the disagreements
and to promote a consensus, which was very clearly
within the Council's grasp. The international
community has missed an historic opportunity to speak
with one voice. The message that it wanted to deliver
and which we all support would have had more weight
if it had had the backing of all members of the Council.

