Mr. Lancry (Israel): Israel feels compelled to
take the floor in the light of the numerous charges,
made in the course of this debate, that the Security
Council has adopted a double standard with regard to
Israel's compliance with Council resolutions.

In fact, those statements are the strongest proof
that there is indeed a double standard: one directed
against Israel. What else could explain such a
deliberate blindness to the fundamental differences
between Iraq's defiance of the Council and Israel's
commitment to a peaceful settlement of conflict with
its neighbours? What else could explain the failure to
see any distinction between binding resolutions,
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter -
resolutions that set out specific actions to be taken by
Iraq, independent of the actions of any other party -
and interdependent recommendations or statements of
principle, adopted under Chapter VI, that are designed
to move all the parties forward in the Middle East? The
Charter of the United Nations is itself founded on the
understanding that different situations and disputes
require different responses and that not every conflict
requires identical action. The distinction between
resolutions adopted under Chapter VI and those
adopted under Chapter VII recognizes that in certain
cases the Council might wish to express itself in the
form of a recommendation or in a broadly outlined
statement of principles, rather than an explicit demand
of one particular Member State.

What else but a double standard could possibly
blur the gaping distinctions between Iraq, which has
repeatedly violated and flouted the resolutions of the
Council, and Israel, which has repeatedly taken
significant steps, at considerable risk to its own
security, to implement the Council's will? Indeed, the
principles set out by the Council in resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) provided the basis for Israel's
peace treaties with Egypt and Jordan, and will
hopefully enable us to reach peace with our other
neighbours as well. All parties accepted those
resolutions as the basis of the Madrid Peace
Conference. They also provided the basis for our
peacemaking with the Palestinians, for our mutual
recognition, for the Oslo accords and for nearly a
decade of peace negotiations. Those negotiations broke
off as a result of the decision by the Palestinian side to
revert to a strategy of violence and terrorism and as a
result of its rejection, both in word and deed, of the
right of States in the region to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries, as required by
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In May 2000, Israel fully implemented its
obligations under Security Council resolution 425
(1978), a fact that has been confirmed by the Secretary-
General and endorsed by the Council. Despite that,
Hizbullah terrorists have continued to launch cross-
border attacks against Israel. The group has abducted
three Israeli soldiers and one civilian, jeopardized
security and stability in the area and threatens to
provoke a broader regional confrontation. These illegal
and dangerous activities are carried out in blatant
violation of resolution 425 (1978) and with the ongoing
support of the Government of Syria, which is itself a
member of the Council, and the acquiescence of the
Government of Lebanon.

Israel has also taken significant steps to
implement the resolutions adopted by the Council since
September 2000. Following the adoption of resolution
1402 (2002), Israel has gradually withdrawn its troops
from Palestinian cities, including Ramallah,
successfully negotiated a peaceful end to the stand-off
at the Church of the Nativity and redeployed our forces
to the perimeter of population centres, in the hope that
reciprocal Palestinian measures called for in the
resolution would follow. But despite the call on the
Palestinian Authority to adhere to a meaningful
ceasefire and to end all acts of violence, terror and
incitement, it did none of those things. Similarly, the
recently adopted resolution 1435 (2002) placed
obligations on both parties, including a call upon the
Palestinian Authority to end all acts of violence, terror
and incitement, and to bring to justice those
responsible for terrorist acts. The Palestinian Authority
has thus far refused to live up to its obligation to arrest
and prosecute terrorists and has thereby forced Israel to
take actions to protect its citizens. In short, these
obligations were totally ignored by the Palestinian
Authority.

Unlike resolutions concerning Iraq, the Council's
resolutions on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict do not
envision Israeli actions without reciprocal commitment
and implementation by other parties to the dispute.
They are part and parcel of a number of interdependent
actions aimed at ending violence and terrorism and
returning the parties to a political process. They cannot
be compared to resolutions adopted under Chapter VII,
which address the threat posed by the aggressive
intentions of one regime to both the region and the
world.

But beyond all that lies a more significant, and
indeed more fundamental, distinction between Iraq and
Israel. Israel is a country confronting the daily threat of
terrorist attacks against its civilians, as well as repeated
threats to destroy it, including threats from remote
neighbours like Iran and Iraq. Are we to forget that just
months before the Gulf War, Saddam Hussein
threatened to "completely burn half of Israel", and that
in the course of that war 39 Iraqi Scud missiles fell on
Israeli cities without any provocation?

Is there a double standard, as certain Member
States have alleged? There is a simple test. Take two
States, one a dictatorship and serial violator of Council
resolutions and human rights that is dedicated to the
acquisition of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons and fighting for regional domination; the
other is a democracy upholding the principles of the
rule of law and freedom of speech, a people whose
survival has been tested for decades but who are still
committed to peace, both for themselves and for future
generations in the Middle East.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a serious one,
and deservedly a source of international concern. But
the cause of peace in the Middle East is not served by
the charges we have heard in the course of this debate,
nor is it served by false comparisons and deliberate
obfuscation intended not to foster constructive action,
but rather to prevent it. We cannot lose sight of the fact
that the resolution of the conflict in the Middle East is
only possible through both sides fulfilling their
obligations and negotiating the terms of a final
settlement in an atmosphere of partnership and
cooperation. We hope that other Member States will do
their utmost to help create such an atmosphere.

