Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Karim
Khan, Special Adviser, for his written report (see S/20l9/407) and for his very enlightening briefing to
us this morning.

In a context that remains difficult in terms of
security given the significant threat that Da'esh
continues to pose, the stability of Iraq is our priority
now more than ever. In order to rebuild a resilient
society on solid foundations, Belgium is convinced that
it is essential to fight against impunity for the atrocity
crimes committed there.

Da'esh is one of the main perpetrators of the
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law that took place in Iraq. In that context,
Belgium co-sponsored resolution 2379 (2017), which
established the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (see S/PV.8052). On that occasion, the Council played its
part in ensuring that the necessary measures were
taken to combat impunity and promote respect for
international law - two objectives that contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security

Belgium commends the work done by Mr. Khan
since he assumed his functions almost a year ago. We
welcome the positive cooperation with local authorities,
which was highlighted during the Council's recent field
mission to Iraq, as well as the contacts maintained
with all components of Iraqi society so as to garner
collective support for the Investigative Team. The work
carried out with regard to its operationalization, the
initial activities involved in the collection and analysis
of evidence and the discussions on the support it could
provide within the framework of national processes are
very encouraging.

We also noted with interest the consultations held
with the Iraqi authorities on ways to incorporate war
crimes, crimes against humanity and the crime of
genocide into domestic law, as well as on the possible
establishment of specialized bodies to prosecute their
perpetrators. That is in line with the efforts by Belgium
and other European countries to explore the viability
of the various possible avenues of international
cooperation to try foreign terrorist fighters.

My country expresses its full confidence in the
ability of Mr. Khan and his team to carry out their
mandate rigorously. I would like to highlight two issues
that are of particular importance to us.

First, with regard to sharing evidence, as an
independent and impartial United Nations mechanism,
the Investigative Team must ensure that it complies with
United Nations policies and good practices, as well as
international law. The aim is to follow the established
practice of the international tribunals and mechanisms
established by the United Nations, whether in the area
of procedural guarantees, the protection of Victims and
witnesses or the non-application of the death penalty.

Secondly, in the context of capacity-building in
connection with applying international standards and
best practices in the area ofjustice, it is necessary that
all perpetrators of crimes, regardless oftheir affiliation,
be able to answer for their actions before Iraqi courts
and tribunals. To that end, in accordance with resolution
2379 (2017), Belgium will explore how it might share
its expertise and provide the Iraqi Government with the
necessary assistance.

It is in the light of those various objectives that
Belgium will continue to monitor the work of the
Investigative Team particularly closely during our term
on the Security Council. This mechanism represents an
immense hope for the many victims, and it is our duty
not to let them down.

