Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are very happy to welcome you here
once again, Mr. Minister, to preside over the Security
Council. We took note of, and are grateful for, the
briefings by the representatives of the United Nations
and of the African Union (AU).

We are once again today discussing an important
topic, namely, the partnership between the AU and
the United Nations in ensuring peace and security.
It is clear that there are ongoing serious threats and
challenges in a number of African countries, including
the marginalization of various groups and territories,
the spread of terrorism, the activities of transnational
organized-crime networks and piracy. There are ongoing
conflicts as well as the destabilization of a number
of countries and regions due, inter alia, to arbitrary
interference from external forces. All of this leads to
a hitherto unseen increase in the number of forcibly
displaced persons. The international community should
responde in a timely and effective manner to threats
and challenges to security in Africa.

Obviously, we must prevent attempts to impose on
Africans ready-made solutions without their clearly
expressed consent. The experience of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
other countries demonstrates the harmful nature and
ineffectiveness of such action.

We welcome efforts to find African-owned
solutions. Africans know better than anyone else the
situation and have situation-specific mechanisms at
their disposal. We note progress in the creation of the
African architecture for crisis response. We support the
enhanced cooperation with the Africa Union so as to
ensure peace and security on the continent.

Ignoring African views has adverse implications.
It is enough to recall the result of disregard by external
forces of the African Union initiative for political
settlement in Libya in 2011.
Russia has consistently called for developing the
partnership between the United Nations and African
organizations, including between the United Nations
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. The importance of such cooperation is
affirmed in the conclusions and recommendations of
last year's review of the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture as well as the September reports of the
Secretary-General.

We support further pooling of efforts between
the United Nations and the African Union to stabilize
the situations in Darfur, Somalia, Mali, the Sahel,
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan, as well as
the conflict between the Sudan and South Sudan. We
also would like to see closer cooperation on thematic
issues, which would include combating international
terrorism, transnational organized crime, piracy and
illegal trafficking in weapons and narcotics.

WetooknoteoftheoutcomeoftheUnitedNations-AU
review on the matter of support to African peacekeeping
operations entrusted with Security Council mandates.
We stand ready for further constructive dialogue with
our African partners. Of key importance, in our View, is
increasing the predictability, reliability and flexibility
of the financing of such operations. We agree on the
importance of ensuring effective support to them from
the United Nations and other international partners. Of
equal importance is Africa's compliance with its own
decisions and obligations. As far as we have gathered,
it is expected that we will finish the development of a
unified African approach at the AU Summit in January.
We are all aware that there remains a divergence of
views on this topic, even among African Security
Council members.

For our part, we are of the view that the specific
financial aspects of support to African peacekeeping
operations through assessed contributions from United
Nations States Members falls within the purview
of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly.
Encroachment by the Security Council into the Fifth
Committee's prerogatives is counterproductive
and undermines the long-standing division of the
"division of labour" within the Organization. We
share the conclusion of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/809) issued in September on the outcome of the
joint AU-United Nations review, namely, that United
Nations support to African peacekeeping should not
add up solely to financial and other support. Partnership
between the AU and the United Nations in support of
peace and security also includes joint efforts in conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.

Russia is making a notable contribution to
supporting peace and security on the African continent,
which includes designing strategies to settle armed
conflicts, as well defining mandates for the relevant
peacekeeping operations of the United Nations in
Africa. Russian troops and staff from the Ministry
of the Interior participate in many such operations,
and their activities are highly acclaimed by the
Secretariat. My country pays particular attention to the
training of police and military personnel from Africa.
Specifically, in Russia there is yearly training of up to
80 peacekeepers. Staff from law enforcement agencies
in Africa are given the possibility to participate in
higher education programmes and internships at the
short-term continuing education courses in Russia.

We are also making a significant contribution to
eradicating the social and economic root causes of
conflict in Africa. In particular, within the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative, more than
$20 billion have been written off ofthe bulk of African
debt. The remaining debt has been rechannelled to assist
Africans under the Debt for Development Programme.
Furthermore, Russia is an active participant in providing
across-the-board bilateral assistance to the continent in
the framework of existing international mechanisms,
including by making relevant contributions.

