Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you as President
of the Council.

At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. De
Mistura of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) for his briefing on the situation in Iraq.
We should also like to expression our appreciation of
his work in leading UNAMI and to wish him success in
his new i and in some ways old 4 job leading the
World Food Programme.

We share the assessment that has been made in
the quarterly report on the work of UNAMI. It is
balanced and provides an overall objective reflection of
the current situation in Iraq, as well as of the ongoing
processes in many areas of political and economic life
in the country, where we have seen some positive
progress. At the same time, we remain concerned by
the security sector situation. Terrorism continues to
pose a threat, as do increased activity of armed groups
and ongoing inter-ethnic and inter-religious tensions.

Strategically, the work of UNAMI should focus
on continued efforts to foster the process of national
reconciliation, which for now is clearly stalled. We
welcome UNAMI efforts aimed at encouraging Iraqi
leaders to seek mutually acceptable solutions to
political and socio-economic problems and create an
effective government system in which all ethnicities
and religions can participate. Without this, efforts to
normalize the internal political situation, maintain the
territorial integrity of Iraq and establish a just
distribution of income from the exploitation of natural
resources will fail.

One of the principal goals of the United Nations
in Iraq is to act as a coordinating centre for the
stabilization of the country, including efforts to prepare
for the parliamentary elections scheduled for January
next year and the regional elections in Kurdistan in
July. In our View, the future presence of the United
Nations in Iraq depends in a large part on UNAMI's
effectiveness in facilitating the successful holding of
elections and in assisting the electoral council. We
must strengthen the partnership between UNAMI and
the Government of Iraq by supporting the Government
in taking the lead in stabilizing the internal situation.

At the moment, we must note that the initial
stages of the pre-electoral process have lead to some
internal political tension. The coming of the elections
may well provoke greater religious and interethnic
problems. We therefore welcome UNAMI efforts to
encourage inter-ethnic and inter-religious dialogue and
we call on the Mission to continue to focus its efforts
on this issue.

Despite the progress in the security sector
reported by the Government, we are concerned by the
increase in the number of violent incidents, which rose
by one third in the month of April. We also remain
concerned about the situation in the disputed areas,
where tensions persist between the Kurdish population
on one side and the Turkmen and Arab populations on
the other. There is a positive role for UNAMI to play in
countering these tensions. We look forward to the
official publication of the report by UNAMI on the
disputed areas. It is our view that this document could
be of great value if it maintains a purely analytical and
advisory nature and doesn't presume to anticipate the
sovereign decisions that must be taken by the Iraqi
people themselves on this issue, which is exceedingly
sensitive to all ethnic and religious groups. In this
context, it is important to be informed of Iraqi opinion
on Mission documents.

Another important issue for us is the relationship
between Iraq and its regional neighbours. Without
more cooperation between Baghdad and neighbouring
countries and without the constructive involvement of
those neighbours in an Iraqi settlement process,
achieving security in Iraq will remain difficult. We
welcome UNAMI efforts to support the development of
bilateral relations between Iraq and its neighbours.

In conclusion, the Russian delegation supports
the draft presidential statement reflecting the position
of the Security Council on the questions related to Iraq.

