Mr. Buyoya (spoke in French): At the outset I wish
to thank the President for this opportunity to take the
floor and inform the Council of the activities of the
African Union in the Sahel region. My intervention
will focus on four points: first, a reminder of the data
and principles that underpin the African Union strategy
in the Sahel; secondly, the African Union contribution
to meeting the security challenges; thirdly, meeting
the challenges of governance; and fourthly, meeting
development challenges.

The African Union commitment to the Sahel region
dates to the Libyan crisis. In December 2011, a joint
United Nations-African Union mission was despatched
to the Sahel region. The idea was to examine the
impact of the return of migrants on the stability of
the countries of the region. A report was published
by the mission and considered by experts in March
2012, in Addis Ababa. Recommendations were made
to both the African Union and the United Nations.
Those recommendations laid the basis of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Those very
recommendations will also inspire the African Union
strategy for the Sahel, adopted on 11 August 2014 by its
Peace and Security Council.

Through the strategy, the African Union is seeking
to respond to the three challenges identified in the
Sahel: security, governance and development. In the
area of security, we have seen that the Sahel region has
experienced many problems that have been touched
upon here. Those include security problems, terrorism;
smuggling, including the trafficking of drugs, other
products and humans; migration, rebellions and domestic
conflicts linked, among other things, to competition for
natural resources caused by climate change.

In the area of governance, it has been noted that
the countries in the Sahel region have several problems.
In particular, they are vast countries. Their populations
have been nearly abandoned to the margins of the
region, particularly in areas experiencing enormous
economic and environmental fragility. Those countries
are fragile in terms of governance. They have access
to limited resources. They do not fully control their
territory. There are problems of corruption.

With respect to development, those areas are
very poor. They are some of the poorest areas in
Africa - indeed, in the world - and their populations
are exploding. In terms ofthe ecosystem, the situation is
very fragile. Certain areas see regular food insecurity,
natural disasters, flooding and droughts.

The link between security and climate change,
for example, has been established by examining the
situation in northern Mali. It is common knowledge
that the people who unleashed hostilities in northern
Mali were Touareg Malians. They are basically Arabs
who emigrated to Libya in 1973 because of a terrible
drought that occurred at the time. In that case, we see
that the link between insecurity and climate change in
the Sahel is a reality that has been proven by the history
of the region.

In the African Union strategy document, we start
by defining the Sahel, because there is no common
understanding of a definition of the Sahel. For us,
the Sahel consists of the area straddling the southern
Maghreb and northern sub-Saharan Africa, from the
Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea. It includes numerous
countries, which is important to highlight. In discussing
the African Union strategy, we consider the African
Union in its entirety - namely, the Commission, the
regional economic organizations, and a number of
specialized agencies in Africa involved in development
or governance. There are organizations that are
dedicated to the environment, such as the Great Green
Wall for the Sahara and the Sahel.

The role of the African Union, in cooperation
with other international community organizations,
is to help countries in the region cope with the three
challenges identified - security, governance and
development - without assuming their national roles.
If we consider the three challenges, we believe that
the African Union can bring a comparative advantage,
in particular in the areas of security and governance.
Why is the African Union investing in security in the
Sahel, whereas, normally, according to the rules of
the organization, the regional economic communities
deal with security? The answer to that question
is very clear. It lies in the fact that the Sahel region
straddles several regional economic communities,
including the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States, East African Monetary Union in the North
and Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other organizations in eastern African.

What is the contribution of the African Union to
security? As many have said, there are three hot issues
involving security in the Sahel. The situation in northern
Mali is well known. Unfortunately, it is not improving
despite the signature of the Peace Agreement. There are
still the usual terrorists movements - Ansar el-Dine,
the Mouvement pour l'unicite et le jihad en Afrique de
l'Ouest and Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb - who
are operating there against Mali forces, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the population, and so on. Today,
we also have what I could term a new generation of
terrorist groups, including the Macina Liberation Front.
We see that instead of decreasing, insecurity is even
extending not only southwards but throughout West
Africa. Incidents in Ouagadougou and the Grand-
Bassam reflect that trend.

The second cause of a lack of security lies in the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin. We have heard for
about 10 days now that the situation is under control,
but we are aware that there is still a very high level
of violence.

The third source of insecurity arises from the
situation in Libya, where the situation is confused but
poses a real threat to the entire Sahel region, particularly
with the presence of the Islamic State there. Heretofore,
young people from the Maghreb and sub-Saharan
Africa went to Syria and Iraq to be trained; today they
do not need to travel so far. They can go to Libya.

What is the contribution being made by the African
Union? From the beginning of the crisis in Mali, the
African Union has been working on the liberation
of northern Mali, on mediation and follow-up of the
Ouagadougou Agreement and Algiers Platform, and
in following up on the peace agreements. The African
Union participates in the technical commission
on security that monitors the ceasefire, and in the
committess on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, integration and security sector reform.

The second aspect of African Union involvement
is to promote regional security cooperation via the
Nouakchott Process, whose emphasis is on information
exchange. For example, every two months we bring
together the heads of the security and information
services from 11 Sahel countries. Every six months, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence Ministers
of 11 Sahel countries come together because we find
that political confidence is engendered by security
cooperation. Today, it is an established fact that regional
cooperation is the way forward. It yields results in the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin. It yielded results
following the Grand-Bassam attacks. Four countries
of the region joined forces to investigate the networks
of the perpetrators of those attacks, and the results
are tangible. We must therefore continue along that
path. I think that is what emerged also from the Abuja
Summit recently.

Another dimension of African Union involvement
the assessement, undertaken at the request of the Heads
of State of the countries in the region, of the situation in
northern Mali and to see how the African Union and the
countries of the region can come together to strengthen
the fight against terrorism. In that regard, an the report
of the assessment mission will soon be issued.

My next point involves the contribution of the
African Union to governance and the political realm.
In Mali, the African Union was at the very heart of
the peace process since Ouagadougou and Algiers,
and is today involved in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. The African Union is chairing the
subcommittee of the follow-up committee addressing
political and institutional matters. We know that this
problem is at the heart of what we could term the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, which is
barely gaining momentum, although we still believe
that the prospects for peace in Mali are real because the
signatories of the Peace Agreements still believe in it,
thanks to the massive political and economic support of
the international community.

With regard to Libya, the African Union is working

via neighbouring countries and the dispatch ofa special
envoy and an international Libya monitoring group. In
the countries of the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
the African Union has strongly supported the use
of the Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko
Haram. In other countries of the region in the Sahel,
we practice preventative diplomacy and closely
monitor developments in those countries when it comes
particularly to elections, especially in the Niger, Chad
and Burkina Faso. The African Union is also involved
through certain projects and programmes to promote or
support good governance, particularly decentralization,
deradicalization, support for electoral processes, and
human rights.

Economically, the African Union has two items
on its agenda. First is the mobilization of African
institutions working in the economic sphere, such as the
African Development Bank, the New Partnership for
Africa's Development and several departments of the
African Union Commission. The second involves the
coordination of Sahel strategies. Given the multiplicity
of such strategies, it was agreed in November 2013
that a coordination framework would be established
for those strategies, to be managed by the countries
of the region. Mali chaired the framework for today
years; today Chad is in the Chair. The African Union
and the United Nations provide the secretariat for what
we have called the Ministerial Coordination Platform
of Sahel Strategies.

In conclusion, the Sahel remains a regional rife
with difficulties. With respect to security issues, two
situations deserve the ongoing focus of the Council.
The first is the situation in northern Mali, where despite
all that has been done by the international community
there is no improvement. Something must therefore be
done to avert a future in which the terrorists will have
gained the upper hand over the rest of the international
community. The second is the situation in Libya. So
long as Libya remains unstable, there will be no peace
in the Sahel. It is as simple as that. These issues must
therefore remain on the Council's agenda.

Turning to development, we happily note that there
is continued interest in the Sahel, but the region's needs
are huge and the international community's efforts must
be long-term. One felicitous development in the region
that must be supported is the assumption of ownership
of all these strategies on the part of countries of the
region. I refer here to the establishment of the Group of
Five (G-5) Sahel, which emerged as a result of all the
debates held since 2013 under the Nouakchott Process.
The G-5 must be supported, but we must not forget that
the Sahel region covers an area greater than that, and
that in order to meet certain challenges, such as those
of security and development, we must cast our gaze
beyond the G-5.

