The President (interpretation from Russian): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

The Russian delegation participated actively in
preparing the draft resolution that is before the Security
Council today. We consider it to be an extremely important
document intended to promote the intensification of the
process towards settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia.

The peoples of Russia and of Georgia are linked by
feelings of mutual respect and sincere fraternal friendship.

Russia, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
is working for a just settlement of the Georgian/Abkhaz
conflict that posits the maintenance of the territorial
integrity of Georgia and for the finding of a form of self-
government for Abkhazia that allows for protecting the
interests of its multinational population. Such an agreement
would provide a stable basis for ending the conflict.

We are convinced that the use of force to resolve this
conflict is counter-productive and could lead to an
explosion in the entire rather unstable situation in the
Caucasus region. We are deeply concerned by the
continuing tense situation in the Gali region. The
consequences of the armed conflict that took place there in
May of this year have not been eliminated. The Gagra
Protocol on a Ceasefire and Withdrawal of Armed
Formations of 25 May is not being implemented either by
the Abkhaz or by the Georgian side.

A repetition of the tragedy of May in the long-
suffering Gali region has once again exacerbated the
problems of refugees. We demand from the Abkhaz side
the establishment of conditions for the speedy return of the
peaceful civilians that have left that region as a result of the
hostilities. If the Abkhaz authorities pose obstacles to their
return, such actions will be regarded as being aimed at the
implementation of "ethnic cleansing" in that part of
Abkhazia, Georgia.

The collective peacekeeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), in
cooperation with the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG), are an important stabilizing factor in
the conflict zone. Such a role of the CIS peacekeepers
was reaffirmed in May of this year, when, thanks to the
measures they undertook, armed conflicts in the Gali
region were localized and did not escalate into large-scale
hostilities. We are appalled by the continuing subversive
terrorist acts directed against the collective peacekeeping
forces, and we demand that the Georgian side take
decisive steps to put an end to them. The need for this is
directly emphasized in the draft resolution to be adopted
today.

We support the extension of UNOMIG's mandate
for six months, being convinced that the Mission must
continue its useful work in the conflict zone. We are
deeply concerned by the problem of the security of
UNOMIG personnel and believe that the greatest
responsibility in this regard rests with the Georgian and
the Abkhaz sides, which must immediately take the
measures that are needed. We reaffirm the readiness of
the collective peacekeeping forces to render assistance in
ensuring the security of the United Nations military
observers.

Recently, with the mediation of Russia, the sides
have been actively negotiating on preparations for a
meeting between the President of Georgia, Mr. Eduard
Shevardnadze, and the Abkhaz leader, Mr. Vladislav
Ardzinba, which would eliminate the consequences of the
events of May in the Gali region and would allow for the
adoption of a package of documents on key issues in
order to reach a settlement. We have a positive view of
the second meeting between the Georgian and the Abkhaz
sides, which took place from 23 to 25 July this year in
Geneva under the chairmanship of Mr. Liviu Bota,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, with the
participation of representatives of Russia, as the
facilitator, as well as of the States of the group of Friends
of the Secretary-General and members of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. We are counting
on the activities of the coordinating council and its
working groups being stepped up as a result of that
meeting.

Russia is ready to promote comprehensively both the
implementation of the agreements achieved in Geneva and
the advancement of an overall settlement.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document 3/1998/699.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour.-

Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia. Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,

Slovenia. Sweden. United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President (interpretation from Russian): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1187 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of its consideration of the item

on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

