Mr. Annabi: I will try to be brief, Mr. President,
as you have encouraged me to defer some of the
answers until the issuance of the reports of the
Secretary-General. I want to point out in that regard
that the Council has requested two reports. There will
be a report at the end of April that will focus on a
military and political assessment of the situation and
on the implications of that assessment for the size,
structure and deployment of the United Nations
Transitional Administration Mission in East Timor
(UNTAET). There will then be a second report, at the
end of July, which will be more comprehensive and
cover the whole issue of what the post-independence
presence will look like. So I hope that Council
members will be patient enough to wait until those
reports are issued. If we have some of the answers
before they are issued we will of course share them
with the Council. But, as I indicated in my
presentation, active work is taking place on the ground
on all of these issues. We will feed the answers back to
the Council as we identify them.

Very briefly, on the issue of property rights, the
Cabinet has simply decided to defer consideration of
claims on property rights until after independence. So
that will not be taken up now.

On phase V and the reconsideration of the
security status in West Timor, until at least recently it
has been the view of the Security Coordinator that if he
were to undertake an assessment he would probably
come to the conclusion that phase V should be
maintained, as there continue to be problems with the
militia in the camps. In fact, an advance security team
went to West Timor a month ago and was unable to
Visit the camps in the area of Betun, which, as the
Council knows, is a militia stronghold. So it seems that
until more is done to improve that situation, the feeling
is that the assessment would not come to a positive
conclusion. But we will continue to discuss this with
the Security Coordinator to see whether that can be
reconsidered.

On the preparations for the elections and the issue
of whether the refugees in the camps will be registered,
the answer is, simply, no; they will not be registered.
The regulation does not foresee that. In fact, the
regulation deliberately foresees - and this was a
decision taken by the National Council - that those
who wish to vote have to return. It is actually hoped
that this may induce some of the refugees to return if
they wish to participate in the election and in the
political life of the country.

On the whole issue of possible reductions in the
level of military and police components after the
elections, I think this will also be addressed in the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General. But I must
tell the Council quite frankly that, as it will have noted
from my report today, while we have a very
professional operation on the border with West Timor,
there continue to be problems. I can assure the Council
that we have a very professional operation on the
border, led by the remarkable Brigadier Gillespie of
Australia. They are doing a very professional job. I met
with him in Suai. But there continue to be incidents,
and it is likely that in the run-up to elections more
incidents may occur, as it may be in the interest of
some groups to try to destabilize the situation during
that period. So there is a very, very strong feeling
among our colleagues on the ground - and I do not
think that we should second-guess them too much -
that we should not tamper with the force levels,
certainly not before the elections. Let us wait and see.

Hopefully, things will go very well and the level
of security will be such that one will be able to think
along those lines, namely, downsizing after the
elections. We certainly would not want to maintain
troops who are not needed. But I think we should defer
that decision until we see what happens and until the
elections are behind us.

A final point: I had the pleasure to meet briefly
with the deputy minister of commerce of China while
he was visiting there - we were there at the same
time. Mr. Vieira de Mello was very pleased with the
agreements that were signed. China, I understand, will
also make an important contribution to assist in the
construction of the future foreign ministry of East
Timor; that is very much appreciated by the East
Timorese.

