Ms. Cafias (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, I wish to express my delegation's
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the work of the
Council and to offer you our fullest cooperation in the
discharge of your tasks, in which, given your great
abilities, we are sure you will be successful.

We would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Merimee of France and his entire delegation for their
harmonious and skilful guidance of the work of the
Council in the month of May.

My Government wishes to express its appreciation
to the Government of Rwanda for its achievements and its
efforts to normalize life in that country, despite the
difficult situation it faces. As we have said before, the
safe and voluntary return of Rwandan refugees to their
communities is essential for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Rwanda. For this reason, the lack of a
judicial system, the militarization of the Rwandan refugee
camps in neighbouring countries - which results directly
in destabilizing incursions into Rwanda - and the need
to speed up the establishment of conditions favouring the
return and reintegration of the refugees are priority issues
that must be dealt with swiftly in order to head off the
possibility of another massacre in the region.

 

In the resolution just adopted, the Security Council
specifically focuses on those aspects. On the one hand,
taking into account the new circumstances in Rwanda, the
Council has adjusted the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) and its force
level. My delegation fully supports UNAMIR'S
reorientation, which was worked out in close consultation
with the Rwandan delegation and is described in operative
paragraph 3 of the resolution. We believe the task can be
successfully performed with a reduction in UNAMIR'S
personnel, in accordance with the provisions of the
resolution; maintenance of the current number of military
observers and civilian police; and, most especially, the full
cooperation of the Rwandese Government.

On the other hand, under paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the
resolution, the Council, concerned about reports on military
preparations and increasing incursions into Rwanda by
elements of the old regime, is taking measures in that
regard. It states clearly that the restrictions imposed by
resolution 918 (1994) apply to the sale or supply of arms
and materiel specified in that resolution to persons in the
States neighbouring Rwanda if that sale or supply is for the
purpose of the use of such arms or materiel in Rwanda. It
also calls upon the States neighbouring Rwanda to take
steps with the aim of putting an end to factors contributing
to the destabilization of Rwanda, and requests the
Secretary-General to consult with those countries'
Governments on the possibility of the deployment of
military observers in their territories in order to monitor the
sale or supply of arms.

We believe that all of these measures should be
accompanied by increased assistance to Rwanda's
rehabilitation efforts. Making resources available to Rwanda
will make it possible to speed up the establishment of the
climate of confidence necessary for national reconciliation
and the return of refugees. In this connection, we urge
donor States and organizations to fulfil their commitments,
and in particular to support the early and effective operation
of the International Tribunal and the rehabilitation of
Rwanda's judicial system.

We also believe that the regional perspective of the
problem of Rwanda should be borne in mind. We think it
advisable to reactivate and implement the Bujumbura
agreement, since it provides the host countries, the
countries of origin and the international community with the
proper framework for action on the refugee question.

Similarly, we believe that the global approach to the
problems of the Great Lakes Region is appropriate, and in
that connection support the speedy convening of the
regional Conference on Security, Stability and
Development.

At this new juncture for Rwanda, we believe that the
presence of the United Nations, in close cooperation with
its Government, has an important role to play in
rehabilitating the country and in enhancing confidence in
the international community at a time when Rwanda is in
great need of it.

