Mexico commends the Dominican Republic for the way it has conducted its presidency of the Security Council this month amid the unprecedented and particularly complex global context resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic. We thank the presidency in particular for its efforts to ensure that the Security Council maintains the same level of transparency in its work. We agree with the first report of the Secretary-General on the subject of this debate (S/2020/167), which recognizes that young people make a crucial contribution to preventing and resolving conflicts and building sustainable peace. Young people face considerable challenges as a result of globalization, changing socioeconomic dynamics, the use and impact of new technologies, and the effects of climate change, among other things. It is alarming that one in four young people in the world is affected by violence or armed conflict. An additional challenge is that more than 1.5 billion girls, boys and young people have been affected by school closures as a result of the pandemic, which has led to an increase in psychological abuse and corporal punishment - a situation of grave concern that cannot and must not be tolerated. Sustainable peace and development, as well as global governance, must include the active participation and meet the aspirations of young people. Young women and men are often perceived as a threat or part of the problem, in addition to being marginalized or excluded from both decision-making and personal- and professional-development opportunities. This view is wrong, and we must change it completely. Young people are the actors who will ensure that development is truly sustainable and, for this to happen, our preeminent goal must be to empower them. Rising youth unemployment has been a huge cause for concern. The scenario becomes even more critical if we consider the implications of the current pandemic for the global economy and social dynamics in the years to come. We must forge a new paradigm for our relationship with young people in the economic and social spheres, one that ensures their inclusion and provides them new opportunities. As a first step, Governments need to take measures to reduce the impact of economic contraction on young people. The Government of Mexico will continue to make meeting the needs of young people one of its top priorities through a range of programmes intended to guarantee the economic and social rights of millions of young Mexicans. Among other activities to improve employment opportunities for young people, the Jovenes Construyendo el Futuro programme was launched with the aim of connecting people aged between 18 and 29 with companies, workshops, institutions or businesses where they can develop or enhance professional capacities and technical skills to improve their future employment prospects. It is important to note that, with Mexico's collaboration, this scheme has already been replicated in other Central American countries. Similarly, the Semilleros y Territorios de Paz initiative, developed as part of the Juntos por la Paz strategy, focuses on promoting a culture of peace and preventing violence by addressing conflicts through the participatory communication of young people and respect for human rights. The review of the peacebuilding architecture provides a further opportunity to strengthen the participation and empowerment of youth in peacebuilding efforts, from the local and community levels to the national and international. Youth participation has been recognized as a key aspect for the sustainability, inclusion and success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as reflected in the draft resolution on the comprehensive review of special political missions Mexico and Finland are introducing before the General Assembly. Mexico believes that the Security Council should consider taking the following specific measures. First, it must strengthen the synergies between the youth and peace and security agenda and the women and peace and security agenda, placing particular emphasis on incorporating the needs and perspectives of young women and girls. Gender equality is an essential prerequisite for strengthening the social fabric and building societies that are resilient to all kinds of conflict and violence. Secondly it should ensure the more systematic involvement of young people in the work of the Security Council and that it hears and takes their voices into account. Thirdly, it must promote the meaningful participation of young people, particularly those from marginalized and traditionally excluded groups, in international peace and security initiatives, as well as in voluntary activities, humanitarian support and certain components of peace missions. Fourthly, it must strengthen the interaction of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict with the rest of the United Nations system, and ensure that the youth dimensions of the topics on the Council's agenda are linked to the work of the Working Group. For Mexico, the path ahead is clear - we must promote prevention and sustainable and inclusive development, with full youth participation. There is no doubt that young people will always be capable of making the change our societies need as long as they are provided with the tools they need. Without young people, implementing strategies to achieve the 2030 Agenda Goals and thereby ensuring that no one is left behind would simply be inconceivable. Investing in young people is our best hope for realizing a world of peace.
