Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join colleagues
in welcoming this debate and in thanking the
Secretary-General for preparing a thought-provoking
and challenging report. I would also like to thank the
Deputy to the High Representative for her intervention.
I would like to associate my delegation with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union later in this
debate.

As we approach the Third Biennial Meeting of
States, this debate is an important opportunity to
highlight small arms issues. The United Kingdom is
committed to taking an active role in this process. We
have submitted comprehensive implementation reports
for both the United Nations Programme of Action and
the International Tracing Instrument. Through you,
Mr. President, I would encourage all Member States to
do the same as soon as possible.

We regret the lack of consensus at the 2006
Biennial Meeting of States. This year's event is an
important opportunity for the United Nations to
revitalize its leadership in tackling the global problem
of illicit small arms and light weapons. The United
Kingdom hopes that all Member States can agree that
we should restore the reputation of the United Nations
as the pre-eminent forum for controlling and curbing
the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons.

For this reason, we should all aim to conclude the
Biennial Meeting of States with agreement on a
practical outcome document. This document should set
the framework for work over subsequent years,
highlight best practices in implementing the United
Nations Programme of Action and identify areas where
greater attention is needed.

The irresponsible trade in arms holds back
development and perpetuates inequality, fuels conflict
and results in many people around the world being
injured, killed or subjected to human rights abuses. The
United Kingdom is committed to action to stop this
trade. My Government has provided around $60
million since 2001 to support conflict prevention by
addressing long-term structural causes of conflict and
supporting post-conflict reconstruction.
In 2007 and 2008, the United Kingdom assisted
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
partners to collect and destroy weapons, develop and
implement national and regional control agreements
and undertake public awareness campaigns. My
Government continues to take a leading role in the
development of globally agreed high standards of
international regulation of the trade in all conventional
arms. We are committed to working with partners at
home and abroad to bring a halt to irresponsible trading
in conventional weapons.

The key priority for the United Kingdom is the
creation of an effective arms trade treaty to help
prevent the irresponsible international sale and transfer
of conventional weapons. We welcome the useful
discussions at the first session of the Group of
Government Experts on an Arms Trade Treaty in
February of this year and we look forward to
continuing that work at the second session later next
month.

The United Kingdom is also fully committed to
the other areas of United Nations work relating to
small arms and light weapons. We welcome the
recommendations contained in the report by the Group
of Government Experts and have considered further
steps to enhance international cooperation to combat
illicit brokering of small arms and light weapons. We
are active members of the ongoing Group of
Government Experts on ammunitions issues. We are
assisting efforts to improve stockpile management and
security. We strongly support the development of the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms.

We must not close our eyes to the negative impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons. I agree very
much with what the representative of Indonesia said on
this subject. As the Secretary-General's report sets out
in its opening pages, illicit small arms adversely affect
security, human rights and social and economic
development. These are issues at the very core of the
Charter of the United Nations. That is why we believe
that continued work on these issues by the members of
this Council and by the wider membership of the
United Nations is imperative.

