Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for his valuable briefing. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has added pressure to the numerous interconnected challenges in the region: conflicts with armed groups,human rights violations and abuses, health epidemics and socioeconomic difficulties. Addressing such challenges benefits from a regional approach. The shared benefit from working together is always greater than that of any country acting individually. We would like to commend the resolute cross-border steps of the countries of the Great Lakes region, such as the mini-summit hosted last week by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi and the border-dispute solutions being facilitated by the Southern African Development Community. We would also praise the work of the quadripartite process on Uganda and Rwanda and the resolve of Rwanda and Burundi in normalizing their bilateral relations. We look forward to receiving an update on the new United Nations regional strategy on peace and security for the Great Lakes region. Estonia condemns the violence perpetrated by armed groups in the region, in particular by the Allied Democratic Forces and the Cooperative for the Development of Congo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Return, Reclamation, Rehabilitation militia group in the Central African Republic. The conflicts in the region continue to be accompanied by large numbers of grave violations and abuses of human rights. We are most worried about the increase in sexual and gender-based violence and the continued displacement of populations and the number of grave violations of children's rights. The perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable in order to fight the presence of a culture of impunity, which, if left unchecked, will only breed more violence. Rapid and robust implementation of the Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance would greatly assist in those efforts. The protection of human rights and the fight against impunity must remain priorities, in particular during the pandemic, and we appreciate the readiness of the Special Envoy to assist in that regard. With elections coming up in several countries in the region, we would like to underline the importance of initiatives promoting the meaningful participation of women in political and electoral processes and advancing the women and peace and security agenda in the Great Lakes region. This is particularly important today, given the COVID-19 pandemic, which has negatively affected the implementation women and peace and security agenda in the region. The same applies to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. I would like to conclude by encouraging the signatories and co-guarantors of the Framework agreement to strengthen their cooperation and utilize innovative solutions to continue tackling regional challenges.
