Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking all the briefers for their valuable contributions
to our discussion today. My particular thanks go to
Mr. Griffiths for his continued efforts to relaunch the
political process in Yemen. Poland holds in the highest
regard his engagement with the parties to the conflict,
the relevant stakeholders and civil society in order to
pave the way for a political dialogue in Yemen.

As Yemen is on the brink of the worst famine
in 100 years and military operations are escalating
despite the looming humanitarian catastrophe, we
now find ourselves on the verge of a disaster. The
conflict cannot continue any longer. Thinking that
it can be solved by military means and by the use of
force is a delusion. Instead, what is urgently needed
to avert the human-caused catastrophe is diplomacy,
mediation, the engagement of all the relevant parties
and regional countries and the meaningful support of
the international community, including the Security
Council. We can no longer limit ourselves to meetings in
the Chamber and discussions of the disastrous situation
in Yemen without taking concrete actions. Words will
not save the lives of the Yemeni children who die from
hunger and disease on a daily basis.

History shows that where there is a will, there is
a way. We therefore strongly urge all parties to the
conflict to show goodwill, flexibility and readiness
to compromise and to engage with the Special
Envoy without preconditions. We call on all relevant
stakeholders to make progress on confidence-building
measures and to participate in the next round of
consultations under the auspices of the United Nations.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our full
support for Mr. Griffiths, in particular his vision for the
political consultations. We also express our appreciation
for the diplomatic efforts undertaken by the members
of the Council aimed at creating conditions conducive
to peace consultations. We are also ready to engage
constructively in negotiations on the draft resolution
proposed by the United Kingdom.

The catastrophic humanitarian situation in Yemen,
as thoroughly described by Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock, and the continuing deterioration of security
conditions in the country require decisive and unified
action by the Council. Therefore, we express our full
support for the five points raised by Mr. Lowcock
during the briefing on 23 October (see S/PV.8379) and
urge their swift implementation.

We particularly call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, especially in and around the infrastructure
and facilities on which humanitarian operations
and commercial deliveries rely. We remain gravely
alarmed by the recent escalation of fighting in the
city of Al-Hudaydah. We urge both the Houthis and
the coalition to immediately de-escalate and cease all
military activities in the whole governorate. I would
like to stress once again that Al-Hudaydah constitutes a
critical supply chain for humanitarian and commercial
deliveries. Any disruption of that vital lifeline will
contribute significantly to the spread of famine, thereby
putting the lives of millions of Yemenis in jeopardy.
We condemn in the strongest terms all actions that
impede the delivery of humanitarian aid to Yemen,
as well as the transfer, storage and distribution of
life-saving supplies.

Moreover, I would like to stress the imperative for
the following actions to be immediately taken by all
the parties to the conflict: guaranteeing unimpeded
access and movement for vital imports into and across
the whole country, ensuring the full and sustained
functioning of all Yemen's ports and the Sana'a airport,
respecting the principles of international humanitarian
law and the ensuring of the protection of civilians,
respecting the principles of proportionality and
distinction, and, finally, ensuring the inclusion and
involvement in the peace process of all relevant groups
of Yemeni society, including meaningful participation
by women in peace consultations.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that all the
parties to the conflict in Yemen and regional actors
have reiterated their commitment to finding a political
solution to the conflict and their readiness to return to
the negotiating table. The time has come to live up to
those declarations.

