Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Today, the
Security Council is discussing the important issue of
maintaining peace and security and post-conflict peace-
building. The Secretary-General has laid a firm foundation
for this debate by submitting a comprehensive report,
entitled "The role of United Nations peacekeeping in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration", for which
we thank him. In this regard, I would like to make a few
brief comments.

First, establishing a climate of trust among the various
sectors of society in a country emerging from armed
conflict is the fundamental prerequisite for achieving lasting
peace. In this connection, the definition of an overall
framework of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), accompanied by a timetable and
technical and financial means for its implementation, is
essential. The central role of the United Nations in all
phases of the process also constitutes an element of
guarantee and a token of impartiality and legitimacy.

However, as the Secretary-General points out, in order
to be effective, United Nations intervention must be part of
the framework of an agreement or a commitment between
the various parties. In this respect, the Secretary-General's
proposal to make disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration a component of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations deserves the full support of Member States.

We also believe that, if United Nations activity is to
yield tangible results, demilitarization expertise and
adequate financial resources need to be mobilized at all
stages of the process. In the same context, we should
stress the importance of the role of the United Nations
Special Representative in terms of the coordination of all
DDR activities in cooperation with the various parties,
United Nations institutions and the bilateral and
multilateral cooperation agencies. Similarly, it seems to us
that experience acquired in former or current
peacekeeping operations should serve as a catalyst for
future United Nations activity.

Secondly, the cooperation of regional organizations
is necessary in the struggle against the flow of and trade
in arms. Regional initiatives on the proliferation of light
weapons in particular, such as the moratorium declared by
the West African States, undoubtedly help create more
effective conditions for controlling such weapons. Given
their reach and scope, these initiatives should be
supported technically and financially.

Thirdly, the reintegration of ex-combatants into civil
society is often a difficult undertaking that deserves
special attention. The consolidation of the reintegration
process requires taking into account the basic economic
needs of ex-combatants, such as education, vocational
training and the financing of their resettlement.

In Mali, this type of preventive diplomacy has been
very successful, following the settlement of the conflict
that beset the northern part of the country in the early
19905. Indeed, peace-building and economic and social
development efforts have involved the progressive
integration of numbers of ex-combatants into the armed
and security forces of Mali and the State public services,
as well as individual or group financing of small
development projects in the northern part of the country.
The effort to build peace and to revive economic and
social activity in post-conflict situations are therefore just
as important as those to prevent or settle conflicts.

Fourthly, the phenomenon of child soldiers needs
special attention. We bear a heavy responsibility with
respect to this unfortunate phenomenon, which is
unacceptable and which must be ended. In that
connection, let me pay high tribute to the dynamic,
intelligent and determined efforts of Mr. Olara Otunnu;
we support him entirely. In our View, we need
international programmes to provide long-term support
and assistance for child soldiers and to strengthen the

 

capacity of communities to offer such crucial long-term
services.

There are a number of lessons to be learned with
respect to the matter under discussion. First, it prompts us
to tackle tough issues such as land management,
decentralization, education, communication and the
strengthening of civil society through the establishment and
strengthening of States based on the rule of law. Secondly,
even modest measures, when taken in good time, can have
a significant positive impact and can offer the hope of
averting crisis. Thirdly, through good coordination, the
international community may be able to prevent the
outbreak of war and create conditions conducive to
economic development.

The transition from a society in conflict to economic
and social development is a major challenge demanding
great international solidarity. The international community
should therefore support the process of consolidating peace,
reconstruction and development, so that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration can meet with success.

