Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
in Kosovo.

We welcome His Excellency Mr. Dacie, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, to today's meeting and thank him for his
presence and statement. I also thank Ambassador Vlora
Citaku for her statement.

Over the past year, Ethiopia has been consistent
and clear in this position on the issue of Kosovo. We
reaffirm our support for the peaceful and amicable
solution of all outstanding issues between Belgrade and
Pristina in accordance with the Brussels Agreement.
We also welcome the ongoing efforts made by the
European Union in facilitating the dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/76), the holding of municipal elections in a
peaceful manner is indeed encouraging. However, we
also note from the report that the security situation in
northern Kosovo is still fragile, and the murder of the
Kosovo Serb politician Oliver Ivanovic' is indicative
of not only the prevailing tense security situation but
also of how the situation is potentially dangerous. It is
good that authorities in both Belgrade and Pristina are
ready to cooperate in addressing this issue in spite of
their emotionally-charged reaction initially. Identifying
those responsible for the crime and bringing them to
justice is no doubt important to reduce tension and
restore calm. Special Representative Tanin could not
have been more emphatic on the need to bring the killers
to justice. We also appreciate his quick condemnation
of the barbaric act.

We note that there was little substantive interaction
between Belgrade and Pristina during the reporting
period, and we understand the murder of Mr. Ivanovic'
has had its own impact. Some of the steps taken
to implement the agreements reached within the
framework of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina facilitated by the European Union (EU) are
encouraging, while the lack of progress on some of
the key provisions of the EU-facilitated agreements,
including, inter alia, on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, remains a source of concern.

It is our hope that the new leadership in both
Belgrade and Pristina will continue to engage in
dialogue and maintain the momentum in a positive
and constructive spirit with a View to addressing
outstanding issues and disagreements through peaceful
means. That demands that both sides refrain from
actions and statements that could cause ethnic discord
and undercut efforts to create an atmosphere of trust
and confidence conducive for dialogue. We will also
support the call by the Secretary-General to the leaders
in both Belgrade and Pristina to intensify their efforts
aimed at implementing the agreements reached within
the framework of the EU-facilitated dialogue.

Ethiopia fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has
been undertaking in discharging its mandates in line with
resolution 1244 (1999). Its engagement with municipal
authorities and community representatives in support
of the efforts to protect the rights of communities and
to promote intercommunity reconciliation and trust-
building is commendable, as is the effort being made
by Kosovo authorities to implement measures aimed
at preventing violent extremism and radicalization by
constructively engaging with young people and women.
It is our hope that UNMIK will continue to promote
political dialogue, strengthen community reconciliation
and ensure security and stability in Kosovo and the
region. We also recognize the significant role played
by the European Union on matters concerning Kosovo,
and we commend the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force for their
valuable contributions in Kosovo in the area of the rule
of law and security.

In conclusion, I would like to say that security and
stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately be
ensured when there is political will and resolve on the
part of both. In that respect, we once again encourage
both parties to remain committed to dialogue
and negotiation with a View to finding a mutually
acceptable solution.

