Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I would be
remiss were I to begin without applauding Peru's
skilful stewardship of the Council's proceedings. We

thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/826)
on children and armed conflict pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005). We welcome the
assumption of the office of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General by Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy
in April 2006 and her excellent presentation this
morning.

We are heartened that the implementation and
monitoring mechanism is in place. We appreciate the
fact that the process included close collaboration with
the key stakeholders. It is our hope that the time-bound
action plans to prevent and end violations will be fully
implemented in all situations of concern.

Children remain most vulnerable in conflicts;
they are always the worst sufferers. In peace processes,
they are mostly ignored. To protect them from war and
conflict is our collective responsibility. We need to
seize the momentum of ongoing consensus in the
children and armed conflict agenda.

To usher in an era of application of international
child protection standards, the Council must urge
Governments and non-State actors to respect and
uphold those standards. The Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, the
International Labour Organization Convention No. 182
and the Landmines Convention are all relevant in this
context. It is now time for the Council to expand its
focus. This should include all categories of grave
violations beyond recruitment and use of child soldiers,
such as the killing and maiming of children, sexual and
other grave acts of violence and denial of humanitarian
access.

Violence against children is usually further
exacerbated in situations of foreign occupation. We are
concerned at the fresh incidents involving children in
the Middle East, particularly in Lebanon and in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Preventive measures
and concrete actions need to be urgently taken to
extend them fullest protection.

As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Bangladesh will remain ever vigilant in respect of the
provisions of resolution 1612 (2005). It is important to
encourage United Nations agencies and international
financial institutions to devote particular attention to
the rehabilitation and reintegration of children. Basic
services like education, health care and housing should
be provided. The involvement of local communities is
crucial for imparting a sense of ownership and long-
term sustainability. Technical and financial assistance
need to be provided to countries, regions and
subregional organizations that are involved in
peacebuilding. We urge donors to continue their
generosity in this endeavour.

We believe that protection of children,
particularly girls, from gender-based violence and
abuse is a primary and enduring responsibility. High
priority must be provided to the special needs and
particular vulnerabilities of girls affected by armed
conflict. There should be zero tolerance for the
perpetrators of violence, particularly vis-a-vis girls;
there should be absolutely no immunity in that regard.

Finally, we have to avoid the perpetuation of
cyclical violence. To prevent today's victims from
becoming tomorrow's perpetrators, the values of a
culture of peace must be inculcated in young and old
alike. It is from this perspective that the Bangladeshi
delegation every year tables in the General Assembly a
draft resolution entitled "International Decade for a
Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of
the World, 2001-2010". It is our fervent hope that this
year too, as in other years, the international community
and the United Nations membership will provide it full
support.

Peace education and programmes, as well as
other non-violent approaches to conflict prevention and
resolution, will help us reach our goals. Robust pursuit
of these aims may change the course of history. It will
most certainly alter the future of the child today and,
therefore, of the men and women tomorrow.

