Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): In the development of the situation in the Serbian
region of Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a new,
important stage has been reached, opening up prospects for
a political solution of the Kosovo problem. Thanks to the
energetic coordinated efforts of the members of the Contact
Group, a real possibility has emerged to stabilize the
situation in and around Kosovo. As is well known, Russia
has been playing an active role in these developments. 1
should like to recall that, during the recent visit to Belgrade
of the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence,
the Yugoslav leadership agreed, in principle, to accept a
mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE). The understandings reached by
Ambassador Holbrooke, the representative of the Contact
Group, with President Milosevic of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the agreements signed on that basis
regarding the dispatch of missions to verify the fulfilment
by Belgrade and the Kosovar Albanians of the
requirements of Security Council resolution 1199 (1998)
have created important conditions for progress towards a
peaceful, lasting resolution of the conflict in Kosovo on
the basis of strict respect for the territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Russia fully supports the
Belgrade agreements. We call upon Belgrade to
implement them fully, and we intend to play a most
active role in the OSCE Verification Mission in Kosovo.

There has clearly been some progress in Belgrade's
fulfilment of the requirements contained in Security
Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199 (1998).
Offensive operations and repressive actions against the
civilian population have been ended. The withdrawal of
the units of Serbian security forces and of the Yugoslav
army to their permanent stations, including outside
Kosovo, is continuing. Cooperation between the Serb and
Yugoslav authorities and international humanitarian
organizations is expanding. The unimpeded access of
those organizations to the people in need of assistance is
being secured, as is the necessary freedom of movement
of international personnel in the territory of Kosovo.
These positive shifts have been witnessed, in particular,
by the group of diplomatic observers from countries of
the European Union, Russia and the United States
working in the region. At the same time, much still
remains to be done.

The task of the political resolution of the Kosovo
problem has always been, and remains, the sole strategic
objective of the Contact Group. Even though differences
of opinion have sometimes arisen among its members,
those differences relate to tactics and methods for moving
towards that objective. To some extent, differences of
tactical approach also emerged when we were agreeing on
the draft resolution that is before us. We are satisfied that
in the final analysis, the approach of continuing joint
efforts within the framework of the Contact Group in the
interests of the peace and stability of the region has
prevailed.

Enforcement elements have been excluded from the
draft resolution, and there are no provisions in it that
would directly or indirectly sanction the automatic use of
force, which would be to the detriment of the prerogatives
of the Security Council under the Charter.

 

In the course of the work on the draft resolution, much
attention was paid to the question of ensuring the security
of the personnel of the Verification Missions in Kosovo.
Russia attaches great importance to this issue, especially
since a large number of Russian representatives will be
working in the OSCE mission. We are satisfied that the
authors of the draft, having overcome their hesitations, have
clearly stated in paragraph 9 that, in the event of an
emergency, measures to ensure the safety of the
Verification Missions, including arrangements for
evacuating OSCE personnel, will be undertaken strictly in
accordance with the procedure provided for in the
agreements signed with Yugoslavia. The clarity introduced
on this issue provides guarantees against arbitrary and
unsanctioned actions.

Nor can one fail to take account of the possible danger
to the implementation of the agreements between the OSCE
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as a result of
actions by the Kosovar Albanians. We are alarmed by news
of their continuing failure to comply with the demands of
the Security Council. The Kosovar Albanian leadership still
has not publicly condemned terrorism. Fighters in the so-
called Kosovo Liberation Army have in recent times greatly
increased their provocative activities and, as a rule, this is
happening precisely in the regions from which Serbian
security forces are being withdrawn. In violation of the
arms embargo imposed by Security Council resolution 1160
(1998), illegal weapons continue to reach Kosovo and
fighters are infiltrating. This creates a real threat of a new
outbreak of violence and tension.

As members know, resolution 1160 (1998) was
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter. The draft
resolution before us today also makes reference to that
chapter. This serves as a reminder to those who are
violating the arms embargo, and in particular the
prohibition on supplying outside weapons or assistance to
the Kosovo terrorists.

We note that paragraph 15 of the draft resolution
makes it clear that the embargo shall not apply to
equipment for missions established in accordance with the
Belgrade agreements.

Also important is the fact that the draft resolution
provides for the parties concerned with the implementation
of the Belgrade agreements to report regularly to the
Security Council on their activities through the Secretary-
General. Here the Secretary-General will take account of
input from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as well. The
Security Council will consider the evolution of the situation
on the basis of those reports and assessments by the
Secretary-General.

At the same time, the draft resolution does not take
fully into account the recent positive changes with respect
to Belgrade's implementation of the Council's demands.
We cannot agree with the one-sided assertion in the
preambular part of the text that the unresolved situation
in Kosovo constitutes a continuing threat to peace and
security in the region.

We regret that the sponsors of the draft resolution
refused to delete the portion of the text relating to
freedom of operation of media outlets in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. I want everyone to be very clear
about our position on this matter: for us, freedom of the
press is one of the bases of democracy. It is one of the
important elements we have achieved in the course of
changing our society, and we value it highly. But
questions of freedom of the press lie far beyond the
powers of the Security Council, and therefore cannot be
the object of a Council resolution, especially one adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter. It is other United
Nations organs that consider such matters.

We were ready to continue to work on the draft
resolution, but the sponsors hurried to bring it to the vote
in its present form, which made it impossible to take our
continuing concerns into account. In the circumstances,
the Russian delegation will abstain in the vote on the
draft resolution.

We are convinced that there are no differences of
opinion among members of the Security Council on the
strategy for action to achieve a peaceful settlement in
Kosovo. That strategy, which precludes the granting of
carte blanche with respect to the use of force, is reflected
in the draft resolution, and we shall not object to its
adoption.

We hope that this Council decision will accelerate
the implementation of the Belgrade agreements and the
dispatch of the OSCE Mission. We also expect the
immediate rescission of the NATO decision on the
possible use of force, the so-called activation order, which
at present remains in force. This is of particular
importance with respect to ensuring the safety of OSCE
personnel.

In conclusion, I want to reaffirm that Russia will
continue to make an active and concrete contribution to
the political settlement of the Kosovo problem.

 

