Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
for his briefing this morning, as well as Mr. Deloire,
Director-General of Reporters Without Borders, and
Ms. Mariane Pearl, for having shared with us their
personal experiences. Those statements underscore the
gravity of the issue of impunity with respect to acts of
violence against journalists. In fact, since the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1738 (2006), progress
has been slow. We therefore commend the unanimous
adoption under the presidency of Lithuania of resolution
2222 (2015), which we co-sponsored.

Let me, at the outset, underscore the essential
contribution that journalists provide to maintaining
and promoting democratic values in our societies, as
well as their contribution to the exercise of the right to
information and freedom of expression, and also their
contribution to identifying responsibilities of States
and non-State players in situations of conflict.

The evolution of the nature of conflicts, which
involves not only State players but also a multitude of
non-State players, as well as terrorist threats, make the
task of journalists even more complex and dangerous,
not only in terms of the international press but also the
local press. As a result, protecting journalists working
in high-risk environments poses a major challenge.
Now one sees that, despite the heightened attention
given to the killing of reporters, little progress has been
made to protect them. There are many journalists who
have been imprisoned or killed. Their number is not on
the decline, and we are seeing no more perpetrators of
such crimes being prosecuted.

My delegation joins the statement made on behalf
of the European Union. I would therefore limit my
statement to three points that relate to the issue of
protecting journalists in situations of conflict. These
are, first, the role of States; secondly, the importance
of prevention; and, thirdly, new actors in the media
sphere.

First, the principles enshrined in resolution
1738 (2006) must be clearly reaffirmed. That is what
we did this morning. It is to be regretted that State
actors continue to be responsible for the bulk of the
acts of violence perpetrated against journalists. It
is unacceptable that in certain cases journalists are
identified with one of the parties to a conflict for
having voiced an opinion that is different from that of
the official version of events.
Under international law with respect to human
rights, States bear direct responsibility for respecting
and promoting the freedom of expression. On the one
hand, they must take effective measures to prevent
attacks against journalists and other individuals
exercising their right to this freedom of expression,
and, on the other hand, they must take every possible
measure to fight the impunity for perpetrators of crimes
committed against reporters.

Secondly, Belgium is convinced that we must
invest in prevention to fight all forms of violence
against reporters, and this in close cooperation with
non-governmental organizations and professional
associations. On 7 May, during World Press Freedom
Day, my delegation associated itself with the
International Federation of Reporters for the holding
of an event that was called "Finding security in unsafe
passages". It is reporters themselves and media experts
who put forward their strategies for protection and the
resources that they need to implement those strategies.

A framework for support for reporters could be
created via non-governmental organizations that are
actively working in this area. This, in particular, would
have to be a matter of developing the preparation for a
mission, supporting reporters who are in captivity and
ensuring psychological follow-up for reporters who are
suffering from post-traumatic effects. In this digital
era, we also need to raise the awareness of reporters
and other media players with respect to protecting their
sources of information.

Thirdly, the media landscape has been changing.
Many reporters and bloggers are working independently
now and do not have the benefit of any of the protection
that traditionally would come from affiliation with
major media bodies or press agencies. They are
therefore in a more vulnerable situation. The same
holds for their colleagues in the local press, who are
also more exposed to violence or persecution for the
very same reasons. Protecting their rights and their
physical integrity becomes ever more urgent, as does
that of recognizing their activities.

The media and reporters contribute to the vision
of the world of citizens and political decision-makers.
Without journalism there is no information, and
without information there is no possibility of forming
an opinion or, when necessary, of taking the required
decisions. In situations of conflict, reporters exercise
their responsibilities at a personal risk. It is therefore
essential to reaffirm our determination to have them
protected and to prosecute those who deliberately put
them in danger.

