Mr. Bin Mubarak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for giving us the opportunity to speak before the
Council for the second time this month. We wish you
and the delegation of the United States every success.
We would also like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and his
team, along with all the humanitarian workers, for their
sincere and great efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering in my country.

Today, the Security Council is discussing the
humanitarian situation in my country. While we greatly
appreciate this international attention, the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is neither incidental nor the
result ofa natural disaster. Its causes are clear, and those
responsible for them are known to everyone. Dealing
only with the results and the symptoms of the conflict
without addressing its root causes is a dangerous way to
address conflicts. It is bound to fail.

Four years ago, on 21 September 2014, the Houthi
militias, backed by Iran, the world's State sponsor of
terrorism, launched a coup against the State and the
outcome of the national dialogue and against everything
that the Yemenis had agreed to. His Excellency the
President of the Republic, Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, said at the time that what Yemen was being
subjected to was "a conspiracy that is dragging the
country to civil war". He affirmed that he would spare no
effort in discharging his constitutional responsibilities
and would work to restore State authority.

Since that day, the Yemeni Government, under
his leadership, has made every effort to put an end to
the coup and regain State authority. It has made one
concession after the other and extended its hand for
peace based on the terms of reference, in support of the
efforts of the United Nations and its Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths. The Yemeni Government
has made it its goal to achieve the dream of its people
to build a civil and modern federal State that supports
democracy, human rights and freedom based on the
rule of law and good governance. That is the only path
that we wish to take.

Throughout the latest developments, the Council
has agreed on a track to support peace, led by the
United Nations and based on the three terms of
reference that have been agreed that the local, regional
and international levels, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and the relevant Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015). That is the only way
to advance the peace process.

In every round of peace talks, the most recent of
which took place in Geneva, we have hoped to reach
a positive outcome on the humanitarian track, at least
in terms of alleviating the suffering of our people in
all the matters on the agenda. However, the coup
forces intentionally absented themselves at the last
minute, which indicated their lack of will to discuss
any humanitarian measures, because that would cost
them a card that they have always played internally and
externally. The international community must be aware
of that.

Speaking of the humanitarian situation, all of the
cities that have been under the control of the coup
forces since 2014 have witnessed systemic raids, the
terrorization and humiliation of civilians, and the
recruitment and deployment of innocent children to
the battlefields of death, as well as the spread of black
markets and the theft of our people's wealth in broad
daylight. That is a dangerous development of which we
have warned repeatedly.

The suffering of thousands of families in
Al-Hudaydah and all areas under the control of the
coup forces is due mainly to the imprisonment of family
breadwinners; the loss of income through confiscation
by the Houthis ofover 70 per cent ofthe State's resources,
according to United Nations reports; and the absence of
humanitarian aid because it is being obstructed, stolen
or diverted by the Houthi militias, as has been testified
to by United Nations agencies. That issue is at the core
of the conversation on confidence-building measures in
Yemen that have been sponsored by the Council, with
the support of the Special Envoy and the States that are
sponsoring the political process in Yemen.

Al-Hudaydah governorate is now the main challenge
to humanitarian aid because the Houthi militias are
the only ones benefiting from the seaport, while the
residents of the area are starving to death. That cannot
persist much longer. The humanitarian suffering in
Al-Hudaydah must end. We must not allow navigation
in the Red Sea to be threatened. We must take action,
while giving due protection and care to the civilians.

I do not exaggerate when I say that the humanitarian
aid being given to Al-Hudaydah by the coalition States,
foremost among which are the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates is unprecedented in any
similar military operation in Yemen and the region. In
that regard, I would like to specifically mention that
such aid is being provided by the States of the coalition,
especially the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates.

My country and the coalition States have sent a
letter to the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs explaining their concern over the safety of
civilians and aid workers because the road between
Sana'a and Al-Hudaydah lies close to fighting in areas
where the Houthi militias have transformed the city of
Al-Hudaydah into a military centre. They have set up
numerous checkpoints that are hindering the movement
and passage of civilians. They have also used the Red
Sea mills, silos and warehouses for military purposes,
as Mr. Lowcock mentioned earlier.

We have affirmed that the Yemeni Government
and the coalition members understand that those roads
are used by commercial and humanitarian trucks, and
we are therefore actively working to secure them by
removing the mines planted by the Houthi militias,
which threaten civilians, aid workers and health-care
providers. That is merely one of the precautionary
measures that we are taking. The Evacuation and
Humanitarian Operation Cell has made it clear to all
stakeholders that there are many other alternative routes
that connect Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a. The coalition
of States sent a detailed letter today to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs concerning
those roads and routes.

The Yemeni Government confirms its commitment
to international law, international humanitarian law
and human rights law, and calls for equal condemnation
of all those who violate those laws. We also call for
the intensification of efforts and coordination with the
relevant official bodies, and for the establisment of
major hubs for the United Nations agencies working in
the humanitarian field in the temporary capital of Aden
and other major Yemeni cities. The Yemeni Government
and the Arab coalition have previously called for
decentralized humanitarian work so as to avoid any
complications arising from military operations. There
are currently five humanitarian aid areas in Yemen,
each of which has land and sea corridors to guarantee
that aid reaches all the people of Yemen equally.

With regard to the depreciation of the Yemeni rial,
the Government of Yemen has established a higher
economic committee that has adopted several measures
to stop the currency deterioration, including creating
favourable conditions for exporting oil and gas, and
preventing the flight of hard currency, as well as
stopping the import of luxury goods and increasing
interest rates. In that regard, I would like to say that
the United Nations, States and donor institutions can
play a pivotal role in stabilizing the Yemeni currency
if they were to channel their aid to Yemen through the
Yemeni Central Bank, as is being done by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia.
Today, 21 September, holds a bitter memory for
our people, who call it the day of the catastrophe.
However, what fills us with hope is that in a few days
we will celebrate the anniversary of the 26 September
revolution, when our people got rid of the racist rule
of the imams that the rebellious militias are trying to
revive in Yemen. Those are the laws of nature. The night
ends and the sun always rises. Will our sun rise soon?

The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.
