Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to welcome my
Ukrainian colleague, Mr. Sergeyev, with whom I have
been working for quite some time here at the United
Nations. I congratulate him on the fact that today
he spoke not only in English and French, but also in
Russian. It was the first speech that I can recall him
delivering in Russian. I should like to tell him, better
late than never! I hope we will hear other speeches from
my Ukrainian colleague in Russian, although, as we
heard, he is also very competent in English and French.

In the course of the statements made by Mr. Sergeyev
and other colleagues, I heard a number of strange and
even surprising claims. I will make some comments
on those. First, the statements made by my Ukrainian,
French and British colleagues, ifI remember correctly,
included the claim that Russia is seeking to exert
pressure on Ukrainian democracy. But can a forcible
takeover be called democracy? What we are saying
is that there must be a normal constitutional process
that takes the interests of all regions and all people in
Ukraine into account. Is that not democracy? We are
calling for democracy, but others are trying to make it
seem that what we are calling for is not democracy.

Mr. Sergeyev brought up the very dramatic and
tragic events of the past three months, for which we
have expressed our great sympathy. There is no doubt
about that. There should be no doubt about whether
Russia understands that the basis of the political
crisis is dissatisfaction on the part of the masses with
Mr. Yanukovych's actions as President. But let us be
honest about one thing - somewhere along the way,
perhaps after the break-up of the demonstrations that
was mentioned, laws were adopted under Yanukovych.
These laws were repeatedly criticized, although such
laws exist in many other countries. There was even
a point at which one could not cross the road during
a demonstration. Such measures have been taken in
many countries. Under French law, in 2009 if I am
not mistaken, it was forbidden to wear a mask on the
street during a peaceful political demonstration. There
may be some other currents at play, but it seems that
many elements under discussion also exist in normal
democratic countries.

That is not the important issue; it is a matter of
principle at play here. Why have my colleagues decided
that what we have in Ukraine now is democratic
governance? As Ambassador Sergeyev noted, we can
all recall what happened in 1917, when a democratic
revolution was followed by dictatorship. We remember
that all too well. We have the feeling that, in essence,
the Kyiv Government comprises nationalist radicals.
They could be replaced by others who might be more
presentable to the West, but what motivates them are
their backers - the ones who brought them to power.

Let us not be fooled into believing that any change
of Government, especially if it is violent, leads to
democracy. Some of our western colleagues seem to
think that this is the case. We would like to see the
process under way in Ukraine lead to the establishment
of genuine democracy in that country.

My colleague from the United States said that there
is a need to respect the Constitution of Ukraine. We
believe that that is indeed important. I am trying to
imagine what would happen if, while President Obama
was in California, Mitt Romney turned up at the White
House and the United States Congress, in one House
of which there is currently a Republic majority, all of a
sudden voted to impeach President Obama. How would
United States public opinion react to that? Would that
be a manifestation of democracy? That is exactly what
happened in Ukraine. Why did Mr. Yanukovich leave?
He was scared into leaving Kyiv for Kharkiv. He was
intimidated into signing the agreement of 21 February.
He was threatened that the presidential residence would
be stormed if the premises were not vacated by 10
a.m.. That is not democracy. That is not respect for the
Constitution.

The situation in Crimea is very complex. The

Autonomous Republic of Crimea enjoys special status.
There was concern that the violent actions in Kyiv would
lead to a similar violent capture of the Administration
there. Someone came to power in Crimea and took
vigorous actions. He subordinated himself to all power
structures.

Some wish to make it seem that there are only
Russian armed forces in Crimea, but there are also the
Ukrainian armed forces who have sworn allegiance
to the new authorities in the Autonomous Republic
of the Crimea - for example, the Commander of the
Ukrainian Fleet, which is also based there; he too has
sworn allegiance to the new authorities. There are also
a number of self-defence militias, which were created
when the Crimean people were afraid that force would
be used due to the movement of armed contingents from
Kyiv. These people were armed and promised to look
for their so-called friends there - that is, militants to
restore the appropriate Government.

Then there is the presence of the Black Sea fleet. The
numbers are interesting. The Ukrainian representative
said that there are some 16,000 military personnel ofthe
Russian Black Sea fleet, but under our agreement up to
25,000 Russian troops can be stationed there. They are
there to protect sites and prevent extremists from taking
actions that could harm civilians or endanger their lives
and health. Perhaps our Ukrainian colleague views this
as excessive, but I fully agree with the authorities of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea.

I was also surprised to hear Ambassador Power
state that all of these concerns are fabricated. That
claim truly surprises me. I have the impression that
Ms. Power is taking her information from United
States television. Well, if she gets all her information
from United States television alone, then of course
everything in Ukraine must seem just wonderful. The
wave of democracy there was interrupted only when the
bad guy Yanukovych ran away.

There was an attempt to take over the Kyiv
Pechorska Lavra, which is as dear to me as it is to
Ambassador Sergeyev - perhaps even more. I am not
from Ukraine; I am from Russia. From the reports of
the American Ambassador and our own information,
I am sure that our media, like that of many other
countries, has portrayed events quite differently. What
about the wave of violence that swept through western
and central Ukraine? What about the armed attacks
against administrative buildings? What about the
municipal leaders who were dragged from their offices,
tied to pillars and mocked? Was that democracy? Is
that a normal political process? Would we see someone
dragged out like that in Chicago or in Bordeaux, for
example? I do not think so. I do not think we would deem
such actions admissible in any democratic country.

What, then, are we to make of the events in
Kyiv? Was that merely a made-up concern? Attempts
to take over administrative buildings in almost all
cities in eastern and southern Ukraine were not made
up. An armed group invaded and tried to remove the
Government and to set up its own undemocratic and
illegitimate authority.

I shall now turn to one of the key points I would
like to highlight. It is not only we who are concerned.
It is not important that we hold such concern. This
concern is shared naturally by people living in southern
and eastern Ukraine.

I now return to a point on which
Ambassador Sergeyev knows I am right. As I have
already mentioned, unfortunately the right-wing forces
in Ukraine are very strong. They cannot stand Russian
citizens or ethnic Russians. Let us recall how their
leaders aligned with Bandera and Shukhevych, who
fought under Hitler's banner against the Soviet Union's
Red Army component of the anti-Hitler coalition.
Those who share their ideology are unfortunately very
close to the Ukranian authorities; in fact, they carry
them on their shoulders. Can one therefore not find it
justifiable or imaginable that people living there would
have concerns - millions ofpeople, with 1.5 million of
them in Crimea.

The key issue here is, does anyone really think that
Russia could allow a repeat of what happened there
in central and eastern Ukraine, where millions of
Russians live? I would recall that, years ago, the United
States took over Grenada. President Reagan said that
they were defending American citizens who resided
there. That was 1,000 people, and there was no threat to
those citizens from Grenada. We have millions living
there. They have concerns.

Our colleagues have referred to international
institutions - the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations.
Granted, those institutions might be used. We do not
deny that. But those of us working at the United Nations
understand very well what international institutions
are like. In Kosovo there were not just institutions, but
deployed NATO forces. What did they do in 2004 to
stop the repression and attacks that took place there,
which forced many thousands of Serbs to leave the
area? Nothing was done. Some here have called for an
OSCE observer mission to be sent to Ukraine. Do they
know what nationalist radicals think of such a mission?
They will not even hear of it. Also, it will take months
to make the preparations for such a mission, so who
knows what could happen there in the meantime?

Another very important point that I want to address
is the following. We called this meeting it. No one
should think that we called it to provide a fuller picture
of what is really happening from our view point. The
two previous meetings were somewhat spontaneous, it
is true. I would like to repeat that a decision by our
President, which was authorized by the Federation
Council, to deploy Russian armed forces on the territory
of Ukraine has not yet been taken. And the fact that
we are holding this meeting does not mean that such a
decision will be taken in the near future.

However, in order to avert something we all want
to prevent, it is essential to bring home to those who
happen to be in power in Kyiv and who control the
situation in vast areas of Ukraine, as well as those who
support them and influence them, that there should be
no continuation of a policy of faits accompli and the
seizure of power by force.

We talked about defensive language rights. Yes, a
lot of work will have to be done there, with the possible
participation of international agencies. But let us
understand one thing now: we must all refrain from
making any plans for, or falling back on the habit of,
violently imposing authority or a philosophy, culture or
world view on other people. That is undemocratic and
could have very dangerous consequences in Ukraine.

On a more practical matter, one of my colleagues
said that we cannot talk about the agreement of
21 February because Yanukovych left. Well, so what?
The point is that our task is not to return Yanukovych
to power. Is it not understood that Yanukovych will
never return to power, that he will never go back to his
residence in Kyiv and never rule the State - although
we continue to consider him the legitimate President of
Ukraine at present, for the reasons I have stated. The
point is that this is not a matter of Yanukovych or no
Yanukovych. The point is that democratic parameters
for resolving the crisis in Ukraine are set out in the
agreement. This is not about returning to one law out
of the blue; there should be constitutional reform. They
have been constantly changing the laws in Ukraine
for the past 15 years, which may be the reason for the
political turmoil. There should be a process between
the different regions and political forces.

The Party of Regions has been scared off, and so
they think it no longer exists. But it exists. It has huge
support in the western part of the country, which is
Ukraine's main industrial centre.
That is what we are talking about. That is what
should be done, in addition to giving up force as a way
of solving problems.

