Mr. Arriola Ramirez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Republic of Paraguay, my
delegation pays tribute to the medical and humanitarian
personnel, those that have fallen in the conflict zones
and their families. May our words serve as an offering
for their sacrifice and a support for their selfless work.

We thank the Secretary-General and the
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Human Rights Watch for their briefings
on the protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict. And we welcome the initiative on the part
of the Uruguayan presidency of the Security Council
to convene this open debate on the occasion of the
first anniversary of resolution 2286 (2016), which is
exclusively dedicated to the protection of medical care
in armed conflict.

As to the protection of civilians in general, Paraguay
reaffirms that an effective system for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is the responsibility of the
Security Council, as has been noted by all Member
States, whether they are parties or non-parties to
conflict. It is therefore up to the Council to continue to
include clearly and explicitly the protection of civilians
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations, and as a
matter of priority in missions where civilians are at
high risk of violence.

My delegation believes that education and training
in international humanitarian and human rights
law are essential in order to stop and prevent acts of
violence, attacks and threats against civilians in armed
conflicts. In that regard, I wish to emphasize that the
Republic of Paraguay is currently contributing military
personnel to six peacekeeping missions. Prior to their
deployment, the Paraguayan Peacekeeping-Operations
Training Centre, known as Cecopaz-Paraguay, provides
specific training in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, in accordance with the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians.

With regard to the protection of medical-care
services in armed conflict, Paraguay emphasizes the
importance of resolution 2286 (2016), which draws
attention to the need for information and analysis on
the risks to which health-care services are exposed in
armed conflict. We also express our commitment to the
Secretary-General's initiative on the development and
dissemination of good practices and lessons learned in
the protection of health-care services in armed conflict
and for their subsequent cross-cutting inclusion in the
national military policies and practices of Member
States and the mandates of peacekeeping missions
provided by the Security Council.

Finally and once again, the Republic of Paraguay
deplores the contempt shown for the fundamental
norms of international humanitarian law and human
rights by parties to conflict, in particular the practice
of using starvation to wage war against the population,
restrictions imposed on humanitarian access and
the protection of civilians, and the undermining
of the institution of asylum and the principle of
non-refoulement.

