Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting, and Mr. Jeremiah Kingsley
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), for his briefing, as
well as the valuable work he is doing with his team.

We note that the security situation in Darfur remains
relatively stable and that intercommunal violence has
significantly decreased. Nevertheless, we must regret
that the peace process remains stalled. There is still a
need to address the root causes of the conflict and to
build sustainable peace.

The human rights situation remains precarious.
We note the decrease in human rights violations and
abuses as compared to the previous year, but the figures
remain high. We are particularly concerned about the
vulnerability of women and children and the absence
of an institutional framework capable of effectively
protecting them.

Peru supports the important work being done
by UNAMID in escorting and protecting civilians,
which allows women and children to carry out their
daily activities outside the camps for displaced
persons. That enables humanitarian actors to obtain
relevant information about the needs of internally
displaced persons.

However, we must condemn the persistence of
sexual violence. According to the latest report of
the Secretary-General on the issue (S/2018/389), the
rate in Darfur is particularly high around the camps
for internally displaced persons. We regret that
sexual violence is not reported because of the lack of
protection for victims and witnesses and inaction on
the part of authorities in punishing those responsible.
There is a need for women to occupy the posts of
judges, prosecutors and police officers. We would like
to underscore the work of UNAMID to promote the
participation of the population in the child-protection
programme, including the establishment of four
committees in camps for internally displaced persons,
which aim to promote the exchange of information and
good practices to respond to reports.

We also wish to underscore the improvements in
access to humanitarian assistance in Darfur. However,
we are concerned that those improvements have not
reached all areas of Jebel Marra, where it is estimated
that food insecurity seriously affects the inhabitants of
that area, as well as those in North Darfur, who could
face a level 4 situation of emergency food insecurity.

In that regard, we welcome the joint fundraising
strategy for sustaining peace in Darfur, which
aims to facilitate the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.

We also welcome the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative, the Special Envoy for the Sudan
and South Sudan and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel to revive the peace process.

We conclude by stressing the urgent need for all
parties to the conflict to participate constructively, in
a spirit of compromise, in the peace and reconciliation
process in Darfur, and to make progress in the
implementation of the Doha Document and in the
establishment of a permanent ceasefire.

