Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Secretary-General and of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Germany and of Serbia and
Montenegro. Their involvement shows the importance
of today's discussion.

Russia is deeply concerned as it follows the
developments of the situation in Kosovo. As a result of
the abrupt outbreak of inter-ethnic violence, we have
seen numerous casualties in the region, the dead and
wounded including staff of the international presences
in Kosovo. The scope of the violence, apparently first
perpetrated by the representatives of the Kosovar
Albanian community against ethnic minorities and the
international presences, allows us to speak of targeted
actions to squeeze the non-Albanian population out of
the region. According to the information reaching us,
the situation in the district continues to heat up,
particularly in the Kosovska and Mitrovica region. The
Kosovar Albanians in that region are concentrated
around the bridges over the Ibar river. They are
building shelters in order to prepare for a transition
into action. The Serbs are seriously concerned that the
KFOR contingent deployed in that region will not be
able to prevent a deterioration of the situation. The
Security Council cannot remain on the sidelines.

The major challenge now is to stop the violence,
to do our utmost to stabilize the situation, to give the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR the chance to restore law
and order in the region. We are convinced that unless
we quickly take decisive measures to restore order,
there is a credible danger of the peace process - so
painstakingly organized by the efforts of the
international community - being undermined.

We are deeply concerned by the scope of the
violence and the speed with which it has spread
throughout the district. In our view, this once again
demonstrates how fragile and unstable the peace was in
Kosovo and how much more needs to be done to build
trust among the ethnic groups populating the region.
But for now, we must note that the process of building
a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo in conformity with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) has not merely
bogged down; it is, in fact, back to square one.

Russia has repeatedly spoken of the need for a
multilateral approach to the Kosovo settlement process,
calling for the resolution of socio-economic problems
and for ensuring equal security for all inhabitants of the
region and full observance of their political rights and
freedoms. How can we speak about implementing the
plan approved by the international community, the
"Standards for Kosovo", when, in reality, one of the
parties is blatantly violating these standards? We deem
it essential for the Security Council to vigorously
demand that all parties to the conflict, first of all the
Kosovar Albanian majority in the district, immediately
cease all acts of violence.

UNMIK, along with KFOR, must undertake
urgent additional measures aimed at the unconditional
restoration of legality and public order and at ensuring
the safety of the representatives of all ethnic
communities in the district.

On that basis, the Russian delegation is prepared
to support the draft presidential statement as a strong
signal to the Kosovo Albanian side, which bears main
responsibility for the ongoing inter-ethnic violence. For
its part, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia is ready to participate actively in
seeking a solution to the problem of Kosovo.

