Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First,
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, for his introduction of
the Secretary-General's report.
The organization of the elections to be held on 17
November is, for all the inhabitants of Kosovo, as well
as for the international community as a whole, a
decisive stage towards inter-ethnic reconciliation and
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) to
establish provisional self-government representing all
communities. I believe that this is the first point that
the Council should note.

My delegation is pleased that the elections are
being prepared in generally satisfactory conditions. It
is encouraging to note that the Kosovars of Albanian
stock have acknowledged, in their public statements,
the role that the Serb community can play in the future
of Kosovo. It is essential to be increasingly vigilant as
we approach these elections, in order to deal with a
worrying security situation as well as with continuing
acts of ethnic violence towards minorities. We are
confident that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), together
with KFOR and all the protagonists in the field, will be
able to contain this violence, so that the parties may
freely express their support for a multi-ethnic and
multi-faith society.

In that regard, we express our satisfaction at the
establishment of a special team on political violence,
whose role will be to coordinate action against any
attempt to spread terror as the elections draw closer.

We consider it essential that the Serb community
take part in the 17 November elections. The
participation of all the inhabitants of Kosovo in the
elections is the key to the operation's success. In this
connection, my delegation attaches the greatest
importance to the dialogue of the United Nations
Mission with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities, which, in our opinion, could encourage the
Serb community in Kosovo to take an even more active
part in this process. I concur with what several other
delegations have said in this regard.

Tunisia attaches particular importance to
economic reconstruction. While we support
confidence-building measures for the inhabitants of
Kosovo, the economy can act as a powerful catalyst for
ethnic reconciliation. We also consider that an
autonomous government in Kosovo will be feasible
only with a solid economic and financial base that
would enable it to manage its own affairs
independently. We therefore deem it essential to
strengthen Kosovo's intrinsic economic capabilities
and to achieve a balanced budget.

With regard to the return of refugees and
displaced persons, my delegation supports the plan of
action adopted by the Joint Committee on Returns of
Kosovo Serbs. We hope that all of the inhabitants of
Kosovo will return to their homes and join in the new
Kosovar social dynamic. We salute the important role
that international organizations play in this area.

We reiterate our appeal that the sensitive question
of missing persons and prisoners be settled as quickly
as possible. We continue to believe that this is a
humanitarian issue with significant social
consequences. This issue still causes division and
impedes reconciliation between the communities in
Kosovo. We encourage the UNMIK/Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia Contact Groups to make further efforts
to settle this question.

Mr. President, Tunisia will gladly support the
statement that you will be making at the conclusion of
this discussion.

I pay a warm tribute to the personnel of UNMIK
and to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, for their excellent work
and assure them of Tunisia's full support.

