Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Please allow me at the outset to extend warm
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
am convinced that your talent and rich experience in
foreign affairs will enable you to guide the Council's work
this month with success.

I should also like to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Gambari of Nigeria, for having successfully
steered the work of the Council last month.

Recently there have been new and positive changes
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The parties to the conflict
have entered into a cease-fire and are now holding peace
talks in Ohio. We welcome those developments. Peace
benefits everyone, and no one benefits from war. We
believe that the parties concerned should make full use of
this opportunity to find a proper solution acceptable to all
through earnest negotiations. At the same time, the
international community should further intensify its
diplomatic and political efforts to facilitate a
comprehensive political settlement of the question of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Chinese delegation has always been concerned
about violations of international humanitarian law in the
former Yugoslavia. We urge the parties to the conflict to
cease immediately all hostilities and all acts in violation
of international humanitarian law, to cooperate with
international humanitarian agencies and to strive to create
a favourable atmosphere for the promotion of progress in
the peace talks on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The main purpose of the draft resolution before us
is to call for the early settlement of the questions
regarding persons detained or reported missing in this
region. The Chinese delegation will therefore vote in
favour of it.

However, I should like to point out that each United
Nations body should fulfil its own mandate, as set forth
in the Charter. Each of them has its own responsibilities
and functions and should act accordingly. The Security
Council should not, in principle, deal with questions of
human rights. Moreover, the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has its own explicit
provisions for the prosecution of persons responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law. The
Security Council should refrain from involving itself in
the work of the International Tribunal. We therefore have
reservations with regard to the relevant portions of the
draft resolution, and we request that they be reflected in
the record.

