Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I will now speak in my national capacity.

First of all, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo and the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union for their briefings.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is a
masterpiece of multilateralism. It is above all one of
the great successes of nuclear non-proliferation. Since
its entry into force more than three years ago, it has
guaranteed the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian programme, as has just been confirmed for
the fifteenth time by the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). It is also the result of 12 years of
intense diplomatic activities based on dialogue and
respect for the parties. The Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action is more than a nuclear agreement; it is a
confidence-building tool.

We share the concerns of our European partners
with regard to Iran's activities in the ballistic field. We
call on Iran to refrain from such activities, in particular
ballistic-missile launches, which are in contradiction
with resolution 2231 (2015). These activities reinforce
mistrust and do nothing but contribute to growing
tensions in the region.

We are concerned about Iran's activities that
contribute to regional instability, including in the area
of missile and arms transfers to State and non-State
actors in the region, in particular the Houthi in Yemen.
We call on Iran to comply with all relevant Council
resolutions and engage in a serious dialogue on these
concerns, including with other actors in the region.

Let me come back to the nuclear agreement. Like
the Secretary-General and the members of the Council,
Belgium regrets the withdrawal of the United States
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. It also
regrets the reimposition by the United States ofunilateral
sanctions and the recent lifting of exemptions in the
nuclear sector, which prevent not only Iran but also
other States Members of the United Nations - parties
and non-parties to the JCPOA - from implementing
their commitments under resolution 2231 (2015), agreed
by all members of the Security Council and supported
by a large majority of the international community.

Belgium is extremely concerned about Iran's
announcements of non-compliance with some of its
commitments. We understand Iran's difficult economic
situation, but like our European partners, we reject a
"less-for-less" approach and call on Iran to comply fully
with resolution 2231 (2015), including the restrictive
measures set forth in annex B of the resolution.

Belgium calls on stakeholders to exercise restraint.
Dismantling a working nuclear agreement would not
put us in a better position to discuss regional issues or
provide an immediate solution to the risks it already
addresses. We also call on them not to underestimate
the devastating and counterproductive effects on the
entire existing and future non-proliferation regime.
Non-proliferation and conflict resolution require joint
negotiated solutions, developed collectively, in full
respect of the Charter of the United Nations. There is
no credible alternative to this approach, which is the
very foundation of the Security Council. There is no
credible alternative to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, and our duty is to preserve it.

