The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Edmond
Mulet for his services and sacrifices during his tenure
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), in an era that was characterized
by challenges and difficulties. I would also like to
welcome the new Special Representative,
Mr. Fernandez Amunategui, and wish him success in
his tasks during this very critical transition period in
Haiti.

Painful tragedies have long dwelled in the
collective memory of the Haitian people and will
continue to do so. This is particularly true of those
witnessed in 2010, which included natural disasters
and political and economic crises, starting with the

earthquake, which has claimed the lives of 230,000
people and displaced more than 2.3 million to date, and
ending with the cholera epidemic, which has taken
many lives.

The major steps taken by Haiti to rebuild its
democratic system are heartening and give cause for
hope. The most recent achievement was the stable and
calm conduct of the presidential elections, which led to
the peaceful transfer of power to President Martelly. In
order to build upon those gains and avoid undermining
them, Haiti must appoint a new Prime Minister. We
therefore appeal to all parties to do so and to establish
a new Government that can face the challenges and
difficulties confronting Haiti in the tasks of
reconstruction, social and economic development and
building State institutions.

We also express our appreciation for the efforts
made by MINUSTAH and support the extension of its
mandate. We support all efforts to restore human
security and rebuild civilian capacity in Haiti. We hope
that such undertakings will not be affected by the
downsizing of military and police capabilities next
year

In conclusion, I stress the fact that Lebanon
stands side by side with the international community in
its efforts to rebuild Haiti and establish a permanent
and strategic partnership that would lead to a better
future for the country. We appeal to donor countries
that have provided support to the people and
Government of Haiti to continue to do so and to
provide relief in all areas.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

