Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I too would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Takasu for his
90-day report, as well as for his management of the
Committee and the professionalism of his team. His
briefing has described the Iranian efforts to circumvent
the Security Council sanctions, along with the
exemplary behaviour of States in seeking to address
this.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has just issued a damning report concerning the Iranian
nuclear dossier, and I would like to highlight a number
of points that are of particular concern.

Iran continues to energetically pursue its
enrichment programme, which it was under the
obligation to suspend. It has now produced almost two
tons of low-enriched uranium; this would be, after
re-enrichment, more than enough to manufacture a
nuclear device. But there is no nuclear plant in Iran
that would be able to use it.

Iran has already started to enrich uranium to
20 per cent, without having notified the Agency in due
time. Thus, the Agency was unable to take the
measures necessary to monitor this progression to a
level that brings Iran dangerously close to the military
threshold. As we know, 20 per cent is more than 90 per
5
cent of the way towards the enrichment of military-
grade uranium.

Iran also continues to pursue its heavy water
activities in Arak and its work on a 40-megawatt
plutonium reactor, which is far too powerful for the
research and development or medical isotopes
activities alleged by Iran. Nor did Iran authorize the
Agency to take samples from several thousands of
litres of heavy water recently discovered at Isfahan.

Iran has constructed a clandestine enrichment
factory in Qom, announced last November. This site
remained undeclared for some years, in violation of
Iran's safeguards agreement. Iran claims that this site's
nuclear purpose was decided only in the second half of
2007, while the Agency states that it has information
revealing that the design of the installation dates back
to 2006. Iran did not respond to the Agency's request
for access to the companies involved in the
construction of the site. The Agency had asked Iran to
confirm in writing that there were no further hidden
sites in preparation, and Iran did not do so.

There is no credible civilian application for this
site. The Agency has confirmed that this installation
could harbour around 3,000 centrifuges. That is
sufficient to construct an atomic bomb but not nearly
enough for a reactor. Nearly 45 years would be
required for it to produce a single annual refuelling for
a reactor similar to that of Bushehr.

We cannot underestimate the gravity of these
facts. How can we have trust? How many hidden sites
remain?

For two years now, the Agency has been
investigating the alleged military studies, namely on
conversion activities, work on coordinated high-power
explosives and, finally, work on a Shahab missile to
carry a nuclear warhead. It is these studies that give
rise to the fear that not only has Iran worked in the
field of fuel and modes of delivery, but also on the
missing link: the development of a device and its
delivery by missile.

The Agency has confirmed that it has credible
information from multiple sources covering a long
period of time, information that is consistent in terms
of the technical detail, timetables, individuals and
entities concerned.

Iran itself has corroborated some of the
information, such as the identification of certain

workshops or the designation of certain projects.
According to the Agency, these activities apparently
continued after 2004.

For nearly two years now, however, Iran has
denied access to any of the documents, sites,
individuals or entities involved. As time passes, the
Agency is concerned that it will become harder and
harder to obtain information. Without this information,
it will be impossible to rule out the possibility of a
military nuclear programme.

In terms of transparency, Iran has - completely
illegally - ceased to apply modified Code 3.1. It is
also is not applying the Additional Protocol.

Concerning the research reactor in Tehran, Iran
has rejected the agreement proposed by the Director
General of the IAEA. That agreement, which was
accepted by all the other parties, had proposed a
transparent and balanced supply strategy aimed at
meeting Iranian needs in terms of medical
radioisotopes. It would have restored some trust while
ensuring that, for a number of months at least, there
would not be a sufficient quantity of low-enriched
uranium in Iran to build a bomb.

Iran, however, has merely re-proposed options
that were categorically ruled out by Mohamed
ElBaradei during the negotiations in Vienna. These
were ruled out with good reason: they all would have
enabled Iran to construct an atomic bomb at any
moment.

Lastly, while this is not reflected in the report,
Iran has rejected all of the E3+3 offers to hold a
meeting on its nuclear programme.

If we take all of these facts together, we see a
country that is producing nuclear fuel without having a
nuclear plant, which is secretly developing enrichment
sites without any credible civilian application, which is
underhandedly making progress towards the necessary
enrichment level to construct a bomb, which has
developed a ballistic missiles programme and which
categorically refuses to comment on the militarization
of its programme even though there is a wealth of
information on this work that the Agency considers
credible.

My country is determined to support the broadest
possible dissemination of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. We have undertaken extensive cooperative
efforts in the Gulf and elsewhere. In Paris next week,
we will hold a high-level conference on this subject.
But how can we maintain confidence in nuclear energy
if it is possible to completely reject transparency
without being called to account? How can we
guarantee the integrity of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons on the eve of
this year's Review Conference if it is possible to
violate all of its rules without consequences?

Within the E3+3, we remain deeply committed to
finding a diplomatic solution to this question.
However, we cannot sit idly by. We cannot allow the
Iranian programme to progress while our offers for
dialogue and cooperation are turned down one after the
other and while the work of the IAEA is hampered in
such a provocative manner. Furthermore, the Security
Council cannot allow a State to flout five consecutive
resolutions.

Lastly, we cannot allow ourselves to continue to
be taken advantage of by the range of dilatory
overtures being made by the regime. Every moment
counts. Given this situation, along with our partners we
have today no other choice but to seek the Security
Council's adoption of new measures in the coming
weeks, in line with the dual-track approach that has
been consistently promoted by the permanent five
members of the Security Council plus Germany.

