Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to wish a
blessed Ramadam to all. I salute His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, Mr. Anifah
Aman, and the President of the Security Council for
convening this timely debate on children and armed
conflict. This matter is of highest priority and urgency
for the State of Palestine, whose children's lives are
gravely endangered by the Israeli occupation. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; and
Ms. Eunice Apio, Director of Facilitation for Peace and
Development, for their important briefings.

We come before the Security Council anguished
by the Secretary-General's decision to exclude Israel
from the list of shame of parties committing grave
Violations against children in his annual report on
children and armed conflict (S/2015/409). Israel, the
occupying Power, is without doubt a flagrant violator of
children's rights. Israel systematically commits crimes
against Palestinian children. Its actions contravene
its obligations under human rights law, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and international
humanitarian law, which obligate the occupying Power
to ensure the well-being and safety of the civilian
population under its occupation. Evidence verified
by the United Nations and numerous human rights
organizations affirms that Israel continues to kill and
maim children, attack schools and hospitals and prevent
humanitarian access, with devastating impact on the
rights, lives and well-being of Palestinian children.
Those facts are well documented in the current report
and similar past reports.

According to the criteria established by the Security
Council, such actions would trigger a listing among the
grave violators identified in the annexes to the report.
One qualifies to be on the list of shame whether Boko
Haram figures there or not. If one meets the criteria,
then one has to be there. Political considerations should
not be the basis for removal because some abhorrent
terrorist organization is on the list.

Yet Israel was not included in that list, as political
pressures were again blatantly exerted to shield
it from censure and measures of accountability,
notwithstanding the objective recommendation of the
experts in the United Nations system. We salute those
experts for their professional and honest position. They
recommended Israel's inclusion, but political pressure
led to the deletion of Israel from the list of shame.
This glaring omission and the failure to hold Israel
responsible for its crimes come at a heavy cost to our
innocent children, who are being denied the protection
ofthe law, their rights violated, their suffering deepened
and their lives, dreams and futures shattered, without
consequences.

Israel's brutality increased against Palestinian
children in 2014, causing the third-highest number
of child fatalities in armed conflicts worldwide. As
reported, 557 Palestinian children were killed. My
statement, which will be circulated, contains an annex
with a list with the names of all those children and their
ages. The majority are from the Gaza Strip, who were
killed during the Israeli military assaults of July and
August 2014. There are 340 boys and 200 girls, from
one-week-old babies to youth 17 years old. As time
constraints do not allow me to read out the names of
all of those beloved children to properly memorialize
their lives and souls, we are distributing the list of their
names with the copies of our statement today.

The Palestinian people still grieve this massive loss
ofhuman life and innocence. Among them are 19 children
of the Abu Jama'a family, the youngest a 6-month-
old girl, Bisan, who were massacred in an Israeli air
strike on their home that killed 25 family members
in total. They suffered the same disaster inflicted on
142 families who lost multiple members - mothers,
fathers, sisters, brothers, grandparents, aunts, uncles,
cousins - in such criminal assaults, with 89 families
totally decimated.

The grim reality is that the Israeli occupying forces
killed an average of 10 children per day in Gaza, most
of whom had not yet celebrated their twelfth birthday.
Children were killed on beaches as they played in broad
daylight before the eyes of the world, in the sanctity of
their homes, in their beds as they slept, in schools, in
playgrounds, in the arms of their parents who could not
save them from the Israeli onslaught. And an estimated
3,000 children were injured and maimed by the
deliberate Israeli strikes and bombardments of civilian
areas. One thousand of those children will be disabled
for life. These facts, documented and verified by United
Nations agencies on the ground, cannot be disputed,
distorted orjustified by any shameless propaganda.

In addition to these horrific facts, 1,218 Palestinian
children were injured in 2014 by the occupying forces
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, more
than half of whom were under 12 years of age. Many
were critically wounded, and 13 were killed. Among
them were Mohammed Abu Khdeir, aged 16, who was
abducted and burned alive by terrorist settlers, and
Nadim Siam Nuwara, aged 17, who was killed as he was
returning home from school during the Day of Nakba in
May 2014. I am honoured to have his father here with us
today as we appeal again to the Security Council to act
to redress the crimes perpetrated against his son and
our people and to bring an end to this 48 years ofillegal
occupation and decades of injustice.

Moreover, along with rampant Israeli strikes on
hospitals and homes that have caused death and injury
to children, the report indicates that Israeli attacks
damaged or destroyed 543 schools in Palestine, the
highest recorded number of all time. This includes
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, where many
Palestinian families, the majority of whom were
refugees seeking protection under the United Nations
flag, met a tragic fate at the hands of the occupying
forces, who killed at least 42 people, including 16
children, and injured 230 in strikes on the schools.

Generations of Palestinian children have been
traumatized by the depravity of the Israeli occupation.
As noted by the Secretary-General in the report,

"The cumulative impact on children and the civilian

population in general of these military operations,

and the ongoing military occupation in the State of

Palestine, is devastating" (S/2015/409, para. 110).

The average 8-year-old in Gaza has witnessed three
acts of major military aggression but has never set foot
outside Gaza. Too many young lives have been cut short
by the violence and terror of the occupying forces and
extremist settler militants, who, along with the Israeli
Government, should be included in the list of violators,
the list of shame.

The children who survive this constant aggression
are left to cope with deep physical and psychological
wounds, which gravely impairs their lives. Those
wounds result from the loss of family members, with
at least 1,500 children orphaned in the last Israeli
war alone. There have been detentions and arrests,
with children as young as 12 seized from their beds
in the dead of night, detained, interrogated, beaten,
blindfolded, strip-searched, forced to endure solitary
confinement and other acts amounting to torture and
prosecuted in the only juvenile military court system
in the world. There is also the illegal blockade by
which Israel has inhumanely deprived the Palestinians
in Gaza, isolated them from the world and obstructed
humanitarian assistance and recovery. Forced
displacement has been endured repeatedly by many
children, with the destruction of their homes and loss
of their life possessions.

Where else in the world would such deplorable
treatment of children be permitted? How long will the
Security Council allow Israel to act as a State above the
law, perpetrating such grave violations against children
with impunity?

This shameful situation renders meaningless the
law and the obligation to protect civilians in armed
conflict, and the accountability mechanisms established
for this purpose. The failure to apply the same standards
and demands for compliance to Israel undermines the
credibility of the international system and proves that
it is broken. This accountability gap clearly fosters
Israeli impunity, as shown in its callous response to the
report and the persistence of its violations against our
children, who are left to fend for themselves against
Israeli savagery. As the Council knows, had Israel
been added to the list of grave violators, a process of
increased oversight would have been initiated. The
United Nations and Israel would have had to negotiate a
time-bound, mandatory action plan to protect children.
Listing would also have provided the Council with the
tools to prevent and respond to future Israeli violations.
Israel's exclusion from the list, despite the expert
advice of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations agencies monitoring the
situation in Palestine, is a missed opportunity to hold
Israel accountable and to save the lives of Palestinian
children.

In 2009, the Secretary-General came before the
Council and stated that "All countries and all groups
must put the protection of children in situations of
armed conflict above politics." (S/PV6II4, p. 3). We
echo that appeal today in the light of the tragic plight
of Palestinian children under Israeli occupation.
Israel must be held accountable for its crimes. We are
convinced that only collective international action can
compel it to cease its violations and respect the law.
Our pursuit of accountability and commitment to
international law are evident in our accession to the
Rome Statute and other international treaties. While the
Israeli Government continues to demonstrate in word
and deed that it has no interest in peace and the rule of
law and insists on denying the Palestinian people their
rights and entrenching its occupation, the Palestinian
leadership remains committed to peace.

To salvage the prospects for peace, we implore the
international community, with the Security Council
at the forefront, to act to uphold international law and
United Nations resolutions towards ending Israel's
illegal occupation and achieving freedom and justice
for the Palestinian people. Until then, we again appeal
for protection of the Palestinian people, beginning with
our children.

