Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing and for the important work
that the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is doing to support the
Syrian people.

We are grateful to the United Nations and the
brave workers on the ground who delivered critical
humanitarian aid on 3 November that included much-
needed vaccinations for 5,193 children and also
provided life-saving assistance to more than 50,000
internally displaced persons, most of them women and
children. The United States worked for months with
the United Nations and like-minded allies and partners
to secure a Russian agreement to support the United
Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent humanitarian
assistance delivery. We also worked together to extract
the necessary approvals from the Syrian regime to
allow the United Nations to make its first humanitarian
assistance delivery to the Rukban camp since January,
and the first ever from Damascus.

The humanitarian needs in Rukban remain
immediate and severe. A one-time aid delivery to
Rukban is a good start, but it is certainly not enough.
It is essential to provide United Nations humanitarian
workers with sustained access to the camp. The United
States has shown that it will do everything possible to
facilitate aid to areas in Syria where we have influence,

and we remain ready to provide security for any future
deliveries of humanitarian aid through areas under the
control of the global coalition to defeat the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. The Rukban aid delivery
is clear evidence that Russia and the United States can
work together to help the people of Syria and that the
Russian Federation can secure the regime's approval for
humanitarian deliveries. There is no conceivable reason
for the Syrian regime to block future deliveries. We are
willing to work with Russia to keep the arrangement
going and we hope that the Russian authorities can work
with Damascus to facilitate more of those deliveries
in the future. We fully support the current United
Nations plan to make another delivery to Rukban in
mid-December, and we call on Russia and the Syrian
regime to do their part to ensure that that happens
without delay.

We must all continue to push for full, unhindered
and sustained humanitarian access throughout Syria
for the millions of people in need, including greater
access for those in eastern Ghouta and south-western
Syria. We urge Russia and Damascus to step up and
get humanitarian aid to all the 13 million Syrians
who need it. The Syrian regime has the opportunity
to demonstrate its willingness and ability to facilitate
aid deliveries throughout the territories it controls. But
humanitarian access has not improved in communities
that are firmly backed by the regime and under its
control, in places such as eastern Ghouta, just outside
Damascus. Why? Because the regime seeks to punish
communities that are outside or were formerly outside
its control for what they believe is a lack of loyalty to
Al-Assad. That is wrong-headed.

An unwillingness to approve facilitation letters
and other bureaucratic delays is essentially a denial of
access, and it continues. As access to people in need
across Syria continues to be severely constrained,
the United Nations and its partners are providing
life-saving aid to some 750,000 people every month
through cross-border operations. There is currently
no credible alternative for reaching those people. It is
therefore absolutely imperative that the Council support
the reauthorization of the cross-border humanitarian
aid delivery mechanism provided for in resolution 2165
(2014). The United States strongly supports its renewal
for an additional 12 months, as the Secretary-General
has called for. We look forward to working with our
colleagues on the Council to ensure that it is renewed.

Humanitarian conditions in Syria will continue to
be dire in the absence of a credible United Nations-led
process. The formation of a constitutional committee
must move forward as quickly as possible. Despite the
relative calm afforded to the people of Idlib in the past
two months since the ceasefire agreement was reached
between Turkey and Russia, Idlib's 3 million residents
live in daily uncertainty. What is certain, however, is
that any military escalation would have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences for millions of civilians
and for the stability and security of Syria's neighbours.
We need only look at the events of the past weekend in
Aleppo, where there are reports from the Syrian regime
of an alleged chemical attack and Russian air strikes
inside the Turkish-Russian demilitarized zone. We can
all see how fragile the situation is and that millions of
Syrian lives are at stake.

Russia committed to a lasting ceasefire in Idlib
in the Istanbul summit communique of 27 October.
To date, that ceasefire has resulted in very substantial
reductions in violence. It is absolutely essential to ensure
that the Syrian regime does not seize on false pretexts to
undermine the ceasefire and launch a military offensive
in Idlib, which would not only lead to a resumption of
violence but would seriously jeopardize the prospects
for a political solution to the conflict. We continue to
engage with the Russian Government and military at
senior levels to make it clear that an offensive in Idlib
would represent a reckless escalation of the conflict
and would put millions of civilians in danger.

The instability for many civilians in Idlib is palpable.
Just last week, two of Syria's most prominent peaceful
resistance activists, Mr. Raed Fares and Mr. Hamoud
Jneed, were assassinated there. I would like to express
our condolences to the families and friends of Mr. Fares
and Mr. Jneed on behalf of my Government. Their
selfless dedication to amplifying the voices of the
Syrian people and their desire for peace, justice and
dignity were sources of inspiration for so many. The
Syrian people have been silenced for too long, and the
prospect of a constitutional committee represents an
important opportunity to move the political process
forward in order to finally end the conflict. We ask
the Syrian regime to take this opportunity and to make
the move towards peace and stability in its country
and region.

