Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting, and Mr. Hameed Opeloyeru, Mr. Miroslav
Jenca and Mr. Souleymane Bachir Diagne, for their
valuable briefings.

For Venezuela, it is of extreme importance to
recognize the role played by regional and subregional
organization in the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
conflict prevention and the establishment of coordinated
strategies for the maintenance and building of peace. We
believe that, in these regional and subregional forums,
the Security Council has important allies in meeting all
the challenges to peace and security around the world.

The United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) have maintained close cooperation
over the last 40 years, particularly in the areas of peace
and security, humanitarian assistance to refugees
and the promotion of dialogue among civilizations.
The strategic cooperation that has contributed to
the promotion of the purposes and principles of the
foundational charters of both multilateral institutions
has undoubtedly been mutually beneficial, in the light
of their shared vision, interests and objectives. In that
regard, we would note that OIC is a strategic ally of
the United Nations, particularly in the fight against
terrorism and the spread of violent extremism, including
terrorism ideologies and narratives, as the organization
regards that scourge as one of the greatest threats to
international security in the world today.

In that connection, we once again emphatically
condemn all terrorist acts in all of its forms and
manifestations, whatever their motivation, wherever
they occur, and whosoever commits them. We also
affirm that terrorism must not be linked to any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group.

Venezuela believes that effectively combatting
terrorism and violent extremism requires the joint,
resolute and coordinated efforts of the international
community and the full, non-selective implementation
of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions prohibiting, inter alia, financing, training,
harbouring or transferring weapons to terrorist groups.
That battle should be waged in the framework of
international cooperation under applicable existing
international and regional instruments, including the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nation and international law, in full respect for human
rights, fundamental liberties and the rule of law.

In that regard, we believe that a preventive approach
is always the most appropriate way to combat the scourge
of terrorism and violent extremism in a comprehensive
manner. We must neutralize the strategies of extremist
groups and ideologies that have taken it upon
themselves to promote violence and intolerance. We
once again highlight the importance of adopting and
implementing coordinated initiatives - adapted to
each situation and national reality - in order to address
the root causes that fuel this despicable phenomenon,
to develop effective and innovative strategies to
counter extremist and terrorist narratives and to
encourage critical thinking within the society with a
view to preventing radicalization, recruitment and the
mobilization of resources, including the inappropriate
use of information and communication technologies.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation has
clearly shown that it is committed and attaches great
importance to the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism, as a great many of its member States have
been victims of terrorist attacks. In that regard, we
call for action, including the adoption of a convention
on that issue. Recently, our country, in our capacity
of president of Non-Aligned Movement countries,
participated in OIC's forty-third session of the Council
of Foreign Ministers, held October in Tashkent,
Uzbekistan. We witnessed the launching of an OIC
message centre and the Centre for Dialogue, Peace
and Understanding. We are sure they will contribute
to the fight against terrorism and violent extremism,
including radicalization and incitement, particularly
online and in social networks.

Such initiatives, which seek to promote respect
for religious, social and cultural diversity, as well as
for a culture of peace, tolerance and respect among
different nations and societies, complement the efforts
of the United Nations to combat terrorism and violent
extremism and contribute to using good practices
and past successes in drafting a broad international
framework to effectively combat terrorist narratives
and developing a strategy that counters the propaganda
used to encourage, motivate and recruit others to commit
terrorist acts, including through distorting religion to
justify Violence. That proposal will be reviewed by the
Council in April 2017.

In conclusion, Venezuela believes that we should
continue to strengthen cooperation and strategic
alliances between OIC and the United Nations,
particularly through bodies such as the Counter-
Terrorism Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. In our View, that
is the most effective way to face common challenges
and to jointly and collaboratively address the spread
of terrorism, violent extremism, the migrant problem
and transnational organized crime, and reach peaceful
settlements to conflicts, particularly in those areas
where OIC has a competitive advantage - its
relationship with the Islamic world.

