Mr. Malok (South Sudan): As this is the first
time that my delegation addresses the Security
Council during your presidency, Sir, permit me to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, and your
delegation on assuming responsibility for the month
of August 2014. I wish you, Sir, every success in
your leadership. I would like to assure you of the full
support and cooperation of my delegation, particularly
as the Security Council plans to travel to Juba in the
coming days. I would also like to use this opportunity
to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing,
which provided more depth to the issues raised in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/537).

At this juncture, allow me, once again, to reiterate
our commitment and faithfulness to the peace
process, and to assure the Council that we are indeed
determined to reach a final settlement of the conflict
through negotiation. The people of South Sudan have
already experienced a lot of wars and suffering from
conflicts. We cannot afford to prolong the current
situation. Therefore, we are expecting the rebels to
show seriousness and faithfulness in the negotiations.

As highlighted in the Secretary-General's report,
the situation in South Sudan is both difficult and dire.
It is not something the Government of South Sudan
wants. As documented in the report, His Excellency
President Salva Kiir Mayardit, the elected Head
of State, has expressed his willingness to form an
interim/transitional Government in order to promote
constitutional reform, national peace and reconciliation,
as well as accountability mechanisms. He remains
steadfast in the realization of those objectives.

It is in the best interests of the Government of
South Sudan that, with the new round of discussions in
Addis Ababa, the parties find renewed vigour in truly
moving towards peace and alleviating the suffering of
our people. We call on the Council and the international
community to remind the rebels of the importance of
adhering to the cessation ofhostilities agreement signed
on 23 January, the agreement signed on 9 May and
the recommitment agreement, signed on the 10 June,
which they have violated many times - thereby forcing
the Government to react in self-defence to protect its
citizens and the territorial integrity of the country.

We must also continue to thank the IGAD countries
and partners for continuing to walk this path with us.

The Secretary-General's report highlights,
among many important elements, the challenges the
Government of South Sudan has faced in undertaking
various investigations and bringing them to a logical
conclusion, where justice and accountability are the
pillars and the goal. It is important for the international
community to note that there may be, in fact, technical
capacities missing in order to swiftly undertake forensic
and legal proceedings. The Government of South
Sudan has expressed its regret with regard to the frozen
capacity-building efforts of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) with regard to the organized
forces and other rule of law institutions, which would
be the pillars in driving this process.

While the Government is trying to do its best to
contain the very difficult reality, it also needs help
to achieve that. As a Government, we also continue
to collaborate with the African Union Commission
of Inquiry for South Sudan as a key element of
confidence-building, not only with the continent and
the world but our own people as well.

I know that in the past there have been a lot of
mistakes and misunderstanding between UNMISS and
South Sudan, but the Government is willing to work
with UNMISS and the United Nations as a whole.

I would like to conclude by saying that many of
the elements set out in the Secretary-General's report
and the briefing provided to us by Mr. Mulet will be
discussed with the members of the Security Council.
The Government of South Sudan commits itself to a
frank conversation in order to jointly find mechanisms
to help the people of South Sudan.

