Mr. Shearer: Often when I brief the Security Council on South Sudan, the news is not encouraging. However, today is different. There have been positive developments that have moved the country further along the road to sustainable peace. On 15 February, President Salva Kiir, against the wishes of many ofhis supporters, agreed toa compromise to return South Sudan to its pre-2015 position of 10 states, although he added three administrative areas. With that shift, Riek Machar accepted the challenge to join a transitional Government in Juba, serving as the country's First Vice-President, despite transitional security arrangements not yet in place. With the deadlock broken, four Vice-Presidents were sworn in at a ceremony in Juba, attended by senior leaders from the Sudan, South Africa andUganda. The fifth was sworn in the following day. I acknowledge the role of President Museveni of Uganda, General Burhan of the Sudan and the Heads of State of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well as South African President Ramaphosa and regional envoys Stephen Kalonzo and Ismail Wais, for supporting the process. But the progress is attributable to the political willingness of two men who put the interests of their country first - President Kuir, to make critical concessions, and Riek Machar, to agree to return to the capital that he left during fighting in 2016. We often speak of courage in war and battle, but peace also requires courage. Relief was the overwhelming feeling expressed to us around the country, the consensus being that the priority is to form the transitional Government so that the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan - and the country - can advance. As we speak, parties are now negotiating over the allocation of ministerial portfolios. Meanwhile, non-signatory groups, through the mediation efforts of the Community of Sant'Egidio, committed to ceasing hostilities last month. The return to Rome next week will aim to bring them into the agreement. The new Government can prompt positive change. The number of displaced and refugees returning is likely to increase. Already, according to the International Organization for Migration, approximately 800,000 people have already come back since the signing of the 2018 peace agreement. The first joint statement from the new presidency - the President and Vice-President - last week urged people in protection-of-civilians sites and neighbouring countries to return home. The collective message is significant and timely, coming ahead of the rainy - and planting - season. The message, of course, puts the onus on the new Government to ensure that areas of return are safe for those who are coming back. For its part, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has stepped up its protective presence to build confidence in areas of return. In addition, the United Nations police (UNPOL) is expanding technical assistance and beginning to co-locate with the National Police Service to enhance policing capabilities. Yet, the dearth of health and education services in rural areas has discouraged returns. The imbalance between services in protection-of-civilians sites, for example, and outside is glaring. It needs urgent redress by humanitarian and development actors, including donors. The Bentiu protection-of-civilians site, for example, faces high numbers of unaccompanied children, who have been left at the site to continue their schooling while adults go back, simply because schools do not exist in their own villages. The protection environment has also changed. The ceasefire and the free movement of opposition leaders across South Sudan have lowered the risk of violence, which has been confirmed by the security risk assessments conducted by UNMISS and its partners. Consequently, UNMISS has prioritized peacekeepers to hotspot locations and areas of return. Between five and eight temporary operating bases, at any one time, are being manned in remote areas. For example, the force presence inside the Bor protection-of-civilians site has been reduced by 70 per cent. That has freed troops to respond robustly to protect civilians against extreme intercommunal violence in Jonglei last week and this week. Our Pibor base has been reinforced to better protect 5,000 civilians who had fled there from adjacent areas and three temporary operating bases have been established in surrounding villages. Nevertheless, the new Government faces a daunting array of challenges on day one that will test its unity. Most urgent is the need to move on the transitional security arrangements. The pretransitional structures are now redundant. The implementation of those measures is dangerously lagging. UNMISS has transported more than 250 tons of supplies to training locations to plug urgent gaps. But universally across sites, there is no registration, no substantial training and a shortage of supplies for those troops assembled. The new Government will also face a precarious humanitarian situation in many of its states. The anticipated improvement in harvest levels 12 months ago was quashed by the extensive flooding last year. Crops were destroyed, livestock were lost. The floods contaminated water supplies, worsening health conditions, particularly for children, in areas that have sparse access to health resources. The flooding has also contributed to communal violence among pastoralists. It is no coincidence that the most severe food insecurity conditions, but also the heaviest fighting, are in Jonglei state, where livestock losses have undermined the social fabric, which is centred around the production of cattle. The threat of damage from locusts, amid South Sudan's never-ending woes, is yet to have a substantial impact on the country. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations is gearing up its preparations to spray to protect crops. A unified Government heralds the start of a new phase. The peace agreement, of course, will be the road map for the coming three years. However, in parallel, South Sudan needs to address four issues that are the cornerstones of a properly functioning State. First, impunity must end, which will require increased support to police and the justice chain, from the collection of evidence through to prosecutions and court trials. Where crimes are committed, especially the number of sexually based offences, perpetrators need to be brought to justice. Secondly, corruption must end. That requires financial accountability and transparency. Government mechanisms exist but are often bypassed. For example, if Government workers and security services receive their salaries regularly every month, they will focus on their jobs, not on other activities to support their families. Thirdly, dependency must end. That requires a determined shift by both the Government and the international community to supporting programmes that promote self-reliance where appropriate. Yes, there are areas where humanitarian assistance is urgently required, but such interventions should be progressively more surgical and vigorously monitored. Fourthly, exclusion must end, which means that all South Sudanese are part of the democratic process, that civil society has a greater role and that there is a political space where it is alright to speak out and criticize. Those are the underpinnings of the upcoming constitution-making and election processes. The mandate of UNMISS is due for renewal. South Sudan, as we have heard and seen, is in flux as the new Government is established; therefore, it is premature to propose significant change. A better understanding will be possible in the coming months. Until then, the current UNMISS mandate is sufficiently broad, in my view, to continue activities to build durable peace and protect civilians. Nevertheless, there will be a need to focus on two areas, namely, the mobility of peacekeepers, which has improved, and plans are in place to enhance it further through increased riverine and air support, particularly during the rainy season; and the role of UNPOL and our Rule of Law Unit to expand its activities to better tackle impunity and support the shift to civilian law enforcement and accountability. Finally, the doubters are telling us that we have been here before. However, itis also important to acknowledge that these are changed circumstances. The international community will likely lean on the side of caution, wary of repeating past mistakes. That, of course, is fair, but neither can we totally step back to wait and see what happens before making a commitment. Our actions can push South Sudan further towards sustainable peace; our inaction can help condemn it to failure. In the past weeks, its leaders have shown leadership. It is hoped that this will continue. It is imperative there be no reneging on the peace agreement or the ceasefire. International partners must remain engaged - both in solidarity and, at times, with pressure - to encourage compromise in order to achieve and maintain the unity. South Sudan's future depends on the ability to compromise and maintain that unity.
