Mr. Rao: Allow me to begin, Sir, by offering
you my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. On behalf of
the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), I wish to
thank you for having invited the OPCW to brief on this
important issue.

This year the OPCW is celebrating 20 years of
working together for a world free of chemical weapons.
As we remain on track to eliminate and verify all
chemical weapons declared by possessor States by the
early part of the next decade, we are redoubling our
efforts to prevent their re-emergence.

The OPCW is not a counter-terrorism organization,
but it is a credit to the commitment of our States parties
that they have recognized the organization as a forum
that can make a meaningful contribution to global
counter-terrorism efforts, especially with regard to the
threat of chemical terrorism.

Since 2009, the OPCW has been implementing and
expanding international cooperation programmes aimed
at enhancing global chemical security. At the request of
States parties, the OPCW conducts a comprehensive risk
assessment to help them determine chemical-security
threats. The aim of capacity-building in such countries
is to assist in assessing risks, increasing vigilance,
instituting protective measures and responding to
threats. Capacity-building programmes involve a wide
range of stakeholders, including facility managers,
police, academics, laboratory staff and chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear experts in order to
strengthen the security framework at the country level.
Experts from neighbouring countries are included, as
appropriate, to increase the footprint of the security
framework regionally.

As we strengthen our role as a platform for
information-sharing and coordination, we have
reinvigorated the work of the Open-Ended Working
Group on Terrorism through the creation of a
sub-working group on non-State actors. The group
addresses the legal, prevention and response aspects of
countering chemical terrorism. The OPCW secretariat
has also developed its capacity to assist States parties
in responding to possible acts of chemical terrorism.
A rapid-response and assistance mission has been
established at OPCW headquarters to deploy at short
notice to any State party affected by a chemical
incident involving the alleged use of toxic chemicals
by a non-State actor. The mission will deploy only at
the request of the State party affected. The team will
be equipped to secure the affected area, detect toxic
chemicals and provide advice on decontamination and
immediate assistance to victims. Essentially, the team
will be equipped to cooperate and coordinate with
the United Nations and other relevant international
organizations. In January, the mission was tested at a
tabletop exercise held in parallel with a United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force meeting
at OPCW headquarters.

Secondly, we are working with the chemical
industry. Hundreds of thousands of tons of scheduled
chemicals are traded internationally every year. As the
global chemical industry continues to grow in size and
complexity, ensuring that chemicals are never traded,
whether knowingly or not, for purposes banned by
the Chemical Weapons Convention is a high priority.
Security along the chemical-supply chain will play a
critical role in protecting people and the environment
from the hostile use of toxic chemicals.

We have seen the enormous human and environmental
costs that chemical accidents can have. The potential
damage is only multiplied if such events are purposely
caused by those wishing to do harm. The recent attack
on a chemical plant near Mosul, Iraq, illustrates all
too vividly the risks we face if those who wish to
harm and terrorize focus their sights on the chemical
infrastructure. Equal responsibility must be shared
between industry and government if we are to raise
the chemical-security bar against terrorist attacks.
The chemical industry worldwide fully understands
the importance of preventing any misuse of chemicals
as well as the physical protection of chemical plants,
and our close collaboration with the global chemical
industry continues to gain in strength.

Thirdly, we are working with our international
partners. Combating chemical terrorism requires a
broad-ranging approach to security that includes a
network of stakeholders and international partners. We
engage with major international organizations through
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
a body that forms part of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Task Force aims to
enhance preparedness and response capacities through
a common and coherent framework. As co-Chair of
the working group on preventing and responding to
weapons of mass destruction attacks, the OPCW has
called for enhanced inter-agency coordination in
response to a chemical terrorist attack. Last month,
the OPCW hosted a tabletop exercise with the working
group to clearly outline response capabilities and gaps.
The goal of the exercise is to create a comprehensive
global response system and to ensure that any country
that requests assistance will receive it in a coordinated
and effective way.

Also in January, the OPCW signed a memorandum
of understanding with the World Customs Organization.
Enhanced cooperation with the World Customs
Organization is envisaged in order to strengthen
national and international controls on the trade of
toxic chemicals.

The members of the Council are fully aware
of the work that the OPCW carried out jointly
with United Nations to eliminate the Syrian Arab
Republic's chemical-weapons programme. More
than 30 countries committed financial and technical
resources to this effort. The private sector played a
pivotal role, as chemical funds in multiple countries
were also involved in the elimination of some of these
agents. Although progress has been made, our work in
Syria is not yet complete. It is deeply regrettable that
chemical weapons have continued to be used in that
country. In Libya, the threat from non-State actors led
to a request from the Libyan authorities for assistance
in removing and destroying the last remnants of its
former chemical-weapons programme. This operation
is currently being successfully carried out with the
cooperation and support of our States parties.

A world free of chemical weapons can be
realized only through a high degree of awareness,
a shared vision and the continuing commitment to
international cooperation. The Chemical Weapons
Convention affirms a common resolve never to allow
the science of chemistry to turn against humankind.
Through it we will continue to work together with
all stakeholders to strengthen the global capacity to
prevent and, when needed, to detect and respond to acts
of chemical terrorism.

