The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

First, like other members of the Council, I extend
our deepest condolences to our Afghan friends - the
people and the Government of Afghanistan - in the
wake of the tragic terrorist attack that occurred in the
country on 17 September.

Today the Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2489 (2019), extending the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for
12 months. We attach great importance to the role of the
Mission in coordinating the provision of international
humanitarian assistance to the country. We note the
selfless efforts of United Nations staff in the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.

We believe that the consensus-based document
adopted by the Council will send a message to the
people of Afghanistan that the entire international
community is committed to long-awaited peace in that
long-suffering country. That policy is more important
than ever before, at a time when fundamental changes
are under way in Afghanistan. Making the peace
process in Afghanistan as inclusive as possible is
of critical importance. The main goal is to seek a
sustained national reconciliation arrangement with the
involvement of all of the country's social and political
stakeholders. At the same time, it is of course crucial to
ensure that the Afghan people continue to play the key
role in resolving their own issues.

The Russian Federation works to ensure that all
Afghan political forces, without exception, and all key
external players operate on a unifying platform towards
the same objective. We reaffirm our commitment to
working in close cooperation with the Government
of Afghanistan, all political forces in the country
and regional and international partners. We also look
forward to the resumption of the United States-Taliban
dialogue and the prompt conclusion of an agreement
between the United States and the Taliban, as well as
the launch of direct intra-Afghan negotiations.

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative ofAfghanistan.

