Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing today on a central issue in
the Middle East that is ever present in our minds but
ever absent from the Council, namely, the Palestinian
question.

We had hoped that, to guide our future work, the
Secretariat would issue a written report on what has
been done over the past 10 years, or rather what has
not been done, what has not been resolved, and what
the international community, the Organization, and the
Council in particular, have failed to achieve, namely, to
put an end to the longest standing occupation in modern
history.

Time and again, the international community has
agreed on and expressed its consensus on the so-called
two-State solution, comprised of an Israeli State and
a Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967.
Palestine would be a valuable State with Jerusalem as
its capital. However, it seems that such agreement and
consensus are confined only to occasional words and
statements in an attempt to save face by boasting about
the assistance provided to the Palestinian people. It
seems that it is the fate of those people to be eternally
grateful and forever indebted to those who have sought
to improve their lot in exchange for surrendering their
fate and future to external Powers that take control
of their land, demolish their homes, displace their
population and besiege it behind walls.

The reshuffling of cards and the denial of
truth have reached a new low. Some have rushed to
condemn Israel's attempts to legalize new outposts
in the occupied Palestinian territory, hoping that we
will heap praise on them. Perhaps they hope that we
will overlook the fact that all settlements in occupied
Palestininan territory since 1967 are illegal according
to all international instruments and conventions,
including Council resolutions, which have apparently
become ineffectual.

The Israeli settlement activities are not just an
obstacle to peace and the two-State solution; they
are at the heart of the crisis. The cause of Palestine,
first and foremost, is the cause of a land occupied by
force; the cause of a people who have been denied their
right to live a life of dignity in their own homeland.
In that regard, I would like to remind the Council of
an internationally agreed principle that has been buried
alive, namely, the principle of land for peace principle.

The different levels of humanitarian attention
accorded to the Palestinian question must be examined
in comparison with other issues in the Middle East:
it is truly a source of surprise. The deafening voices
lamenting the absence of conscience and humanity on
certain issues suddenly fall silent when the issue at hand
is the issue of a people whose generations * including
women and the elderly - have only known injustice
over the past decades.

I call on everyone here today to self-reflect and to be
true to themselves. I call on the Council to pay serious
attention to the most urgent challenge of our time,
namely, the possible collapse of the two-State solution.

