Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): A century ago, when
international humanitarian law was still in its infancy,
civilians represented only 10 to 15 per cent of the total
casualties in armed conflict. Today, civilians account
for more than 80 per cent of all casualties. As we sit
here today, civilians are bearing the brunt of conflicts
in Syria, South Sudan, Yemen, Libya, the Lake Chad
basin and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
international community's failure to prevent mass
atrocities, such as the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 and
the genocide against the Tutsi in 1994, remains a stain
on our collective conscience. Anyone witnessing the
bombing of schools and hospitals in Id1ib or the plight of
children starving to death in Yemen might be forgiven
for wondering why we have not made no progress since
those dark days.

We need to keep strengthening the normative
framework and support robust protection for the
needs of specific groups who are particularly at risk
in conflict situations. Much progress has been made in
recent years on the protection of groups such as women
and girls, children, internally displaced persons,
refugees, journalists and media professionals but it is
important that we continue to examine where further
developments can be made. That is why we are very
proud to be working in the Council with Poland on a
draft resolution on persons with disabilities in armed
conflict. I very much agree with what the Minister
of Germany said with regard to the need for us to be
examining the use of high explosives in urban areas.

However, our priority should be to redouble
our efforts to ensure implementation of established
international humanitarian law and the Council's
resolutions on the protection of civilians and to
combat impunity. The protection of civilians should
be integrated into the Council's approach to country
situations, for example, in monitoring the ceasefire
around Al-Hudaydah in Yemen. In some cases, out
of necessity, we may need to carve out separate
humanitarian tracks from wider conflict resolution
efforts, such as cross-border authorizations in Syria.
But we must be clear that that cannot substitute for
supporting efforts to find viable long-term political
solutions to conflict.

Eight of the 14 United Nations peacekeeping
missions operating around the world are mandated to
protect civilians. We need to work to ensure that wider
efforts to improve peacekeeping performance in general
include a specific focus on improving the protection of
civilians. Better mandating, as we have been asked by
the Secretary-General in his Action for Peacekeeping
agenda, is of course part of that. But ensuring that
protection elements in mandates are translated into clear
tasks on the ground will require mission leadership and
personnel to understand the practical implementation
and implications of their protection duties. There needs
to be an integrated approach in missions and across the
United Nations if protection strategies are to come off
the page and onto the ground.

All troop- and police-contributing countries also
need to ensure that their uniformed personnel are
trained to the required core standards on the protection
of civilians. That is a key part of operational readiness.
Peace enforcement operations, mandated or supported
by the Council, such as the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the Group of Five for the Sahel, must
also have strong training and compliance frameworks.
It would be good to make sure that the Department of
Peace Operations is working with those troop- and
police-contributing countries to understand how such
training can be most effective and report back on it
so that Member States, both trainers and trainees, can
improve their performance.

The Council should receive regular reporting on
mission performance in relation to the protection of
civilians, as part of the wider performance reporting
under resolution 2436 (2018). Where serious protection
failures arise within missions, we will continue
to support the Secretariat in holding individuals,
contingents and mission leadership accountable and to
make sure that we all learn lessons.

I agree very much with you, Madam President,
that protection is not only a matter for United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The primary responsibility to
protect all civilians on their territory ofcourse rests with
host States - States Members of the United Nations.
In order for peace to be enduring and sustainable,
host State authorities and civil society actors all have
a role to play. I agree very much with what Federico
Borello had to say about the need for national plans.
The United Kingdom has a human security policy for
our armed forces, and we have published a voluntary
national review on the domestic implementation of
international humanitarian law. We are very happy to
work with anyone else interested in such an approach.
In that context, we welcome the focus on the role of
local communities in today's open debate, as they not
only have an important voice in conflict resolution but
are best placed to understand their own environments.
We need to hear more from them.
Turning to accountability, whatever progress is
made on implementation, strengthening the protection
of civilians over the next 20 years will also depend on
how we collectively address the issue of accountability,
including, ofcourse, in the Council. Combating impunity
is partly about establishing robust mechanisms for
justice and accountability. In some cases, international
mechanisms, such as the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Court,
sanctions regimes and the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which
we set up in Iraq, will be the best tools at our disposal.
In other cases, accountability can best be delivered
through domestic or hybrid mechanisms, such as the
Special Criminal Court in the Central African Republic
or the establishment of a hybrid court, as provided
for in the South Sudan peace agreement. We can also
achieve accountability through national prosecution. I
hope very much that those gathering evidence of crimes
in Syria or against the Rohingya will one day see that
evidence presented in effective tribunals in Syria and
Myanmar. But if not, those responsible should be held
to account wherever national law permits.

Accountability is about doing what is right by the
victims and survivors of atrocities against civilians, but
it is also a key condition for building sustainable peace.
If post-conflict efforts to establish good governance,
security and the rule of law and, crucially, to maintain

peace, are to succeed, then accountability is Vital for
the rebuilding of trust and confidence between civilian
populations and the parties to the conflict.

Let me conclude by saying that the Council has an
important role to play. When we receive reports about
attacks on civilians, schools, hospitals and medical
facilities, we need collectively and individually to be
ready to say what we see and to say who is behind it. It
can be uncomfortable to do so. It can cut across political
priorities or international friendships. But, for the sake
of all, we must do it. After all, ifwe do not speak up for
other countries' civilians when they are attacked, who
will speak up for our own?

