Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. My congratulations go also to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Malaysia, on his skilful stewardship of the Council's
activities last month. Allow me to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for his briefing on the situation in East
Timor.

Ever since the New York agreement of May 1999
and the holding of the popular consultation of 30
August 1999, we have borne witness to a remarkable
transformation of the question of East Timor. Indeed,
Indonesia's new democratically elected Government
led by President Abdurrahman Wahid, immediately
after assuming official responsibility, honoured the
decision of the East Timorese people. In that regard, it
should be noted that the letter dated 25 October 1999
from President Wahid to the Secretary-General
conveyed the decision of the People's Consultative
Assembly on arrangements for the transfer of authority.
Despite the sincere and concerted efforts of my
Government over the past year, the Atambua incident
of 6 September 2000 has regrettably brought to the
forefront residual problems, including that regarding
the refugees in West Timor, which have become
formidable challenges for all parties concerned.

In that regard, my delegation would like to
reiterate its decision on the need for a comprehensive
resolution of the remaining problems relating to this
item, which can be achieved only through the adoption
of bold measures on four main questions. These would
involve, first, an investigation of the Atambua incident
of 6 September 2000 and bringing the perpetrators to
justice; secondly, disarming the militias; thirdly,
reaching a comprehensive solution of the problem of
East Timorese refugees; and finally, promoting
reconciliation among the East Timorese.

With regard to the investigation of the Atambua
incident of 6 September 2000 and to bringing the
perpetrators to justice, the Indonesian Government has
accorded priority to handling this matter. Investigations
by the relevant authorities into the killing of the three
members of the staff of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and into the murder of Olivio Mendosa Moruk are
continuing. As to the former, a suspect by the name of
Sisto Pereira has been arrested and is being questioned.
Almost a month after the occurrence of that tragic
incident, our outrage has not abated. My delegation is
constrained to point out that in the emotionally charged
environment caused by the killing of a militia leader on
5 September 2000, police officials on duty had asked
all UNHCR personnel to vacate the office under their
protection. Of those 13 personnel, 10 complied with
that request and were escorted to safety, while three
UNHCR staff members chose to remain and hence
could not be saved.

On the question of disarming the militias, the
Indonesian Government has adopted a two-step
approach. The first step laid out a specific time-frame
for the militias to surrender their weapons voluntarily:
by 24 September 2000. On that date, in a ceremony
witnessed by the Vice-President, Megawati
Sukarnoputri, and other high-ranking Indonesian
officials, as well as by UNTAET officials, militia
members surrendered the weapons in their possession.
This involved the voluntary handover of 888 home-
assembled weapons, 34 standard weapons, four
grenades and 1,000 rounds of ammunition.

My delegation would like to stress that the
process of disarming the militia did not begin just on
23 September 2000, but has been under way since
December 1999, resulting in the seizure of 817
firearms, consisting of 214 standard weapons and 603
home-assembled weapons, and 19,926 rounds of
ammunition and 66 grenades. Mindful of the
complexity of this process, and to ensure that it was
conducted in an orderly, peaceful and thorough manner,
the Indonesian Government extended the period from
24 September to 27 September 2000. Since then, an
additional 215 weapons, including four units of M-16s
and 13 grenades, and 1,900 rounds of ammunition,
have been surrendered.

In the light of those facts, Indonesia considers
certain comments with regard to the handover of
weapons on 21 September to be most unfortunate and
ill-advised, as they reflect a failure to fully appreciate
the prevailing realities of the disarmament process.
Every single one of those weapons could have maimed,
injured or killed innocent civilians. Any shortcomings
in the handover ceremony should not, and cannot,
detract from the basic, indisputable fact that a large
quantity of weapons were surrendered to the police on
that day and that, accordingly, security in the refugees
camps and in Atambua generally has been enhanced.
Moreover, the comments indicate an acute inability to
recognize the political significance of the occasions on
which the individuals concerned have opted to pursue
their legitimate aspirations through peaceful means by
renouncing violence.

Indonesia also takes strong exception to any
suggestion that the scuffle that broke out following the
handover ceremony testifies to the inability of the
Indonesian police to maintain order. On the contrary,
despite the potentially volatile situation, the police
were able to quickly drive the excitable crowd out of
the police compound and safeguard the surrendered
weapons - those that were briefly retrieved were
quickly surrendered to the local military commander -
and protect the UNTAET personnel who were in the
compound at the time, and provide them with the
necessary military escort for their journey back to
Monta Ain en route to Dili.

Indeed, the commotion following the handover
ceremony confirmed the Indonesian Government's
forewarning that the disarmament would be fraught
with challenges. This was not a unique local
phenomenon; it is, in fact, inherent in any effort to
disarm individuals or groups bent on retaining their
weapons. It is for these reasons that the emphasis was
first placed on persuasive matters.

Furthermore, commencing on 27 September, the
sweeping operation - the second step - was carried
out by a joint police and Indonesian armed forces
(TNI) team to persuade people to hand over, or to
forcibly confiscate, weapons which are still at large.
Although these operations are continuing, they are not
without risk, not least to the ordinary people, whose
safety and security are paramount. Under these
circumstances, we should not second-guess those in the
field with intimate knowledge of the tasks at hand,
pontificate or make endless calls for Indonesia to
disarm and disband the militias. Rather, the
international community should issue unmistakable
words of encouragement to those who are, at this very
important moment, doing their level best to carry out
these important tasks.

Understandably, the commencement on 27
September of the phase of the forcible confiscation of
weapons generated a fair degree of anxiety in Atambua
because of wary anticipation or rumours of possible
violence and public disorder. It is gratifying to note
that such assumptions have been largely unfounded.
The awesome display of force by the Indonesian police
had its intended deterrent effect on would-be trouble
makers and in reassuring the general public of their
safety and security. Just as important, the Indonesian
police and the TNI have continued to work closely with
the local district authority and local community and
religious leaders in promoting calm, resulting in the
maintenance of general law and order in Atambua.

The issue of refugees almost always creates a
dilemma for the international community, especially
with its many and multifaceted problems. The question
of East Timorese refugees in no exception. More than
one year on, the presence of East Timorese refugees in
West Timor is proving to be more of a financial burden
with each passing day. Indonesia has done far more
than its fair share in extending assistance to them.
Urgent steps have been implemented to take over the
task of providing humanitarian emergency relief due to
the departure of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
relevant humanitarian agencies. On 24 September, the
Vice-President personally oversaw the provision of
such assistance in Atambua. Pivotal in this field has
been the role of the provincial government, which since
10 September, has initiated phase I of the relief
operation, namely, the distribution of 1,040 tons of
rice.

During phase II, begun on 27 September and
continuing until 6 October, 918 tons of rice are to be
distributed, with additional cash in the amount of 1,500
rupiahs per person per day for meals. Approximately
130,000 refugees multiplied by 1,500 will amount to
1.95 billion rupiahs.

Commencing on 6 October, assistance will be
channelled through the affected districts. Hence,
Indonesia is not shirking its responsibilities to the East
Timorese refugees. But we believe that that this is a
shared responsibility. The United Nations, including
the Security Council, has an important role to play to
extend urgently needed assistance at this critical hour
of need. In order to alleviate the plight of the refugees,
much more is needed than mere rhetoric and platitudes,
which need to be reinforced by concrete plans for
action. As always, my Government stands ready to
work with the United Nations in a spirit of cooperation
and mutual respect to resolve the outstanding
problems.

My Government has consistently pointed out the
urgent need to promote the reconciliation of the East
Timorese people of all political persuasions, which the
French Ambassador and other speakers have
mentioned. It is hoped that UNTAET will ensure that
there is an effort to promote an all-inclusive
reconciliation process. It is regrettable that little
progress has been achieved so far on this track. Thus,
while calls for disarmament are justifiably made to the
pro-integration side, they should be equally applicable
to FALINTIL if a process of genuine reconciliation is
to begin. Merely disarming one side would only
provide a short interval of peace, as feelings of deep
resentment and anger would continue to fester and a
lasting peace would prove elusive.

My Government has therefore offered a hand of
cooperation to UNTAET to facilitate such
reconciliation, and it stands ready to work towards that
end. In this regard, it is pertinent to note that Indonesia
initiated the meeting that took place in Denpasar on 14
September 2000, which was attended by UNTAET, the
leaders of CNRT and UNTAS.

As East Timor moves further along the path to
independence, it is of the utmost importance that the
pro-integration group, which constitutes 21.5 per cent
of its population, be encouraged to participate in its
nation-building endeavour, as it has the same rights and
responsibilities as the pro-independence supporters.
These efforts should be pursued in earnest, as they
offer the only viable path to replacing decades of
mistrust and enmity with a prosperous future built on
trust and amity. Only then can its people relegate this
conflict to the past and look forward to opening a new
chapter in their lives, characterized by peace, harmony
and stability.

In an effort to ensure that the Council is kept
apprised of ongoing developments, the Special Envoy
of Indonesia was dispatched to brief its member States
on the comprehensive plan of action to disarm the
militias and on the other important measures that it had
already undertaken. As a follow-up, the Foreign
Minister of Indonesia, Mr. Alwi Shihab, will return to
New York on 12 October 2000 to brief the Security
Council and the Secretary-General on the progress
made by the Indonesian Government in implementing
Security Council resolution 1319 (2000). These
endeavours by my Government reflect its sincerity and
commitment to ensure an open channel of
communication and information between Indonesia and
the United Nations on the unfolding situation.

