Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Let me begin by
congratulating you and your delegation, Sir, on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I assure you of the full support of my delegation.
I also thank you and your delegation for initiating this
meeting and bringing the Council together to discuss
an issue that is critically important to the Republic of
Croatia, and surely to all nations.

Allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations Alain Le Roy and
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan
Simonovie for their enlightening briefings. Their
presence here today shows the clear commitment of the
United Nations to placing this issue at the highest
possible level.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the European Union. I would
now like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

In our opinion, the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict deserves more consistent
attention from the Council. Statistics over the past 20
to 30 years clearly show that civilian casualties in
conflict areas have consistently outnumbered military
casualties and continue to do so. In the twenty-first
century we are still witnessing gross violations of
international humanitarian law in which civilians are
increasingly and deliberately becoming a primary
target of armed groups. It is evident that the nature of
contemporary conflict has changed. Nowadays, in the
conduct of armed conflict, civilians more often than
not become the targets of armed attacks and atrocities
that include murder, deportation and ethnic cleansing,
as well as rape and sexual violence, which have thus
become weapons of war.

This goes directly against the commitments made
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), as well as the
relevant Security Council resolutions that reaffirm the
provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 in that
document. The international community should
encourage and help States to exercise their
responsibility to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Such acts of violence must be
thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators brought to
account. It is therefore imperative that the International
Criminal Court, as well as national courts, be the
crucial focus of justice for victims, and thus a reminder
that there can be no tolerance for any criminal act.

This has proved a valuable tool in combating
impunity, a corrosive force that can undermine
opportunities for reconciliation and building lasting
peace. Over the years, the Security Council has acted
in numerous other ways to enhance the agenda of the
protection of Civilians. The Council has promoted the
use of mediation in order to help prevent the outbreak
of armed conflicts in crisis situations. It has used its
influence on parties to armed conflicts to observe
standards of protection, including by imposing targeted
measures against parties in cases of violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
should not be seen to be deficient in fulfilling our
commitments.

Despite several positive developments in the
Council, Croatia remains extremely concerned about
the severity and prevalence of attacks on civilians,
especially women and children. The Council has a
responsibility to respond to situations of armed conflict
where humanitarian assistance is being deliberately
obstructed, not merely by calling on the parties
involved to allow unimpeded passage to relief, but also
by imposing targeted measures in grave instances of
the wilful impediment of the delivery of such supplies.
The Council needs to provide strong and effective
leadership on this issue, including by taking concrete
action when necessary, with the ultimate aim of ending
mass atrocities. We thus support the international
community's increased preparedness to take collective
action through the Security Council when national

ll-33lll
authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations
from violations of humanitarian law.

In addition, we express our deep concern over the
further worsening of the situation in Libya and plead
for the cessation of violence that is claiming more
victims by the day. We harshly condemn the use of
force by the Al-Qadhafi regime against civilians and
demand that such violence cease immediately. As a
country taking active part in the international efforts to
prevent further civilian casualties in Libya, Croatia
fully supports the implementation of resolution 1973
(2011) on establishing a no-fly zone and stiffening the
existing sanctions against the Al-Qadhafi regime
imposed under resolution 1970 (2011). Once more, we
recognize the importance of fully respecting the legal
framework and mandate set out by the relevant
resolutions in order to take, individually or through
regional organizations and arrangements - especially
by members of the League of Arab States and the
African Union - all necessary measures to protect
civilians in Libya.

Additionally, we share the deep concern over the
humanitarian situation, the number of casualties and
the escalation of violence in Syria, Yemen and Bahrain,
as well as in the now-appeased Cote d'Ivoire. We
invite the governing structures in these countries to
refrain from using violence against political opponents
and civilians who are committed to change. Continuing
repression leads to unnecessary killings, strengthens
antagonisms and contributes to the radicalization of
certain social and political groups. Political, economic
and social reforms are necessary for restoring lasting
and non-oppressive stability in those countries, and
they can be implemented only through a
comprehensive national dialogue.

Croatia also co-sponsored a resolution adopted
during the special session of the Human Rights Council
on 29 April, whereby it condemned the use of lethal
violence against peaceful protestors by the Syrian
authorities and urged the Syrian Government to put an
end to all human rights violations and respect all
fundamental freedoms, including the freedoms of
expression and of assembly.

Lastly, I would like to welcome the establishment
of the New York Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, which we see as a step forward in
strengthening a heightened profile for human rights in
the United Nations system. We commend the Office for
its consistent and structured work and its integrated
approach to human rights, which is necessary to
enhance the protection civilians in armed conflict. We
look forward to our continued cooperation.

