Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for this important meeting and for
the opportunity that it provides for all United Nations
Members to discuss essential disarmament and
non-proliferation issues. The spread of weapons of
mass destruction and the illegal proliferation of
conventional weapons constitute a serious threat to
international peace and security.

The protection of peace and security is the core
of the mandate of the Security Council, and the
Council has an important role to play in supporting
international arms control through determined action.
Norway fully supports the resolutions adopted by the
Council regarding specific proliferations concerns.
Norway welcomed the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004) and has provided funds to the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs for the promotion of
that resolution at the regional level. But we must also
recognize that global norms will have to be negotiated
in relevant - and broader - multilateral bodies. It has
been a firm Norwegian policy that multilateral arms
control negotiations should be open to all United
Nations Member States.

Regrettably, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is under growing strain.
Equally regrettable are the unfulfilled expectations in
the field of nuclear disarmament. While we applaud the
significant reductions in nuclear arsenals that have
taken place, we call for significantly deeper reductions
on the basis of irreversibility, verification and
transparency.

We are also increasingly impatient at the lack of
progress in multilateral efforts to prevent a possible
new arms race. We regret that the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) has not entered into
force, and it is deplorable that it has so far been
impossible to negotiate a treaty banning the production
of fissile materials for weapons purposes. It is
imperative that we make progress in that field in the
coming year.
An erosion of the NPT would be a serious setback
for multilateral non-proliferation efforts. Such an
erosion would make a world free of nuclear weapons
much more difficult to achieve. It is Vital that all States
parties to the NPT do their utmost to contribute to a
successful outcome. Norway is seeking to contribute to
that end in various ways, including the cross-regional
Seven-Nation Initiative.

It is encouraging to note the renewed interest in
achieving the full elimination of nuclear weapons.
There is a growing consensus that the existence of tens
of thousands of nuclear arms does not enhance our
security. Nuclear disarmament is an integral part of our
common non-proliferation efforts.

In February this year, Norway hosted an
international conference on nuclear issues, attended by
some of the leading experts from around the globe. A
key message from the conference was the importance
of the CTBT. A legally binding Test-Ban Treaty is
crucial. We need new and deeper cuts beyond those
provided for in existing arms control treaties. We need
to explore ways to reduce the importance of nuclear
arms in security policies, such as regional nuclear-
weapon-free zones. We need to lower the operational
status of nuclear weapons that are deployed. All
political leaders and relevant stakeholders must be
engaged. We must forge new alliances and work across
traditional political and geographical dividing lines.

My Government is pleased to note that important
results have been achieved in the field of eliminating
categories of conventional weapons that cause
unacceptable humanitarian harm. We applaud the
landmark decision that was reached in Dublin on 30
May this year, when 107 States adopted the text of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions. The new Convention
prohibits all use, stockpiling, production and transfer
of cluster munitions. It also deals with assistance to
Victims, the clearance of contaminated areas and the
destruction of stockpiles.

The Convention is the outcome of the Oslo
process, an open process that was launched in 2006 and
that included States, civil society, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations.
We have achieved a result that represents a significant
strengthening of international humanitarian law. The
Convention on Cluster Munitions will be opened for
signature in Oslo on 3 December. All United Nations
Member States have been invited to the Convention on
Cluster Munitions Signing Conference.

Norway is convinced that the lessons learned from
a humanitarian disarmament approach can be applied in
other areas, such as regulating the international trade in
conventional weapons. My Government reaffirms its
support for negotiations on a forward-looking arms
trade treaty. We look forward to participating in the
upcoming process in that regard with a View to
achieving a legally binding treaty regulating the trade
in such weapons as well as their munitions.
08-60919

