Ms. Bensouda: Today's briefing marks the
nineteenth visit of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to the Council to update
its members on the situation in Darfur. December 2014
will mark the twentieth such briefing, and March 2015
will mark 10 years since the Council referred the Darfur
situation to the International Criminal Court. None of
these milestones gives cause for celebration.

In the close to 10 years since the Council's
much-lauded referral of the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), systematic and
widespread crimes have continued to be committed with
total impunity in Darfur. It is indeed an understatement
to say that we have failed the Darfur victims who
continue to bear the brunt of those crimes. Over the past
years, a number of players, including the International
Criminal Court, the United Nations and others, have
been engaged in efforts to bring justice and other forms
ofreliefto Darfur's victims. The time has now come for
us to take a critical look at the impact of all our efforts
vis-a-vis Darfur. What have we achieved, in concrete
terms? Have we lived up to the expectations of Darfur's
victims? Sadly, the intellectually honest answer is a
resounding "no".

While the International Criminal Court may have
significantly contributed to raising awareness of the
massive and systematic crimes committed in Darfur, the
Court's best contribution to ending impunity - through
a judicial process that independently, fairly and
impartially assesses the evidence and determines guilt
or innocence - is yet to be achieved. The reality is
that the International Criminal Court's judicial process
cannot take place without arrests. Darfur suspects
remain at large and no meaningful steps have been
taken to apprehend them and bring them to justice. To
be clear, the Court does not have the power to arrest
indictees. It is the responsibility of States and others
to arrest and surrender indictees to the custody of the
International Criminal Court.

There are critical questions to which Darfur's
victims are seeking answers from the Council. How
much longer will legality and accountability be
sacrificed at the altar of political expediency? How
much suffering should Darfur's victims endure for the
Council to act decisively on the situation in Darfur?
The Court remains firmly convinced that enforcing
warrants of arrest in Darfur is a key element of peace
and stability and of ending the victims' suffering.

Today we are in the same position we have been
in since 2007, when warrants of arrests were issued
against Mr. Ahmad Harun and Mr. Ali Kushayb. Even
with the addition of another three arrest warrants - two
for Mr. Omer Al-Bashir in 2009 and 2010, and one for
Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein in 2012 - the situation
has not changed. It is a sad reality that action from the
Council has not been forthcoming when it matters most
for Darfur's victims. That not only reflects badly on the
international criminal justice system, of which the ICC
is only a part, it also greatly undermines the Council's
credibility as an instrument of international peace and
security. The time is long overdue for the Government
of the Sudan's consistent defiance of Security Council
resolutions to be met by decisive action from the
Council.

Recent allegations that reporting from the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) has been subject to manipulation, with
the intentional effect of covering up crimes committed
against civilians and peacekeepers, in particular those
committed by the Government of the Sudan, should be
a matter of concern for all of us. These allegations call
for a thorough, independent and public inquiry. While
the responsibility for such manipulation may lie with
a handful of individuals, it impugns the credibility
of the mission as a whole and deprives advocates of
peace and justice of an essential tool for evaluating
the ever-evolving situation in Darfur. The victims in
Darfur, and the peacekeepers who have sacrificed their
lives, deserve better. We all do. It is to be hoped that
the Council - and, indeed, the United Nations as a
whole - will take immediate and concrete steps to
establish the full facts and take appropriate action if
the allegations prove to be well-founded.

The implementation of the non-essential contacts
policy, particularly with regard to the Darfur situation,
deserves closer scrutiny within the United Nations
system. As my Office suggested in its June 2013 report
(see S/PV.6974), the application of the non-essential
contacts policy requires a rigorous assessment as to
Whether such contacts are indeed strictly required for
carrying out essential United Nations-mandated duties.
Without such an ongoing assessment, both before and
after contacts with those subject to the Court's arrest
warrants, the potential for those individuals to take
advantage of the goodwill of the United Nations to
legitimize their own actions is great. In order to dispel
misperceptions about United Nations engagements with
indictees, the Organization might wish, to the extent
that it is possible, to make public all its contacts with
those subject to ICC warrants of arrest, including, as
far as is necessary, providing explanations of why such
contacts are deemed to have been strictly required for
carrying out essential United Nations-mandated duties.

We have taken note of Mr. Omer Al-Bashir's
travels during this reporting period, including his visits
to States that are party to the Rome Statute. States
parties are clearly obliged to cooperate with the ICC
in arresting and surrendering those subject to ICC
warrants. In a recent Chamber decision, the judges
made it clear that States parties must consult with
them about any problems they have identified that may
hinder their cooperation with the Court in effecting
arrests. On the issue of immunity, the judges also found
that there could be no lack of clarity about Mr. Omer
Al-Bashir's lack of immunity under article 27 of the
Rome Statute.

The question of Mr. Bashir's travels remains a
matter before the Council. Such travels are not simply a
challenge for the States parties that he may visit, it is a
challenge for all States to provide the necessary support
and assistance to one another to ensure that an effective
arrest and surrender can take place. In that regard, it is
worth recalling that in addition to the obligations ofthe
Rome Statute, all States Members of the United Nations
have been urged by the Council to cooperate with the
Court's investigations and prosecutions in Darfur. As
the Pre-Trial Chamber recently emphasized,

"When the Security Council, acting under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, refers
a situation to the Court as constituting a threat to
international peace and security, it must be expected
that the Council would respond by way of taking
such measures which are considered appropriate,
if there is an apparent failure on the part of States
parties to the Statute or the Sudan to cooperate in
fulfilling the Court's mandate as entrusted to them
by the Council. Otherwise, if there is no follow-
up action on the part of the Security Council, any
referral by the Council to the ICC under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter would never
achieve its ultimate goal, namely, to put an end to
impunity."

Accordingly, the Chamber concluded, "any such
referral would become futile."

I share the deep concern of UNAMID's Deputy
Joint Special Representative for Political Affairs,
Joseph Mutaboba, and the United Nations Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator in the Sudan, Ali
Al-Za'tari, about the increasing violence in Darfur
and the immense number of people who continue to be
displaced. I likewise deplore the increasing constraints
being put on those who are trying to aid the displaced,
making it more and more difficult for them even to
properly monitor the conditions of the displaced. The
deliberate obstruction of humanitarian aid must end.

Equally worrying are the ongoing patterns of
aerial bombardments and armed attacks on civilian
populations by militia and Janjaweed, and in particular
the involvement of the newest iteration of the J anj aweed,
the Rapid Support Forces, led by Mohamed Hamdan.
It is particularly disturbing that in February the Rapid
Support Forces shifted their operations from North
Kordofan to Darfur. My Office's factual indicators
seem to illustrate a similar pattern of indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks on civilians by the Rapid
Support Forces. In all the reported attacks, crimes
against civilians were allegedly committed from the end
of February onwards, coinciding with the deployment
of the Rapid Support Forces to Darfur. In 12 of the 17
reported attacks, civilian villages were set ablaze. In
the majority of the attacks, the presence of rebels in
the attacked areas is not reported, while in others the
information available is ambiguous. All of the attacks
were carried out in areas located in South and North
Darfur.

This reporting period has also witnessed an
increasing pattern of gang rapes of women and girls.
I have just released a comprehensive policy paper on
sexual and gender-based crimes. My Office recognizes
that sexual and gender-based crimes are among the
gravest of crimes under the Rome Statute. The policy
paper will guide the Office's work in this area in Darfur
and all other situations under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court.

Attacks on students, on civil society and on
local leaders - in particular the 21 January attack
in Zalingei, in central Darfur, in the course of which
security forces attacked and beat students who
were protesting military fees imposed on residents
in support of military operations - are also very
disturbing. Equally disturbing is the 3 April attack at
the University of Nyala, in South Darfur, during which
approximately 100 students were beaten and dispersed
with tear gas, with seven arrested. That followed a
demonstration against the arrest of four students who
had criticized the Government over ongoing killings,
lootings and burnings in Darfur. The use of violence
against unarmed civilians must be addressed.

Let me repeat what I have stated to the Council
many times before. The Government of the Sudan, as
the territorial State, has the primary responsibility and
is fully able to implement the warrants, consistent with
its sovereign authority. It has consistently failed to do
so. At the same time, it has also failed to provide any
meaningful measure ofjustice at the national level.

I look forward to constructively interacting with
the Council on the Darfur issue. What is needed is a
dramatic shift in the Council's approach to arresting
Darfur suspects. I appreciate the efforts being made
to ensure that the Council produces a substantive
response to the eight outstanding communications from
the Court. Likewise, I believe that concerted efforts to
promote cooperation with the Court may help to fill the
gap. In that regard, I kindly call on all States and the
Council to find creative ways to support those among
them that may be most vulnerable to planned visits by
Mr. Omer Al-Bashir or other individuals wanted under
ICC arrest warrants.

I thank the members of the Council for their
attention and for remaining actively seized of the Darfur
situation. Darfur does not have to be a failure for the
Council, for the United Nations or for the International
Criminal Court. It is incumbent upon all of us to take
concrete and effective action now to ensure that our
efforts to protect victims in Darfur show tangible
results and do not go down in history as an indefensible
failure.

