Ms. Power (United States of America): Today the
Security Council has adopted a robust Chapter VII
resolution to counter the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front
and other individuals and entities associated with
Al-Qaida. The unanimous vote in favour of resolution
2199 (2015) shows ourjoint commitment to confronting
violent extremist groups that threaten our collective
security and the human rights that the United Nations
was created to defend.

The United States strongly supports today's
resolution, which is part of a comprehensive strategy
to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL. The strategy
also includes the coordinated efforts of many nations
to conduct robust military operations to degrade ISIL's
military capabilities, enact tougher laws and foster
better cooperation to stop the flow of the foreign
terrorist fighters who fill ISIL's ranks, and to counter
the violent ideologies that attract people to ISIL and
help fuel the group's attacks.
In recent weeks and months, we have seen what
this strategy can yield. Together with partners, we are
degrading ISIL's leadership capabilities, knocking out
oil fields, refineries and other associated infrastructure
that ISIL controls, and supporting troops on the ground
as they fight to recapture terroritory from the group,
as was achieved in Kobani. As a result of these and
other efforts, ISIL is having a harder time generating
the new funds needed to carry out its operations.
Today's resolution aims to make that effort even more
challenging by using sanctions and other punitive tools
to target three ISIL income streams.

First, the resolution provides States with clear,
practical instruction for how to cut off ISIL's illicit oil
smuggling. United Nations sanctions already require
States to stop that trade, but resolution 2199 (2015)
also presses States to step up their efforts to prevent
and disrupt the movement of vehicles going to and
from areas controlled by ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front
so as to stop the flow of assets traded by the groups,
Whether oil, precious metals and minerals, or refining
equipment.

Secondly, by imposing a new ban on the trade in
smuggled Syrian antiquities, the resolution both cuts
off a source of ISIL revenue and helps to protect an
irreplaceable cultural heritage of the region and the
world. To help stop that trade, the United States has
sponsored the publication of so-called emergency red
lists of Syrian and Iraqi antiquities at risk, which can
help international law enforcement catch antiquities
trafficked out of those countries.

Thirdly, the resolution reinforces the existing
prohibition in United Nations sanctions on all
payments and donations to ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front
and other Al-Qaida affiliates, including ransoms,
which perpetuate a cycle of horrific brutality, giving
those groups resources to carry out more murderous
and incentivizing them to take more people captive.
The devastating consequences of such kidnappings and
abductions have been felt by families, communities and
whole nations in recent weeks and months.

Lieutenant Muath al-Kaseasbeh, the Jordanian pilot
executed by ISIL, was just 26 years old when he was
murdered. A devout Muslim, in his last conversation
with his wife he reminded her to pray and told her that
he had performed a double prayer for martyrs.

Kenji Goto, age 47, a Japanese journalist executed
by ISIL, had gone to Syria to search for a kidnapped
colleague and friend, Haruna Yukawa, who was also
killed. Kenji spent his life writing about conflicts. An
award-winning children's book he wrote in 2006 - I
Want Peace Rather Than a Diamond - told the story
ofa former child soldier in Sierra Leone.

Kayla Mueller, a 26-year old American, had
been drawn to the region to alleviate the suffering of
Syrians, volunteering to work with refugee children in
neighbouring Turkey. In an interview before she was
abducted by ISIL and later killed, she said: "For as
long as I live, I will not let this suffering be normal,
something we just accept."

The loss of people like Muath, Kenji, Haruna and
Kayla deepens our resolve to eradicate the violent group
that cut their lives short. At the same time as we applaud
the Council's resolute action to address the threat posed
by ISIL, we lament the Council's persistent failure to
address one of the main factors that led to the group's
rise. There is no better recruiting tool for ISIL than the
atrocities of the Al-Assad regime, which has dropped
barrel bombs on civilians, used chemical weapons on
its own people, and tortured tens of thousands more in
its prisons.

We regret that we were not able to show the same
unity we have shown today in adopting the critically
important resolution on ISIL when it came to the
crimes of the Al-Assad regime. So just as we condemn
the monstrosities perpetrated by ISIL, we must also
continue to condemn the brutality of the Al-Assad
regime, which has long since lost the legitimacy to
lead, and reject the arguments of those who claim that
we must partner with the regime to effectively confront
violent extremists. As the war in Syria grinds on, we
renew our call on the Council to press for the political
solution needed to end the tremendous suffering of the
Syrian people.

