Mr. Aljarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to express our appreciation
to Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his excellent and
exhaustive briefing. We would also like to thank
Ms. Rajaa Altalli for her presentation.

A few months ago, we all witnessed a glimmer of
hope for the brotherly people of Syria, in particular, and
for the international community as a whole 4 a glimmer
of hope in the agreement on the definitive lists for the
Constitutional Committee and the holding of the first
round of its Syrian-owned and Syrian-led meetings in
Geneva, facilitated by the United Nations. That was an
essential step forward in the peace process and also laid
the groundwork for other very important milestones,
as set out in resolution 2254 (2015), more specifically
the drafting of a constitution and the holding of free
and inclusive elections in Syria by virtue of said
constitution, under United Nations supervision and
with the participation of all Syrians, including those
residing abroad.

Despite the difficulties encountered during the
second round of Constitutional Committee meetings
as a result of disagreement on the agenda owing to
differences of opinion on the priorities and the details,
we still hope that, thanks to the support of Special Envoy
Pedersen, the Syrian parties will reach an agreement on
the issue and subsequently on understandings on the
Syrian constitution, as well as other political elements
set out in resolution 2254 (2015). We call on the Syrian
parties to be mindful of the interests of our brotherly
Syrian people and undertake efforts to ensure that they
achieve their legitimate aspirations through a political
agreement endorsed by all components of Syrian
society. Such an agreement would preserve the unity,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria.

It is clear that there are differing opinions among
the various stakeholders who have suffered for eight
years because of the bitter and bloody conflict. That
is normal and predictable. However, what worries us is
that accelerated military developments on the ground
are affecting the political process and the work of the
Constitutional Committee, in particular. The political
process must be accompanied by confidence-building
measures among the parties to ensure its sustainability
and success. The most important of those measure
is achieving real and tangible progress on the issue
of missing persons and detainees. The international
organizations concerned must be allowed to visit prisons
and detention centres. Here we note that, in June, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2474 (2019), on
persons reported missing during armed conflict, which
must be implemented throughout conflict areas in the
world, including in Syria. We reaffirm how important
it is to bring those who are responsible for committing
serious crimes in Syria to justice and to ensure that
there is no impunity for any injustices, as sustainable
peace cannot be achieved without justice.

With respect to the acceleration of military
operations in north-western Syria, of greatest concern
to us is the intensity of the escalation - the price of
which will be a greater number of civilian casualties.
We therefore once again condemn the targeting of
innocent civilians by any party, including attacks by
Security Council-designated terrorist groups on civilian
populations and in populated areas. At the same time,
we reiterate that even if operations are for counter-
terrorist purposes, their actors, like any other party to
the conflict, are in no way exempt from their obligations
under international law, including compliance with the
principles of distinction, proportionality, caution and
the protection of civilians and civilian facilities.

We recall the earlier warning by the United
Nations that any massive-scale military operation in
Idlib governorate could lead to the worst humanitarian
disaster of the twenty-first century. In this regard,
we call for an urgent ceasefire across all of Syria, as
provided for in the relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2401 (2018). In this regard, we
condemn Israeli's repeated attacks on the sovereignty
and territory of Syria, which also constitute violations
of the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 350 (1974) on the disengagement between the
Israeli and Syrian sides. Speaking ofIsraeli violations,
I would reiterate that the Golan is Syrian Arab territory
occupied by Israel, the occupying Power. The seizure
and annexation of territory by force is unacceptable and
violates the Charter of the United Nations, the principles
of international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions, and, in this context, resolution 497 (1981).

In conclusion, given that this is the last scheduled
meeting on the Syrian political process in which the
State of Kuwait is participating as a member of the
Security Council, I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to Mr. Pedersen for the efforts he has made
since taking office earlier this year. We assure him of
the State of Kuwait's full support, which will continue
even after our membership in the Council comes to an
end. We wish him every success in his difficult mission
to facilitate a political process aimed at restoring
stability and security in Syria, the brotherly Arab
country with a long-standing history and culture for
which we maintain the deepest affection, appreciation
and respect.

Furthermore, I would be remiss ifI failed to extend
my thanks to all members of the Council for the cordial
reception they extended to us yesterday and for their
praise for my country, Kuwait, for the role it has played
throughout its two-year term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council. We are extremely
grateful for the support and cooperation we found in
this Chamber, which enabled us to work together to
achieve our common goals.

