The President (spoke in French): Before adjourning
this meeting, as the Senegalese presidency of the
Security Council comes to an end, I would like to
correct a mistake. Earlier in the meeting I failed to
thank, congratulate and encourage our briefers from
this morning: Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria; Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. Geert Cappelaere, UNICEF Regional Director for
the Middle East and North Africa. Their testimony and
presentations shed clear light on our work.

I am moreover particularly pleased to express
the deep gratitude of the Senegalese delegation
for the kind cooperation that the members of the
Security Council - the permanent members and
their teams - have all contributed throughout the
month of November in carrying out a particularly
busy programme of work. In their support, I see the
expression of their ongoing commitment to peace and
security around the world and the excellent relations
that unite each of their countries with my own.

Iwould like to thank all the members of the Secretariat,
starting with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon himself,
the skilled technical and administrative staff of
conference services, the interpreters, as well as the
representatives, special envoys and security officers. I

thank in particular Ms. Hasmik Egian and the entire
Security Council Affairs management team, whose
professionalism and availability were exemplary from

all points of view.

I must also offer my gratitude to our partners in
the press, generally speaking, as well as those who are
accredited to the United Nations, and more specifically

to our friends at the stakeout.

As this month comes to an end, we can be pleased
to have been able to bring about consensus around a
number of significant issues that we have been seized
of. We would not have been able to achieve that alone
or without the commitment, support and agreement of
every Council member. As our presidency wraps up, I
know that all members would like, together with me,
to wish every success to the delegation of Spain, which
will assume the presidency in December.

The meeting rose at 2.15 pm.
