Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Allow me first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. My delegation is indeed proud that it has fallen
on none other than the Republic of Guinea, a sisterly
neighbour of ours in the West African subregion, to
preside over the affairs of the Security Council at this
time - a time that might well prove to be the defining
moment in the future of the United Nations. I have no
doubt that, as always, you will discharge your
responsibility with objectivity, fairness and sagacity.

Let me also pay homage to your predecessor,
Minister Joschka Fischer of Germany, and his able
colleague, Ambassador Gunter Pleuger, for a job well
done during the month of February.

My delegation is indeed grateful to you for
organizing this ministerial workshop on the
proliferation of small arms, light weapons and the
phenomenon of mercenaries: threats to peace and
security in West Africa. This is a subject that is of great
concern to us all in West Africa, not least to President
Al Hadji Yahya A. J. J. Jammeh and the Government of
the Gambia. We have been drawing attention to this
West African problem for several years now, because
the accumulation of small arms and light weapons is
obviously an important contributing factor to the
unending conflicts that have plagued much of West
Africa and stymied development on the continent. The
fact is that, for the most part, the methods through
which these weapons are acquired are illicit, as are the
purposes for which they are acquired. Currently, it is
reported that there are an estimated 8 million illicit
small arms in circulation within and across our porous
borders in West Africa.

Within the last decade, the problem of small arms
and light weapons has led to the convening of a number
of summit meetings on the issue, culminating in 1998
in the adoption of a declaration of a three-year
renewable Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on small arms, the first
of its kind in Africa. In addition to the moratorium,
ECOWAS heads of State also adopted a plan of action
and a code of conduct and made a decision that each
country would establish a national commission to
oversee implementation. Together, all these instruments
would facilitate enforcement of the Moratorium.

In addition to that, as a support and monitoring
mechanism, the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED),
in close cooperation with the ECOWAS secretariat and
the various national commissions, provides assistance
with national initiatives to align existing laws and
administrative procedures with the requirements of the
Moratorium. It maintains a register of weapons being
used by peacekeeping troops in the subregion;
processes requests for exemptions and importation by
Governments of arms, ammunitions and components;
provides training in arms control; and promotes
cooperation with manufacturers and suppliers on the
implementation of the Moratorium.

Thus it can be seen that commendable efforts are
being made by West African Governments to address
the problem. Besides, the far-reaching decision taken
by our leaders to extend the Moratorium for a second
three-year period is indeed a clear demonstration of
political will to deal seriously with this problem.

Of equal concern is the character of the end users
of these arms and weapons. It is a well-known fact that
it is militias that drive conflicts in Africa. Some time
back, it came to light that these militias depended to a
significant extent on child soldiers. That realization
shocked the world into action, and the international
community responded with the appropriate measures to
confront this issue. But over and above this repugnant
reality, what has also been emerging in bold relief has
been the fact that the backbone of these militias is
made up largely of mercenaries. This phenomenon has
not yet received the attention it truly deserves.

In the past, mercenary activities in Africa were
associated with European adventurers and "dogs of
war". Increasingly, however, Africa is becoming quite
adept in producing its own rich crop of these soldiers
of fortune. The West African subregion in particular is
riddled with war and conflict situations that are driven
by mercenary-dominated militias.

The conflicts of the Mano River Union, for
example, were sustained through the use of
mercenaries by the various warlords. It is now well
known that the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) of
Sierra Leone was made up of combatants from virtually
every country in West Africa, who were engaged on
contract terms to fight for pay and profit for the sole
purpose of overthrowing the legitimate Government of
Sierra Leone. It is also a fact that these elements were
involved in the invasion of Guinea and in the present
imbroglio in Liberia, not to mention the atrocities that
they perpetrated during those difficult times. There are
more than strong indications that in the latest conflict
situation in West Africa, in Cote d'Ivoire, the spillover
of mercenaries from the Mano River Union conflicts is
an important additional complicating element.

Mercenaries are totally lacking in conscience and
morality. Their only loyalty and allegiance is to
themselves, and they will respond only to the highest
bidder. There are known cases of mercenaries who
have fought with several different militias, some of
whom were mortal enemies. They are there, ready to
fight anyone's war, so long as the price is right.

It is certain that for as long as these unsavoury
elements exist in our midst, the demand for small arms
and light weapons will be there - as will the
financiers and lords of war. They constitute a critical
link in the chain of conflict. And unless that link is
broken, we in West Africa will know no peace or rest.

It will be recalled that in July 2001, the United
Nations convened the Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, at
which it decided to implement the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. The Conference affirmed that "Governments
bear the primary responsibility for preventing,
combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects" and that "the
international community has a duty to deal with this
issue" (A/CONF192/I5, preambular paragraphs 13 and 15). I believe that the same holds true for the
problem of mercenaries.

It is true that in the West African subregion
Governments have started to assume their
responsibilities vis-a-vis the control of small arms and
light weapons. What they have achieved, commendable
as it may be, is only a beginning. Much more needs to
be done.

In December 2002, at the end of the third year of
the Moratorium, an evaluation was undertaken. Some
of its findings and observations are instructive. Let me
highlight a few.

"Unless the world's major arms producers
take more responsibility for managing the world
market in arms, the most vulnerable States will
continue to suffer from the uncontrolled trade in
small arms A renewed momentum needs to be
built around the issue of dialogue with arms
suppliers and producers.
"While the (numerous) applications for
waivers (for imports of arms and ammunitions)
indicate that member States do respect the
Moratorium, there have been allegations that not
all States are complying with the Code of
Conduct ECOWAS member States may
therefore wish to review the Code of Conduct in
order to provide (a) enforcement measures
when countries are found to be in violation of
their obligations, and (b) initiation of
investigation of serious breaches of the Code of
Conduct."

Regarding import exemptions,

"there is a gray area in the exemption procedure:
there is currently no clause requiring that arms
dealers" (as opposed to State parties) "submit an
application to the ECOWAS Secretariat There
is yet another gray area in the exemption process:
countries which have been granted waivers do not
have to show them when purchasing weapons."

Against this backdrop, I should like us to
consider a few proposals as to what more could be
done, over and above the efforts made so far, to address
the problem of small arms, light weapons and
mercenaries in West Africa. It goes without saying that
a priori, each West African country must show stronger
commitment towards the objectives of the sub-regional
and international initiatives on this issue and a greater
willingness to enforce the agreements made
collectively.

First, an international legislative instrument is
needed to hold both supplier and user of small arms
and light weapons to greater account. Manufacturers
and suppliers must be made to show more responsible
behaviour in the transfer of these arms and weapons to
non-State actors. A mechanism must be put in place to
ensure that transfers are made only to legitimate State
end-users. The efforts under way to regulate arms
supplies to militias in certain countries in the region
should be modified for application throughout West
Africa. In addition to that, something akin to the
monitoring and regulation of the movement of blood
diamonds should be designed to control the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. Of
course, these would have to be backed up by an
appropriate sanctions regime. In this regard, much
stronger cooperation must be sought from the arms
manufacturers and suppliers, signatories of the
Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Control for
Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and
Technologies.

Secondly, actions should be taken to check the
activities of illicit arms brokers, dealers and retailers in
much the same way as measures have been taken
against illicit drug dealers. The situation in West Africa
today is such that it is easy for individuals or groups of
individuals to purchase any amount of arms and
weapons, sometimes fairly openly. Effective measures
must be put in place to stop this.

Thirdly, we need to promulgate an international
convention proscribing the activities and use of
mercenaries in the subregion. Warlords who recruit
mercenaries to carry out any kind of war, whether
justifiable or not, should be held to account. The
appropriate surveillance and enforcement mechanisms
should then be put in place.

Fourthly, as an immediate measure to respond to
the urgency of the situation in West Africa, steps
should be taken to demobilize mercenaries and have
them reinserted into productive and gainful economic
activities in their countries of origin. Sierra Leone
recently had a successful programme, supported by the
United Nations, for the demobilization, reintegration
and reinsertion of tens of thousands of its nationals. A
subregional version of such a programme is what is
being proposed now.

Fifthly, some legislative instrument is needed to
prevent the provision of safe havens, rear bases,
logistics, supplies, etc., to mercenaries and other users
of illicit small arms and light weapons. The appropriate
regime of sanctions on defaulters would also need to be
worked out.

Finally, to have any or all of the foregoing
enforced, we would need a much stronger partnership
between the United Nations, PCASED and ECOWAS.
At present, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS), the Secretariat's Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and Department for
Disarmament Affairs, and the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research provide various forms of
assistance and support to the work of PCASED. What
is now required is for that cooperation to be broadened
to include concerted actions on the question of
mercenaries, as well as a more formal arrangement
through which the Security Council, in close
cooperation with ECOWAS and PCASED, would
establish a mechanism for monitoring the situation,
receiving reports on it and enforcing its decisions on
matters of small arms, light weapons and mercenaries.
Perhaps the United Nations Office for Conflict
Prevention and Peace-building for West Africa should
assume the role of coordinator of this arrangement, and
liaison between the Security Council and ECOWAS.

My delegation fervently hopes that this workshop
will not be a one-day wonder. It is our expectation that
from our deliberations will emerge the pointers that
will lead to stronger collaboration between all the
major players in West Africa on one hand, and the
Security Council on the other, in a bid to confront our
subregion's biggest challenge, namely, the problem of
mercenaries and the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.

