Mr. Own: (Libyan Arab J amahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are
confident that the President's experience and wisdom
will enable her to make a great contribution to the
promotion of international peace and security. I also
cannot fail to thank her predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Congo, for
wisely presiding over the work of the Council last
month. I must also thank your delegation for its quick
response to the request to hold this important meeting
to discuss an extremely important matter that will have
serious consequences for international peace and
security in the region, in particular, and in the world in
general.

Serious developments have arisen from the
barbaric ongoing Israeli aggression against the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, which culminated in the
premeditated invasion and flagrant attack referred to as
Operation Summer Rains - which was carried out on
28 June, targeting innocent civilians, power stations,
bridges and other Palestinian Authority infrastructure
in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank - and from the
detention of several members of the Government and
of the Palestinian Legislative Council. Those acts are
violations of international norms and laws, in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention.

The international community, especially the
Security Council and its permanent members, should
assume the moral and legal responsibility to stand up to
that cowardly and shameful action. They should
exercise their responsibility and denounce and
condemn the premeditated and organized military
campaign by the Israeli occupying forces against the
unarmed Palestinian people. They should consider that
aggression a crime and an act of collective punishment
exemplifying international terrorism and proof positive
of Israel's designs to counter any efforts at peace and a
just solution of this chronic crisis.

The international community, including the
Security Council, should not be fooled by the claims
made by Israeli occupying forces to justify their
aggression as a response to the kidnapping of an Israeli
soldier or a means of self-defence. That aggression was
planned and carefully considered for weeks, as
confirmed by the Haaretz newspaper on its Internet
web site - to the effect that the occupying army and
the general security apparatus, the Shabak, had planned
for weeks to detain the leaders of the Hamas movement
and had sought special orders from Israeli courts under

the signature of Attorney General Menachem Mazuz.
That confirms that this was a premeditated act of
aggression that has nothing to do with the claim of
self-defence. Self-defence cannot take place in
occupied territory, in which - in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, international human
rights norms and practices and resolutions of
international legitimacy - any intervention is a
flagrant act of aggression against the rights of the
Palestinian people.

The deterioration in the situation and the
increasing complexity of the problems in the region are
the result of Israel's ongoing occupation of Palestinian
and Arab territories, its enforcement of a policy of
creating a fait accompli and its adoption of continued
criminal practices against civilians. They are also the
result of Israel's siege and collective punishment of the
Palestinian people and its intimidation of certain
neighbouring Arab countries. Those actions by the
Israeli authorities are tantamount to piracy and are a
serious violation of the inviolability of a sovereign
Arab country, namely, Syria. They are also intended to
provide cover for the barbaric crimes of Israeli forces
in the occupied territories, and to serve as a means of
reaffirming Israel's continuing policy of aggression
and unjustified attacks in violation of international
laws and norms.

In the face of those serious challenges and threats
to international peace and security, and in the face of
this organized invasion of the territory and
headquarters of the Palestinian Authority, we would
request the Security Council to exercise its
responsibility as follows.

First, the Council should ensure adequate
international protection for the Palestinian people and
their legislative authority, in implementation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and other relevant
international laws.

Secondly, the Council should hold the Israeli
occupying authorities responsible for the safety of all
detainees, prisoners of war and kidnapped persons in
Israeli prisons and detention centres, and call for their
immediate release.
Thirdly, the Security Council should condemn
Israel's aggression against Gaza and the West Bank and
put an end to it and to any violations or acts of piracy
against Syrian air space.

Fourthly, the Council should call for the

provision of international assistance for the Palestinian

people and ensure that such aid reaches them as
quickly as possible.

