Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I would
like to start by thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his
briefing - his final one to the Security Council in his
current capacity.

Please allow me to focus on three important
aspects: the formation of the new Government, inclusive
Government and accountability.

First, on the formation of the new Government, we
congratulate and commend Iraq on the formation of the
new Government within the constitutional time frame
and look forward to the appointment of the remaining
ministerial positions. Iraq has taken a very important
step this year towards democracy and long-term
stability. Prime Minister Abdul-Mahdi presented an
ambitious programme and took initial significant steps
in favour of proximity to the Iraqi people, transparency
and reform. We are encouraged by those early signals
and expect that the Prime Minister and his Government
will continue to be inclusive and representative of Iraq's
diversity when implementing that programme.

We also welcome the elections that took place in
the Kurdistan Region. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/975) spoke of a positive trend in the
communication between Baghdad and Erbil, a dialogue
that we hope to see continued and intensified. Equally
important is the need for the new Government to increase
efforts to meet the legitimate demands of its people and
provide basic public services. That includes safe and
sufficient drinking water, electricity, the creation of j ob
opportunities and countering corruption. Iraq can count
on the Netherlands to back such efforts - politically,
financially and through our private sector i as we
have done over the past years. We are in full support of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Iraq, which
will allow it to form and exercise the new Government.

My second point is that a diverse society wants
to see itself reflected in its elected leaders and in a
Government that is inclusive and representative and
includes the meaningful participation of women.
Iraq can be proud that it has historically been at the
forefront of women's empowerment in the Arab world,
with the first Arab female minister nominated in 1959.
That example can still be replicated. The meaningful,
political, social and economic participation of women
is ever so important in view of the dark period in its
history that Iraq and the Iraqi people experienced. That
is why I want to take this opportunity to commend
Nadia Murad for being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
in recognition of her voice, advocacy and all Yazidi and
other Iraqis who suffered as a result of sexual violence
and atrocities committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS).

Providing victims with means for their
rehabilitation and reintegration into society is a
priority area for Iraq's second national action plan
on implementing resolution 1325 (2000). But in the
aftermath of the defeat of ISIS the focus will also be
on other areas of the national action plan, such as the
social and economic empowerment of women, which
Suzan Araf Maroof spoke about that in the Council in
August (see S/PV.8324). In that respect, we encourage
the Government to take steps to end impunity for
perpetrators of gender-based violence -for example,
by considering a law on violence against women that
criminalizes such violence, as other countries in the
region have implemented. In today's Iraq the talents
of all its people are indispensable, including those of
women and young people, for its economy to grow and
deliver a better future for all Iraqi citizens - men,
women and children alike.

Finally, I want to mark the continuing engagement
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) on ISIS accountability and the
commencement of the work by the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ISIL. Earlier this
month, UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights published an
important report entitled Unearthing Atrocities: Mass
Graves in Territory Formerly Controlled by ISIL.
Reportedly, an overwhelming majority of those graves
contained victims of ISIS. So far 1,258 bodies have
been exhumed, but it is estimated that there are human
remains of between 6,000 and 12,000 people.

The task for UNAMI, the Investigative Team
and the Iraqi Government is vast, that is, to secure,
collect and preserve evidence and to give information
to the families of the many missing. That is why the
Netherlands has decided to contribute financially to
the work of Investigative Team. We look forward to
Special Adviser Khan's first briefing in December.
We encourage the new Government to continue
to collaborate closely with both UNAMI and the
Investigative Team on the collection, preservation and
storing of evidence of those crimes that may amount
to war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.

In our belief that there should be accountability
in accordance with international standards, and
looking towards the future, we call upon the new Iraqi
Government - as we do on all others that have not done
so yet - to ratify and implement the Rome Statute and,
as such, recognize the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court.

In conclusion, I want to pay tribute to Special
Representative Kubis for the excellent work he was
able to carry out with his team in implementing
UNAMI's challenging tasks over the past three years
and nine months. We look forward to working with the
designated Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, who will
start in December. We wish her a lot of success.

