Mr. Okamura (Japan): As this is the first meeting
on the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, my
delegation would like to start by congratulating you,
Sir, on your work as Chair of that Committee. Let me
also commend the work carried out by the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group.

For Somalia, this is a crucial year for the
implementation of Vision 2016. Japan welcomes the
recent inclusive Somali-led discussion on an electoral
model, and the decision announced by the Federal
Government of Somalia at the end of January. It is now
important for all parties of Somalia to set aside their
remaining differences, engage constructively in the
political process without delay, and agree on the details
so that this decision may be implemented in time for
the elections to be carried out by September. In that
connection, proper management of public finances
in the run-up to the elections is crucial. We must not
allow spoiler networks to manipulate the course of
events through financial bribes or threats. The Security
Council should be ready, if necessary, to consider
listing individuals engaged in any acts that threaten
the peace and reconciliation process in Somalia for
targeted measures.

Al-Shabaab remains a major threat. Japan strongly
condemns the terrorist attacks that took place recently,
and we express our sincere condolences and heartfelt
sympathies to the victims and their families. We pay
tribute to the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army
for their work under harsh conditions on the ground.
In order to prevent Al-Shabaab from taking further
advantage, we believe that it is crucial that offensive
operations against Al-Shabaab by AMISOM, the
Somali National Army and the police be carried out
in an even more closely coordinated manner. We look
forward to the troop-contributing country summit and
the High-level Partnership Forum in Istanbul next week
for concrete results in that direction.

After long endeavours, Somalia is at last moving
steadily towards State-building. This must be Somali-
led, but at the same time supported by the international
community. It is my pleasure to announce that Japan has
recently provided additional assistance of $37.1 million,
which we expect to be used for State-building measures
in Somalia, such as supporting the election process
and police training. Japan is a strong supporter of the
Monitoring Group.

It is unfortunate that the Monitoring Group has
not been able to Visit Eritrea since February 2011. I
would like to recall that all Member States are under
the obligation to act in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and to cooperate with the
Monitoring Group so that this important body can carry
out its mandated tasks fully and effectively. To that
end, we hope to see the new experts of the Monitoring
Group and Government of Eritrea both engaging in a
cooperative and constructive manner this year, with the
support of the Sanctions Committee and the Council.

Japan stands ready to provide every support as we
continue our work in the sanctions committee under
your chairmanship.

