Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the Guinean presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate on two key issues in the
complex scenario of threats to international peace and
security in West Africa, and we congratulate the
presidency on this initiative, which is very timely.

We welcome the broad participation that this
debate has attracted, with regard to both the States
present and the regional and subregional organizations
represented by the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). We
believe that the issue's regional dimension is essential
and that only through joining measures at the national
level with regional initiatives will we be able to
consistently and comprehensively confront the threat to
peace and security that the millions of small arms and
light weapons circulating in West Africa represent.

My delegation would like to appeal to all West
African countries and to their regional organizations to
implement the measures contained in the action plan
that resulted from the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Traffic in Small Arms and Light Weapons,
held in New York in July 2002. For the sake of brevity,
and given the impossibility of dealing with every facet
of this debate, I should like to make several comments
and to pose several questions on the following points.

First of all, I should like to stress the importance
of including concrete measures concerning the
elimination of small arms and light weapons in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for ex-combatants. That component is
sometimes not included in peace agreements and, when
it is, its implementation in practice is slow and
problematic. In our judgement, the delays in this type
of programme have very negative consequences in the
post-conflict phase. I should like to know the opinions
of the West African States present in this Chamber that
are implementing this type of programme with regard
to what lessons they have learned in that respect.

Secondly, I should like to express my concern
about the urgent issue of child soldiers in West Africa.
We attach great importance to the reintegration of child
soldiers - especially to the educational aspect of their
reintegration. I should like to ask the States that are
present what their activities are in that respect.

My last point concerns the ECOWAS
Moratorium. In its implementation, African States must
not forget the importance of the ways in which these
arms are supplied and the great responsibility of the
States bordering the countries where conflicts are
currently taking place. I should like to ask the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS what technical
difficulties are being encountered in the
implementation of the Moratorium. What is his
assessment of the role of the national commissions
established thus far?

