Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you for the opportunity afforded
me to present to the Security Council the situation in
the Sudan at a time when the Council is considering
the latest reports of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
(S/2010/528) and on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (8/2010/543).

As everyone knows, we are less than three
months away from the referendum, and the Sudan has
entered a crucial period. In addition to the political and
security challenges that are inherent to the referendum
process, other challenges, such as the situation in
Darfur and the difficulties of the Doha peace process,
2
remain. In this presentation, I would like to highlight
the key points of the reports and to inform the Council
of the very latest developments in the Sudan.

There has been visible progress in the preparation
of the referendum for Southern Sudan, but very little
time remains. On 11 October, the President of the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, Mr. Khalil,
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Menkerios, co-presided the first meeting
of the policy committee of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, in which representatives of
the Governments of both Southern Sudan and the
Sudan participated.

The committee expressly requested that the
Commission finalize its operational plan, including the
schedule for the referendums and the budget. It also
asked the Commission to clarify the criteria for the
registration of Southern Sudanese living in the north.

UNMIS continues to provide technical, logistical
and advisory assistance to the Commission and is
deploying several hundred additional personnel to
support this action. UNAMID will also support the
Commission by setting up voter registration and
polling centres in Darfur. In the meantime, formal
invitations to the monitor the referendum were
addressed to interested organizations, such as the
African Union, the League of Arab States, the
European Union, the Carter Center and other
organizations.

The Referendum Commission has now reached
agreement on the schedule for the preparation of the
referendum in Southern Sudan, especially the
registration of voters. Registration will start on
14 November and end on 30 November. The voter
register will be finalized by 31 December. The
International Foundation for Electoral Systems and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
have provided manuals on the drawing up of electoral
lists and other materials, which should arrive in the
Sudan before the end of October. A great deal of these
materials has already reached the country.

There will be close to 3,600 registration centres in
the Sudan, but, since all the sites have not been decided
yet, additional material has been pre-positioned to deal
with any eventualities. The International Organization
for Migration (IOM) has drawn up its operational
modalities and is determining what resources are
necessary for registering Sudanese voters living abroad.
10-59995
The vote will take place in eight countries besides the
Sudan. Additional resources will be necessary for the
IOM, so as to ensure that voting abroad takes place in a
timely manner.

The question of national financing presents a
major obstacle to the preparations. The Referendum
Commission had initially drawn up a global budget of
$370 million, but the first funds have only just been
transferred. The Government of Southern Sudan has
recently declared that it had organized the transfer of
$51 million, the equivalent of its contribution, if one
excludes purely security-related aspects.

The Government of the Sudan only last week
provided the first $8.5 million, as it awaits an
opportunity to consider the detailed budget proposal
that was submitted by the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission. This delay has severely limited the
implementation of concrete measures for the
registration of voters, including the training and
recruitment of 12,000 voting officials, which has
barely begun. An international financial support system
has been set up. The fund administered by the UNDP
has received $58.5 million for the referendum in
Southern Sudan and $8.1 million for the referendum in
Abyei. But the referendum is first and foremost a
national exercise and cannot be implemented without
agreement on national financing.

Serious concerns remain about Southern
Sudanese living in the north. Recently, high-level
members of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM)/National Congress Party declared that
Southern Sudanese living in the north could lose their
citizenship, access to health services and their right to
property ownership, if Southern Sudan were to secede.
In the meanwhile, in Southern Sudan, numerous reports
have stated that there have been acts of intimidation
committed by the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) against pro-unity groups. It is essential that the
Governments of both Southern Sudan and the Sudan
should guarantee conditions that would enable voters
to freely express their will without any outside
pressure.

In the meantime, at the political level, there is a
significant movement towards reconciliation between
the stakeholders in Southern Sudan. On 6 October,
President Salva Kiir pardoned Generals Athor Deng
and Gabriel Tanginye, as well as Colonel Gatluak Gai
and a number of military chiefs who had been opposed
10-59995
to the SPLM. Following those pardons, General
Tanginye officially joined the SPLM. It is possible that
General Athor might do the same.

During the All-Southern Sudanese Political
Parties' Conference last week, from 13 to 16 October,
all of the parties of Southern Sudan, including the
SPLM, committed to abiding by a code of conduct
during the period leading up to the referendum that
would guarantee the freedom to campaign and equal
access to the media by pro-independence and pro-unity
parties. The SPLM. has also undertaken to set up a
multiparty government following the referendum,
which would include representatives of all opposition
parties and has agreed on the presidency of President
Salva Kiir during its transition period.

We remain deeply alarmed by the absence of any
progress on the referendum in Abyei. The Abyei
Referendum Commission has not yet been set up, and
the voter registry criteria remain to be defined. Earlier
this month, the parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement met in Addis Ababa to discuss options that
would enable them to overcome the obstacles to the
implementation of the Abyei Protocol. Even if no
agreement was reached, the parties have, however,
agreed to meet again at the end of October under the
auspices of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel under President Mbeki, and in
the presence, of course, of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios, and the
United States delegation. They will also discuss a
number of important subjects, such as the demarcation
of the border and a number of post-referendum
arrangements to achieve a consolidated solution, which
would include the issue of Abyei. It is absolutely
essential that the parties reach an agreement during
those negotiations. As long as there is no agreement,
tension continues to increase on a daily basis in Abyei.

The panel appointed by the Secretary-General to
monitor the referendums in Southern Sudan and the
Abyei area carried out its first visit to the Sudan from
10 to 15 October. This panel, presided over, as Council
members know, by President Mkapa, has met a great
many of the stakeholders, including the highest
authorities, and it stated that it was alarmed by the
delays in the preparations for the referendum in
Southern Sudan and by the mistrust between the
parties. It urged both Governments to immediately
allocate the necessary funds to draw up electoral lists.
The panel has identified a number of technical issues
3
that require an urgent solution, including the
finalization of the schedule, the number and placement
of electoral registration offices, the clarification on the
requirements for registration and the recruitment and
deployment of registration personnel. In addition, the
panel expressed its alarm regarding the absence of
progress on the conduct of the referendum in the Abyei
area. Of course, the panel remains ready to take action
on all these issues, including through its good offices.

We remain alarmed by the absence of significant
progress as far as the referendums in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan States are concerned. In Southern
Kordofan, the results of the special census carried out
earlier this year have not yet been announced, which
delays the elections of the governors and members of
regional parliaments. It is now clear that the Southern
Kordofan Popular Consultation Commission will not
finalize its work before 9 January 2011, the date set for
the referendum. In the Blue Nile State, the Popular
Consultation Commission was created on 18 September.
It has not yet been in a position to achieve any progress
in its work. Those troubling delays show the general
lack of progress as far as the transition zones are
concerned and the need to redouble our efforts to
sustain the process and to meet the concerns of the
population.

The security situation in the area of operation of
UNMIS during this period remained relatively calm. It
has tangibly improved since the elections. However,
tensions rose at the beginning of October, when the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the SPLA mutually
accused each other of having strengthened their
positions along the border between Unity State and
Upper Nile State.

Due to the lack of cooperation between local
commanders and limited land and air mobility, UNMIS
was unable to fully verify the situation. However, the
information that did come to us suggests that there has
been no major military mobilization, even if the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the SPLA seem to have
heightened their level of preparation and reinforced
their defensive positions along the borders between
Unity State and Southern Kordofan State, the Upper
Nile and the White Nile and near the south of the Blue
Nile State and Abyei.

Given the scale of security risks and the mandate
of UNMIS to back the referendum process, violations
of freedom of movement of UNMIS remain a source of
concern, and the Mission continues to raise that issue
with authorities. On 6 October, the SPLA authorized
UNMIS to carry out joint monitoring exercises in the
area of operation until the referendum takes place. The
division commanders of the SPLA have received orders
to afford UNMIS complete freedom of movement. The
southern Sudanese Police Service and the national
intelligence and security units of Southern Sudan have
since received the same orders.

Given the growing political and security tensions,
UNMIS has developed a number of initiatives aimed at
strengthening its assessment capacities and confronting
the new security challenges. Those measures include
strengthening conflict resolution mechanisms through
increased involvement of the Joint Defence Board -
the JDB - active participation of all levels of security
forces, the Sudanese Armed Forces, the SPLA, the
Sudanese police forces and Joint Integrated Units.
Also, the number of patrols has increased, especially
along the north-south border, and mobility has
increased through military exercises.

Similar measures are now planned for the civil
sections of UNMIS and the United Nations country
team. As the Council is aware, UNMIS has also
strengthened its military presence in Abyei, in
particular by adding a platoon and by doubling its
capacity to patrol.

In addition, UNMIS has finalized, in consultation
with country team, the strategy for the protection of
civilians, which allows the force to provide protection
to United Nations personnel so they can carry out
initiatives for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in the 10 States in Southern
Sudan and in the transition areas. UNMIS will
certainly provide protection, to the extent its capacities
allow, to international humanitarian actors and to the
population at risk in order to facilitate humanitarian
assistance. The country team has also set up
contingency plans that include mechanisms designed to
respond to a possible increase in population
displacements and humanitarian needs and is currently
pre-positioning foodstuffs and other reserves.

During the Security Council's recent visit to the
Sudan, Vice-President Salva Kiir warned of the serious
risk of violence during the referendum and
recommended the creation of a buffer zone between the
north and the south. As everyone knows, that has given
10-59995
rise to a great many questions regarding a possible
reinforcement of UNMIS, especially along the borders.

We are currently considering several options to
increase the UNMIS presence in high-risk zones along
the border, especially in traditional migration zones or
those where population movements could take place.
One option would be to re-deploy troops based in other
areas of Southern Sudan. That, however, would weaken
UNMIS' capacity to assist in the preparations for the
referendum and to provide security for the process.

Another option would be to request an increase in
the number of authorized troops and to deploy
additional contingents near zones that have been
identified as sensitive. We are currently examining
those options, in consultation, of course, with the
various parties. If necessary, we will return to the
Council with proposals, after having consulted with
parties on the ground.

However, it remains important to recognize that
an increase in the number of troops would not enable
UNMIS to prevent or even contain a head-on
confrontation between the two armies. Our best
weapon against a return to war is and remains our
commitment to a political agreement, that is, the
agreement of the parties on key unresolved issues.
From that point of view, it is all the more urgent that
progress be achieved during the upcoming meetings in
Addis Ababa.

(spoke in English)

As the attention of the international community
increasingly turns to the impending referendum, we
must not lose focus on the acute challenges remaining
in Darfur.

Since our previous report on Darfur, the number
of armed confrontations between parties to the conflict
has decreased. However, intermittent clashes have
continued between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) in Northern and
Southern Darfur, as well as between Sudanese Armed
Forces and forces loyal to the Sudan Liberation Army-
Abdul Wahid in Jebel Marra. Those clashes have
inflicted a humanitarian toll on the civilian population.
Aerial bombardments were used in mid-July as part of
a Government campaign to dislodge JEM. from the
Abola Mountain and were reported, but not confirmed,
in early October, in Jebel Marra.
10-59995

During the reporting period, incidents of banditry,
carjacking, ambushes and abductions of United Nations
staff and humanitarian workers also continued. As I
speak, one international staff member kidnapped the
day the Council arrived in El Fasher, 7 October,
remains in the custody of his kidnappers. The
Government has not done enough to stem the culture of
impunity for such attacks, which remains the norm. We
have repeatedly reminded the Government and rebel
movements that attacks on United Nations personnel
constitute war crimes and that the perpetrators must be
held accountable and brought to justice.

Since the outbreak of violence in Kalma camp in
July, the situation there is calm, with no new fatalities.
The 25,000 or so internally displaced persons (IDPs)
displaced from the camp have now mostly returned.
However, there have been some reports of clashes and
shooting incidents. UNAMID has continued to
maintain a reinforced presence, including round-the-
clock patrolling in and around the camp and constant
engagement of camp leaders and residents by
UNAMID civilian teams. In Hamidiya, an IDP camp in
Western Darfur where similar unrest took place in July,
IDP leaders have agreed on locations for the
construction of community policing centres, which will
contribute to enhancing security.

Meanwhile, little progress has been made with
regard to the five sheikhs seeking refuge in UNAMID's
community policing centre in Kalma camp. We are
continuing our discussions with the relevant authorities
to find a mutually acceptable solution.

The violence that took place in Kalma and
Hamadiya during the reporting period highlighted the
problem of weapons and armed elements inside IDP
camps, which violate humanitarian principles.
UNAMID has initiated discussions with IDP leaders on
that issue but has been clear to the Government it
cannot be involved in the forcible disarmament of
IDPs. The authorities in Southern Darfur have
indicated their intention to relocate Kalma camp from
its present location to nearby Beleil and to disarm the
residents in the process. The Government has agreed,
however, that any relocation should be voluntary and
any disarmament effort non-coercive.

During the reporting period, a further serious
security incident took place on 2 September, when an
unidentified group of armed men attacked a market in
the village of Tabarat in Northern Darfur, killing 37,
injuring 35 and resulting in the displacement of about
3,000 people to Tawilla. Reports indicate most of those
killed were executed. Initial reports indicate that the
incident was caused by a tribal dispute over blood
money, but a Government investigation is ongoing. We
have called upon the Government to finalize its
investigation as soon as possible and bring the
perpetrators of that heinous crime to justice. There was
no improvement in most humanitarian indicators
during the reporting period, owing to a combination of
seasonal and conflict-related factors. Since the
beginning of the year, more than 280,000 people have
been displaced across Darfur, though fewer than half of
that number have been verified so far, and most of this
displacement has taken place in the South.

Meanwhile, humanitarian operations continued to
be hampered by insecurity and operational constraints.
Owing to insecurity, the World Food Programme
(WFP) was unable to reach more than 435,000, or
some 11 per cent, of its intended beneficiaries during
the month of August.

In eastern Jebel Marra, both the Government and
the SLA-Abdul Wahid have continued to deny the
international community access, including in the context
of alleged aerial bombardments in early October, which
reportedly led to the displacement of thousands of
civilians. However, some positive developments are also
worth noting. On 15 and 16 September 2010, with
UNAMID's support, UNICEF and the World Health
Organization transported 114 tonnes of essential
medication and nutritional relief, in the first
inter-agency mission to Jebel Marra since February.

On 14 October, Council members expressed
concern about the suspension of food distribution in
Abu Shouk IDP camp in North Darfur, following their
visit there. The WFP has confirmed that the suspension
was in place only during the month of September,
while an IDP verification exercise was conducted, and
that the IDPs were informed in advance. Except for
September, distribution has been ongoing on the basis
of half-rations, as part of an overall strategy to shift
from general food distribution to more targeted safety-
net programmes for the most vulnerable. That approach
is based on data collected since February 2009
indicating changes in the food security profile of IDP
camps in Darfur.

The precarious human rights situation in Darfur
also remains a consistent concern as a result of

violations committed by the Government and rebel
movements. A state of emergency still exists in Darfur,
giving broad-based powers to the National Intelligence
and Security Service (NISS), which are sometimes
used with impunity, resulting in reports of arbitrary
arrests, torture during detentions and a lack of due
process.

Following the Council's visit to Abu Shouk, we
have received reports that some of the IDPs who spoke
to Council members had been arrested and intimidated,
although such reports have been denied by the
Government of Sudan. We are not in a position to
provide names of the alleged victims, out of our
concern to protect our sources from retaliation.
However, we have urged the Government to release
anyone being held and to guarantee the rights of IDPs
to speak openly, without fear of intimidation.

With regard to the political process, Joint Chief
Mediator Bassole continues to work with the armed
movements and the Government in Sudan to develop
an inclusive and comprehensive peace agreement. On
19 October, the Joint Mediation, the Government of
Sudan and the Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM)
met in Doha to review the progress made by the
negotiation committees. Although progress has been
made in some areas, significant areas of disagreement
remain, including issues involving the administrative
status of Darfur, power-sharing and security
arrangements and mechanisms for compensation,
justice and reconciliation. The parties will continue to
negotiate the outstanding issues for another week.
Mr. Bassole will subsequently work on compromise
proposals in order to develop an agreement consistent
with the principles endorsed in the 24 September high-
level meeting, on which all belligerent parties and
representatives of Darfur's various communities will
be consulted.

In separate developments, Mr. Bassole recently
held meetings with Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) leader Khalil Ibrahim in Libya and Abdul Wahid
al-Nur in Paris. JEM. has indicated some willingness to
resume its participation in the peace talks, if
arrangements can be made for Khalil Ibrahim to visit
Darfur. Abdul Wahid has also indicated a willingness to
consider participation, conditional on international
assistance to convene his field commanders.

The Joint Mediation continues its efforts to bring
both groups to Doha and would appreciate the support
of Security Council members with influence in this
regard. In the event that JEM. and SLA-Abdul Wahid
decide to participate, the Joint Mediation intends to
delay presenting a draft agreement, so as to allow time
to integrate other groups into the process.

In the meantime, although the Government has
stated its ongoing commitment to the Doha talks, it has
also made clear its preference for a domestication of
the peace process. The notion of holding talks
exclusively inside Darfur has been rejected by the
movements in the current security environment. We
have therefore continued to stress the need for both the
engagement of the Darfur population and space for
negotiations with movements that show themselves to
be credible interlocutors. We have also stressed that
peace is contingent on the Government's commitment
to making significant concessions for the people of
Darfur.

On the ground, UNAMID continues to support
the peace process, particularly through efforts to
facilitate the greater participation of Darfurians.
UNAMID has also supported local-level peace
initiatives and plans to facilitate a tribal reconciliation
conference in November, involving tribes from South
Darfur, Southern Bahr El Ghazal and Western Bahr El
Ghazal states.

UNAMID continues to focus on its core
mandated function of protecting civilians and
providing a secure environment for humanitarian
operations. In this regard, the Mission is strengthening
its strategy for the protection of civilians, including
through enhanced patrolling activities. New directives
have already been issued to military and police
components to patrol more robustly, and improvements
seen in the Kalma and Hamadiya camps indicate that
these efforts are bearing fruit.

However, restrictions on UNAMID's freedom of
movement remain a significant constraint on the
Mission's capacity to react and to maintain situational
awareness, which are key to its mandate to protect
civilians. During the reporting period, restrictions of
the movement of UNAMID or United Nations agencies
occurred on 26 occasions, and seven peacekeepers
were injured as a result of armed attacks during
UNAMID operations.

On 17 September, the Government endorsed a
new political and security strategy for Darfur, focusing
on five key areas: security, development, resettlement,

reconciliation and negotiations. The strategy called for
greater coordination with UNAMID, especially on
protection and returns, and a shift from humanitarian
assistance to development and support for returns.
UNAMID is engaging with the Government on this
strategy, in a manner consistent with its own mandate
and the promotion of humanitarian principles. We
continue to stress that success will require the
Government to build confidence among the Darfur
population by implementing long-overdue measures,
including addressing insecurity and impunity, reigning
in the powers of the NISS and making available
development funds for Darfur.

The challenges ahead are multiple and grave.
With respect to the referendum, time is running out for
resolution of the many outstanding issues. While
planning for the worst-case political and security
scenarios continues, our core goal must be to prevent
these from occurring by urging and supporting the
parties to reach agreement on the process and on the
basis for long-term peaceful coexistence, irrespective
of the outcome. In this context and in view of the
limited capacities of UNMIS to address widespread
insecurity in Sudan, it is absolutely critical to
underscore to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) parties their responsibility for the referendum
process and the peaceful implementation of the final
CPA benchmarks.

With regard to Darfur, the support of the Council
is needed in several critical areas. First, as previously
stated, the Government must do more to create an
enabling environment for the implementation of
UNAMID's mandate, including by tackling impunity
and providing full freedom of movement.

Secondly, to move forward on the peace process
ahead of the referendum, movements that remain
outside the process must go beyond vague signals and
demonstrate their serious intent to re-engage, including
through a recommitment to a ceasefire. The Security
Council should consider imposing consequences on
those who continue to obstruct the process.

Thirdly, progress in Darfur depends on the
Government's willingness to make maximum
concessions in the peace negotiations and, in the
meantime, to implement measures that will improve
the lives of Darfurians and build their trust. As we
collectively engage the Government on strategies for
7

resolving the Darfur conflict, we must clearly convey
those responsibilities as our core message.

