Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Albania, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

Ijoin other speakers in welcoming my good friend
High Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Security
Council and would like to reassure him of our continued
support. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for her statement.

The European Union continues to closely follow
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Stability
and progress in the country are both very important
to us. I have the pleasure to inform the Council that
the Stabilization and Association Agreement between
the European Union, its member States and Bosnia and
Herzegovina will enter into force on 1 June, following the
adoption in Sarajevo of the written commitment, which
sets out an ambitious framework for a comprehensive
reform agenda. We attach strategic importance to the
written commitment to reform and progress towards
EU membership, which has been adopted by Bosnia
and Herzegovina's Presidency, signed by the leaders
of the country's political parties and endorsed by the
Parliamentary Assembly. These positive developments
are crucial signs of Bosnia and Herzegovina's strong
partnership with the European Union and evidence of
the country's commitment to the EU path in the context
of the renewed EU approach outlined by the Council of
the European Union in December 2014.

Following the October 2014 general elections, the
process of forming State and entity parliaments and
Governments has now been concluded. Representatives
of the newly formed State and entity-level Governments
are now engaging with the European Union and
international partners, including with the international
financial institutions, towards the development and
implementation of the initial reform agenda. This reform
agenda should be in line with the EU acquis and will
need to focus on Copenhagen criteria: socioeconomic
reforms, including rule of law and good governance,
and agreed functionality issues, including the EU
coordination mechanism. It should also embrace the
Compact for Jobs and Growth initiative, of which the
Council was informed in May 2014 (see S/PV.7176).

Comprehensive efforts towards the implementation
of reforms by the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will benefit all citizens of the country, irrespective of
their ethnicity or religious affiliation. Meaningful
progress in the implementation of reforms will
strengthen stability and build strong foundations for
future development and prosperity. It will also play a
role in further progress on the EU integration path.

Despite the foregoing important positive signs,
there is a long way to go in Bosnia and Herzegovina
before we can declare unreserved success. Deeply
rooted divisions remain and reconciliation is slow.
Socioeconomic challenges can be easily manipulated
for political purposes. There have been attempts to do
so. Divisive and separatist rhetoric remains a cause
for serious concern and is highly disruptive of the
reforms that Bosnia and Herzegovina has to implement.
Statements are made and initiatives are taken for short-
termpoliticalpurposes. Misleading and harmfulpolitical
visions are offered to the public, often to consolidate
power and distract attention from deep socioeconomic
challenges and from the political responsibility for the
state of the economy. Such behaviour undermines trust
in the domestic political leadership and questions its
intentions and its commitment to the success of the
reform process in the country.

Since September 2011, the consolidated presence
of the European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been fully engaged in supporting the country, including
in all EU-related matters. The recently appointed
Special Representative of the European Union, who is
also our Head of Delegation in Sarajevo, Lars-Gunnar
Wigemark, has just arrived there, and will, like his
predecessors, continue to provide political guidance on
military issues with a local political dimension to the
EU Force Commander.

The European Union also continues to accompany

Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in the security field.
The overall security situation has remained calm and
stable, yet stability has not been entrenched. The recent
dramatic incident in Zvornik, where a police station
was attacked by an individual and a policeman was
killed, is an indicator of the persistent risks in the area
of public order and security and a reminder of the need
for continuous efforts in these areas. In addition, the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina need to address
the root causes of the socioeconomic difficulties and
further improve the capacity of law enforcement
agencies.

In relation to the foregoing, the EU is ready to keep
the EU-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation
Althea focused on capacity-building and training while
retaining the capability to contribute to the authorities'
deterrence capacity, if the situation so requires.
EUFOR Althea is also ready to play an executive
military role to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's
efforts to maintain a safe and secure environment under
a United Nations mandate. Further, in the context of
the overall EU strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we look forward to continuing the discussions with the
international community in the appropriate forum on
the reconfiguration of the international presence and
call on the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet the outstanding objectives and conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

The EU reiterates its unequivocal commitment
to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a sovereign and united country as well as to
Bosnia and Herzegovina's European Union prospects.
The European Union will continue to provide the
necessary support and assistance for promoting the
country's stability, reforms, development and European
integration process.

A new energy and spirit are evident. They must be
sustained and further strengthened to take on the deep-
rooted divisions and challenges that remain, including
the need for significant improvement of the efficiency
and functionality of the country's institutions in
general, to ensure the sustainability and continuity of
democratic reforms that have been in place since 1995,
and to develop capacities and capabilities required in
the context of EU accession, particularly as regards
coordination among various levels of Government.

Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity
to invite the Security Council to urge the leadership
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to respond to its citizens'
demands, maintain positive momentum by delivering on
its commitments to reforms, including those relating to
the implementation of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement, to look beyond persistent political divisions

and to finally and decisively move the country forward
on its reform agenda towards stability and prosperity
for all its citizens as it advances on the path to the
European Union.

The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina deserve
progress, prosperity and prospects for a better future.
The European Union stands ready to help and assist
the country to fulfil this Vision and encourages all the
stakeholders in the country and the region to provide
their share of support. Bosnia and Herzegovina's
tangible progress on the comprehensive reform path is
in the best interest of the country, the region and the
European Union itself.

