Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Eighteen months ago, with
the closure of the United Nations Office in Burundi
previously authorized by resolution 2137 (2014), there
was immense hope that Burundi had turned the final
page on a tragic chapter in its history. At that point,
Burundi seemed poised to move out of the post-conflict
phase into a period that would consolidate the political,
economic and social gains built on the principles of
the Arusha Agreement as well as those enshrined in
the country's Constitution. Therefore the political and
security turmoil in Burundi that arose in 2015 and
which persists today is deeply distressing. Instead of
moving forward, there are legitimate fears that the
country is being drawn back to its dark days of violent
conflict.

The Security Council has often been faulted in the
past for not acting quickly enough in response to crises.
Too often, the Council reacts only after a situation has
significantly deteriorated to the point where it cannot be
ignored. In supporting resolution 2303 (2016) adopted
today, Malaysia believes that the Council's decision
represents a novel approach to conflict prevention in
a region with a long history of conflict as the status
quo. This time we are not waiting for the worst to occur
before taking action.

We strongly condemn all acts of violence that have
occurred in the course of the protracted political crisis
in Burundi. Violence will never result in a permanent
solution. Rather, genuine, credible and inclusive
political dialogue is the only viable path to resolving
the crisis in Burundi in a peaceful manner.

We commend and support the leading role played
by regional organizations, including the African Union
and the East African Community, to mediate dialogue
and restore stability in Burundi. We believe that the
combination of a United Nations police component
to monitor the security situation on the ground and
strengthen United Nations capacity for human rights
monitoring mandated by resolution 2303 (2016) can
help create an environment conducive to supporting a
viable political dialogue.

We wish to make it clear that the consent and
cooperation of the Government of Burundi is
fundamental for the successful implementation of
the resolution. Malaysia reaffirms the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity
of Burundi, a principle that is clearly reflected in the
text and stresses the primary role of the Government in
upholding the security and human rights of its people.
In this regard, we call for the Government of Burundi
to extend its cooperation and for the United Nations to
consult closely with the Burundian national authorities
for the swift deployment of the United Nations police
component. We appeal to the Burundian Government
to take this opportunity to demonstrate its sincere
commitment to resolving the crisis peacefully and give
priority to the interests, security and welfare of the
Burundian people.
In conclusion, we wish to commend France,
the penholder, for setting the tone for constructive
negotiations on the draft text. While we regret that the
resolution could not be adopted by full consensus, we
support the resolution and its ultimate aim - to bring
Burundi back to a path of lasting peace and stability.
We fervently hope that the Government of Burundi and
the international community greet this resolution in the
same spirit we do.

