Mr. Annabi: Members of the Council have before
them the third report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
which was issued on 7 March. This report covers
developments since the last report, which was issued on
11 January 2000 (S/2000/13).

During the reporting period there has been some
progress in furthering the peace process in Sierra Leone,
but in many areas the process has remained slow. There
has been in particular little progress in disarmament in the
northern and eastern parts of the country, while rebel
groups continued to interfere with humanitarian activities
and with UNAMSIL patrols and to harass the civilian
population in those areas.

A special meeting was organized on 1 and 2 March
2000 under the auspices of the current Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)

 

in Bamako, which was attended by high-level
representatives of ECOWAS, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the Sierra Leonean parties. The special meeting
concluded with the adoption of a communique which calls
on all Sierra Leonean leaders to translate their expressions
of commitment to the peace process into concrete action.

In a significant development since the issuance of the
report, a high-level meeting was convened on 9 March, last
week, to follow up on the Bamako meeting with the
participation of President Kabbah, Mr. Sankoh, Mr. Koroma
and Chief Hinga Norman, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji, the
UNAMSIL Force Commander and the Force Commander
of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group, ECOMOG. At that
meeting the following decisions were reached and
subsequently made public. There would be full and
unhindered access to all parts of the country for
UNAMSIL, humanitarian agencies and all civilians,
including refugees and internally displaced persons. There
would no longer be areas under control of any combatant
group and the Government would have full control over
every part of the country. Finally, disarmament would take
place in selected areas in the Northern and Eastern
Provinces, Where facilities are in place, and thereafter in
other areas as facilities become available. The next day, on
10 March, the Special Representative convened a follow-up
meeting with representatives of the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF), the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
(AFRC), the Government, UNAMSIL and ECOMOG, and
at that meeting it was decided that factions would remove
all their checkpoints within 48 hours.

During the period covered by the report there were
several serious incidents involving UNAMSIL and former
rebel elements or combatants, although in the case of the
main incident, involving the Guinean troops, they were not
at that point in time under UNAMSIL command; they had
not yet joined UNAMSIL. In the course of these incidents,
peacekeeping troops were forced to surrender their weapons
to groups of armed rebels. Measures have since been taken
at the request of the Secretary-General to prevent such
incidents from happening in the future and to try to retrieve
these weapons. While some of the weapons have been
returned, the bulk of the weapons seized from the Guinean
troops have yet to be returned by the RUF.

On 23 February 2000, a convoy of the Indian battalion
moving from Kenema to Daru was also stopped by a large
number of well-armed RUF fighters. A stand-off ensued
and continued for two days, but eventually the UNAMSIL
convoy had to redeploy to Kenema. On 7 March,
however, another convoy of the Indian battalion was able
to reach Daru without being obstructed by the RUF.

UNAMSIL is now deployed, apart from Freetown,
in Lungi, Port Loko, Lunsar, Masiaka, Makeni,
Magburaka, Kenema, Daru and Mile 91, as well as at B0
and Moyamba. Successive efforts have been made to also
deploy troops to Koidu and Kailahun on the eastern tip of
the country, but most of these efforts were unsuccessful
as a result of the RUF's refusal to allow UNAMSIL
freedom of movement. On 10 March, however, a
UNAMSIL convoy of 65 troops was able to reach
Kailahun and Buedu on a recce mission. At the same
time, according to oral reports received today from
UNAMSIL, the envisaged deployment of a part of the
Indian contingent today to Kailahun was again stopped by
the RUF. In addition, no troops have yet been able to
reach Koidu, although patrols of UNAMSIL military
observers have visited the town on four occasions.

In a letter dated 13 January 2000 addressed to the
Secretary-General, the Foreign Minister of Nigeria offered
to suspend, for 90 days, the Withdrawal of the Nigerian
troops serving under ECOMOG in Sierra Leone. He made
that offer in order to assist in preventing a possible
security vacuum before the full deployment of the
expanded UNAMSIL. In subsequent decisions with the
Nigerian military authorities, it was agreed that two
Nigerian infantry battalions and one tank company would
be incorporated into UNAMSIL. I wish to express our
gratitude to the Government of Nigeria for its cooperation
and for the flexibility it has shown to help maintain the
needed level of security in the country until the full
deployment of UNAMSIL.

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programme has continued, but albeit at a slow
pace. At the same time, a significant increase in
disarmament of former Civil Defence Forces (CDF)
combatants occurred during this reporting period. As of
today, a total of 18,332 ex-combatants have been
disarmed and demobilized. However, we are concerned
about the number and the low quality of the weapons
which have been surrendered, as well as about the ratio
of collected arms to the number of ex-combatants, as
many fighters report for demobilization only with
ammunition and hand grenades. As of today, a total of
6,426 weapons have been recovered, as well as 1,545
grenades and over 1.5 million rounds of ammunition.

 

The security situation at the disarmament and
demobilization camps also continues to be a matter of
concern, especially at Port Loko. UNAMSIL has recently
begun to destroy the ammunition and unexploded mortar
rounds collected in the course of this exercise.

Turning to the human rights situation, I want to recall
that the human rights situation in Sierra Leone was
extensively discussed at the Security Council consultations
of 8 March. Therefore I will not go into details today.

I would, however, like to state once again that the
human rights situation in Sierra Leone remains a cause for
serious concern, in particular in the area of Port Loko,
where former elements of the Sierra Leone Army are
present, and in RUF-held areas, with continuing incidents
of abductions, rape and harassment of civilians. However,
according to our human rights observers, there has been
some improvement in the human rights situation in areas
where UNAMSIL has been able to deploy.

At the present time, the activities of the Sierra
Leonean police continue to be limited to the western part of
the country, in particular Freetown. Also, the local police
still lack the necessary personnel, facilities and equipment
to fulfil essential tasks. Despite these challenges, progress
has been made in the training of police officers, improving
service conditions, monitoring their conduct and
implementing structural and personnel changes, which are
being conducted under the leadership of the Sierra Leonean
Inspector General of Police with the support of the
Commonwealth Police Task Force and UNAMSIL's civilian
police advisers.

On the humanitarian side, with the deployment of
UNAMSIL military units, humanitarian access is showing
signs of improvement. Urgent action continues to be needed
to address the appalling conditions of health, water,
sanitation and school facilities in most of the assessed
areas. Meanwhile, RUF resistance to UNAMSIL
deployment continues to slow humanitarian access to
approximately 2.6 million war-affected Sierra Leoneans in
the upper Northern and Eastern provinces of the country.
Only limited humanitarian assistance has been possible in
the critical locations of Kambia in the Northern Province
and in Kailahun and Kono in the Eastern Province. Should
humanitarian access improve, the United Nations agencies
would require additional generous support from the
international donor community.

I also wish to inform Council members of two
incidents that took place on 7 March, in which
humanitarian workers were detained and mistreated by
RUF fighters near Kabala and Rogberi, respectively. All
of these aid workers have been released, although one
was shot in the hand. As a result, the non-governmental
organizations concerned - Medecins sans Frontieres and
Christian Extension Services - have suspended their
operations in RUF-held areas.

The Secretary-Generals report outlines the main
steps to be taken in the peace process so as to establish
priorities and responsibilities for all concerned and to
provide the international community with benchmarks to
measure progress. These main steps can be grouped under
four specific areas of activity: first, the early
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of all ex-
combatants; secondly, the extension of state authority,
including law enforcement, throughout the country;
thirdly, national reconciliation and democratization; and
fourthly, the improvement of Sierra Leone's own capacity
to ensure its own security. Significant progress during the
course of this year towards these important objectives
would be an essential precondition for the organization
and conduct of the parliamentary and presidential
elections envisaged for the spring of 2001.

It is clear that progress towards these objectives
would require a sustained commitment by all concerned,
as well as significant material and financial resources. In
this regard, the Secretary-General very much welcomes
the organization of the donor conference scheduled to be
held in London on 27 March at the initiative of the
British Government, and he has asked Deputy Secretary-
General Louise Frechette to represent the United Nations
on that occasion to underscore the importance that he
attaches to this meeting.

The Secretary-General would like on this occasion
to appeal to the donor community to make generous
contributions, in particular to the World Bank Multi-donor
Trust Fund, to cover the present shortfall of
approximately $20 million in the funding of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. It would also be useful if financial support
could be provided for various other aspects of the peace
process, including small-scale quick-impact projects, civil
affairs, the rehabilitation of the civilian police, support for
political parties - including the transformation of the
RUF into a political party - and other democratization
efforts through the United Nations Sierra Leone Trust
Fund, as proposed in the report.

 

The Secretary-General's report stresses, however, that
resources alone will not be not sufficient. In the final
analysis, the Government of Sierra Leone, the RUF and
other groups and all Sierra Leonean leaders bear a personal
responsibility for moving the process forward and they
should intensify their efforts to this end. In this regard, the
frequently negative approach taken by Mr. Sankoh towards
key elements of the peace process and the role entrusted to
the United Nations remains a cause for concern. Hostile
public remarks by the RUF leader about UNAMSIL and its
mandate have led to increasing tension between RUF
fighters and UNAMSIL troops on the ground. They also
give rise to serious doubts about the commitment of Mr.
Sankoh and the RUF to the faithful implementation of the
Lome Agreement. Mr. Sankoh should therefore dispel these
doubts in a tangible and unequivocal manner. His
participation in the high-level meeting held on 9 March is
a step in the right direction, but more needs to be done.

The continued ceasefire violations perpetrated against
civilians and peacekeepers is not acceptable. The persistent
obstruction of UNAMSIL patrols and deployments is also
unacceptable and must cease immediately. However,
UNAMSIL has made impressive progress, in the face of
what are considerable difficulties, to deploy to many
locations in Sierra Leone, as I have indicated, including to
areas where no deployment had previously taken place.

The efforts of regional leaders, in particular President
Konare of Mali, the current Chairman of ECOWAS, to help
keep the peace process on track are very much appreciated
and the United Nations hopes that these very helpful and
constructive efforts will continue in the future.

In conclusion, I would like to appeal to Council
members to, perhaps, agree to a modification of the
reporting cycle on UNAMSIL. Reports have so far been
submitted every 45 days; we believe that the Council may
wish to consider modifying that reporting cycle to a report
every 60 days, if that is agreeable to Council members.

