Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the delegations of China, Angola
and Senegal for their initiative to convene today's
meeting of the Security Council on the issue of piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. We
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
his contribution to today's debate.

In the current context, we welcome the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4, which calls
additional attention to this matter.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
about the ongoing expansion of pirate activities along
the west coast of Africa, which have spread far beyond
the territorial waters of the countries of the region.
Beginning in 2012, the International Maritime Bureau
has regularly recorded significant incidents in the
region. The lives and safety of people are increasingly
threatened, which is of particular concern. The
hostage-taking of seafarers is a relatively new and
alarming trend in the Gulf of Guinea. Russian nationals
have been among those targeted.

Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea
now clearly appear to be a highly functioning criminal
business that threatens maritime shipping and transit,
as well as the prosperity of coastal countries. According
to sources in the region, the aggregate economic losses
due to piracy come to billions of dollars. According
to available information, including reports of the
International Maritime Bureau, the majority of attacks
continue to be conducted not far from the coast,
sometimes at the very edge of the territorial waters
of coastal States. Resolving this issue will therefore
require above all the enhancement of coastal controls
by strengthening coast guards and improving their
technical equipment. There is also a need to create
conditions conducive to the effective legal prosecution
of the average pirate and captains of the piracy business.
It is important to step up efforts to identify and suppress
channels of financing for piracy.

We welcome the individual initiatives of countries
of the region, as well as their efforts in the framework
of regional organizations, to improve coordination
mechanisms for combatting piracy and armed robbery at
sea. We call for the speedy drafting and implementation
of a joint anti-piracy strategy that would promote the
more effective utilization of all existing resources. We
express the hope that the Gulf of Guinea Interregional
Coordination Centre, established in Cameroon in 2014,
will become fully functional in the coming months, as
foreseen in the decisions of the high-level Summit of
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, which took place in
Yaounde' in February.

In conclusion, I note that Russia has fruitful
experience in participating in international efforts to
combat piracy in the north-western sector of the Indian
Ocean. We are ready to share our insight and know-how
in that regard.

