Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): Thanks to the excellent initiative of the United
States of America, which presided over the Security
Council in the month of September 1997, we are gathered
here today to discuss the crucial question of conflicts in
Africa. We hope that our work here will proceed in a
constructive spirit and that, beyond good intentions, it will
lead to tangible results - in other words, that it will be
followed by deeds.

In our view, the Secretary-General's report is a sound
presentation of the problems involved in African conflicts
and proposes a certain number of solutions that deserve the
utmost attention. We agree with the diagnosis contained in
this report regarding the sources of conflict in Africa, both
endogenous and exogenous. Only an accurate vision of the
sources of conflict make it possible to envisage appropriate
action to deal with or prevent conflicts.

Given this twofold approach, and taking into account
that most conflicts break out in Africa because of economic
weakness, we wish to emphasize the measures that need to
be taken by institutions of the United Nations system in
support of the efforts made by African countries. The
proposal of the Secretary-General to examine ways and
means of developing an appropriate structural adjustment
programme is a step in that direction. In this context -
relieved, for example, of their debt burden, these countries
would have greater prospects of achieving both subregional
and regional economic integration, as envisaged in the
Abuja Treaty of June 1990.

The African countries have for almost a decade now
been undertaking courageous political reforms that bear
witness to their commitment to build more open societies
in which the exercise of political power rests on democratic
values. While armed conflicts are not exclusively an
African reality, it is nonetheless true that the conflicts now
taking place on the African continent warrant urgent
preventive measures. The Secretary-General's opinion that
to prevent conflict in Africa is to defend humanity itself
deserves to be embraced. This concern has always
inspired reflection and efforts on the part of African
States, leading to the establishment of the Organization of
African Unity's Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution.
The Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism is
already doing notable work. Its members constantly have
before them crises affecting the continent, and they
suggest solutions and initiate immediate action to
facilitate the political settlement of the disputes that arise.
The role played by the Mechanism in the prevention of
armed conflict through the early warning system that has
been adopted by member States deserves to be
highlighted.

Such mechanisms, which have already proven their
usefulness, need to be strengthened and provided with all
the support they need.

These measures are important, and we should all
support them, for even though most current conflicts are
taking place within national borders, their repercussions
can lead to disputes between States and can destabilize
entire subregions.

Whenever able, African leaders and African States
have spared no effort to resolve crisis situations before
they degenerated into violent armed conflict. It is in that
context that the President of the Gabonese Republic, His
Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo, has always made
available his good offices with respect to the settlement
of crises affecting African countries. Very recently, with
the invaluable assistance of other African Heads of State,
President Bongo agreed to mediate in the conflicts
affecting our sister countries, the Central African
Republic and the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville).

But as the Secretary-General rightly observes,
Africa, owing to the diversity of the sources of its
conflicts, cannot bear sole responsibility for the
emergence of those conflicts and cannot be called upon to
resolve them on its own.

The indispensable cooperation in the prevention of
conflicts and the maintenance of peace that must always
exist between the Security Council and subregional
organizations means that there can be no delegation of
responsibility in the form of United Nations
disengagement in Africa. That is why we continue to
reaffirm our preference for a true partnership for peace in

 

Africa between the United Nations and subregional
organizations on the one hand, and between the African
States and the international community on the other.

Whatever the solutions that are advocated, we can
never overemphasize the role that the Security Council
absolutely must play to its full capacity, as the
indispensable driving force in coordinating and reconciling
initiatives for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Only the Security Council can stand above the
rivalries and sensitivities that too often continue to dampen
the energies of the various parties contributing to the
needed mobilization of the international community in
helping to resolve and prevent tension in Africa and,
beyond Africa, in the world at large.

