The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

I want to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Chambas and Ambassador Chergui
for their briefings. I also thank Cote d'Ivoire for
co-hosting this meeting with us. Today's meeting is
a strong finish to that country's efforts over the past
two years to highlight challenges in West Africa.
Cote d'Ivoire has been a distinguished partner in this
Chamber, and its voice will be truly missed.

Let me also begin with words of condolence to our
friends in the Niger who will join the Security Council
in January. The deepest sympathies ofthe United States
are with the families of the more than 70 soldiers of
the Niger who were killed in the 10 December terrorist
attack. It is with that latest attack in mind that we
meet today to better understand how the international
community can prevent violent extremism in West
Africa and the Sahel.

In West Africa there has been an explosion in
violent extremism and intercommunal conflict as
jihadist cells attempt to take root. Those groups fuel
violence by exploiting local grievances, a lack of State
presence and existing intercommunal tensions. We have
seen a dramatic uptick in the tempo and complexity of
attacks against security forces in Mali and the Sahel,
especially by the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara.
Boko Haram and Islamic State's West African Province
also continue to terrorize the Lake Chad region.
Meanwhile, the protracted conflict in Libya threatens
to further destabilize an already-fragile Sahel.

That violence has most acutely affected civilians,
reducing food security and displacing more than
900,000 people. When communities feel that they must
compete for limited resources, or that they cannot rely
on their Governments to provide basic infrastructure,
economic opportunity and protection, they are more
likely to become aggrieved. Citizens must have the
confidence that their Governments can and will
protect them. If not, they will seek out other means of
protection, includingjoining violent or criminal groups.
Good governance and capable and accountable security
forces are critical to violence prevention.

What should we do to reverse that trend and create
the necessary conditions for peace and stability? The
solutions are many, although I would like to highlight
a few today.

First, a military response alone often fails to
address the root causes of violent conflict. Societal
resilience to the threat of violent extremism is born
from community-led efforts. Secondly, all communities
in West Africa and the Sahel should enjoy inclusive
representative governance. That includes access to
essential services and resources and accountability for
leaders who fail to meet those needs. Thirdly, in order
to maintain accountability, civil leaders at every level
must have an active role in upholding the social contract
between citizens and their Governments.

This is not just talk. The United States administers
numerous programmes to support those solutions. In
2017 and 2018 we provided more than $5.5 billion in
support of long-term stability and security in West
Africa. In the Lake Chad region we provided nearly
$470 million in assistance to address underlying
drivers of conflict and counter terrorist threats. Our
United States Young African Leaders Initiative invests
in capacity-building to equip young leaders with the
skills to build bridges in conflict and lead democratic
societies. Our Prosper Africa Initiative supports
trade, investments and livelihoods in urban and rural
areas. And the State Department's Sahel Development
Partnership offers a holistic approach to bolster
resilience and counter violent extremism.

Those are just a few examples of how the United
States partners with West Africa to foster a more
prosperous, democratic and stable region. But, in order
to combat regional violence and enhance stability, we
need greater commitment from Governments of the
region. The United States supports Nigeria's efforts to
end violence, facilitate the swift and voluntary return
of displaced communities and bring those responsible
for abuses to justice. But I must reiterate the need for
unhindered life-saving humanitarian access for relief
organizations to serve the people of Nigeria, including
the areas most affected by Boko Haram.

We look forward to the advancement of cornerstone
political objectives such as the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process. But we remain
concerned that the Government of Mali and the signatory
armed groups have made little progress implementing
the Agreement. The United States is optimistic about
our collective ability to make progress in this vital
region. We believe that, working together both in the
Council and with Governments of the region, there is
no limit to the potential of West Africa and its people
that can be unleashed.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I will now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

