I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Ms. Irena Hasic, the representative of the non-governmental organization Youth Initiative for Human Rights, for their presentations. [also welcome the presence at this meeting of the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and the European Union. France fully aligns with the statement that the representative of the European Union (EU) delegation will deliver. The challenges in Bosnia and Herzegovina remain significant, as the High Representative has explained. However, I note several positive developments that show that cooperation and unity can prevail. First of all, I would like to welcome the response of the leaders and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The swift reaction of the authorities at all levels and the good coordination among all actors made it possible to keep the spread under control despite the political crisis. The European Union has also demonstrated its solidarity by delivering assistance in order to respond to the most urgent medical needs and to ensure economic recovery, supplemented by bilateral aid from its member States. Secondly, the formation of the Council of Ministers at the level of the central State last December was a positive development that had long been awaited since the general elections of 2018. However, we regret the decision to block the normal functioning of the State-level institutions that was taken in mid-February following a decision of the Constitutional Court. We call on all stakeholders to respect the rulings of the Constitutional Court and to enable the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to function normally as soon as possible. The 2020 budget must also be adopted in order to enable the State to function. In addition, we call for the formation of the Federation entity Government and the holding of local elections in Mostar. Thirdly, I wish to reaffirm France's conviction regarding the European perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Western Balkans. The European Union remains fully committed to this issue, as demonstrated by the organization today of a leaders' video-teleconference of the EU and the six Western Balkan countries. We welcome the agreement reached last week among the three members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the implementation of the European Commission's recommendations regarding the rule of law and democratic functioning in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that that agreement will pave the way for the resumption of the normal functioning of State-level institutions. Reforms in the economic and social fields, the rule of law, democratic functioning and human rights are more necessary than ever for the development of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for European rapprochement. I also recall the important contribution to the stability of the country by the European Union-led military Operation Althea, mandated by the Security Council. Finally, France continues to strongly condemn the glorification of war crimes and criminals, whatever their community of origin. National and international justice has done a remarkable job in prosecuting and convicting those responsible for atrocities committed during the conflict. It is unacceptable to challenge judicial decisions. I am thinking in particular of the genocide in Srebrenica as we commemorate its twenty-fifth anniversary this summer. Transitional justice and reconciliation processes remain the only solid foundation for the future of the country. In that regard, I fully concur with what the German Ambassador said about the French-German reconciliation, which can be a source of inspiration.
