Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I wish to refer the
Council to the draft resolution before it on Western
Sahara.

My delegation wishes to place on record that,
with regard to the reference in the fifth preambular
paragraph to the Council "welcoming serious and
credible Moroccan efforts", our understanding is that
the word "credible" does not imply that the plan
presented by the Polisario Front - which is based on
previous Security Council resolutions and the Charter
of the United Nations - is therefore less credible. We
regret that this word managed to stay in the draft
resolution, because we believe that it conveys an
unintended meaning: that one plan is more worthy than
the other.

We also wish to place on record our view that the
words "to move the process forward" are also
unfortunate, in that they prejudge the situation that
may be ahead of us. We are delighted that both
Morocco and the Polisario Front have expressed their
interest to meet and resolve the last colonial issue on
the African continent. We look forward to the meetings
with the Secretary-General and hope that they will
produce results that will indeed bring about change for
the people of Western Sahara.

Lastly, we regret that operative paragraph 2
simply states "Calls upon the parties". That, in our
View, amends paragraph 47 of the report of the
Secretary-General, which reads in part:

"I recommend that the Security Council call
upon the parties, Morocco and the Frente
Polisario, to enter into negotiations without
preconditions, with a view to achieving a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
that will provide for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara."

We regret also that the Group of Friends, which
produced this draft resolution, gave us less than 24
hours to decide on it. This is what sometimes causes
the Council not to be viewed as more credible: some of
us, who are not in these groups, are never given
enough time to decide on such issues. We hope that in
the future, those drafting resolutions will make room
for the rest of us to fully participate. All we want is for
the people of Morocco and the people of Western
Sahara to come together and resolve their problems so
07-32348
that the people of Western Sahara will one day exercise
their right to self-determination.

We will support this draft resolution -
reluctantly so - because we do not want to stand in
the way of creating a platform whereby the Moroccan
people and the people of Western Sahara will together
have an opportunity to negotiate among themselves.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
07-32348

