Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Madam President, on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for August.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to commend the choice of the
subject for the first Council debate of this month.
Synergy between international, regional and subregional
organizations is a prerequisite for the success of peace
and security efforts. That issue has been discussed
before and should be revisited anew to address different
aspects and strengthen the cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations.

The Security Council has the primary jurisdiction
over matters relating to international peace and security.
However, full regional, subregional and national
participation in Security Council peace and security
efforts is necessary in order to ensure a sufficient level
of ownership and familiarity for regional parties to
every conflict. The engagement of the relevant regional
organizations is crucial for the success ofUnited Nations
peace efforts at the various stages of responding to a
conflict, including early warning, conflict prevention,
mediation and post-conflict peacebuilding.

In the Middle East, cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States is indispensable.
The establishment of the mission of the Joint Special
Representative for Syria is just one example of the
potential cooperation between the two organizations.
Such cooperation should extend to conflict prevention
and resolution. It can also help in finding lasting
solutions to the two major chronic problems of the
region that have had a negative impact on regional
and international peace and security: the Palestinian
question and the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
Middle East.

The United Nations can benefit from the regional
convening power and consensus-building of both the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. For that to happen, the Security Council
should be more responsive to the regional mechanisms.
Consultations should take place on a more regular basis,
and consultations should have concrete outcomes.

A shared role between the United Nations and
regional organizations for peacekeeping is both
desirable and achievable. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is a case in
point. It stands out as the most prominent example of
cooperation between the United Nations and a regional
organization in the field of peacekeeping. However,
hybrid peacekeeping operations continue to be the
exception, not the rule. In Africa, we should have
more hybrid operations with a predominantly African
character.

It is necessary to expand African capacity to meet
peace and security challenges. That could be achieved
through more streamlining and coordination between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. Consolidating and securing
financial resources is another obstacle that should be
overcome. It is worth noting that the 2008 Prodi panel
report (S/2008/813) on African Union/United Nations
cooperation recommended a multi-donor trust fund
to support peacekeeping in Africa, based on African
ownership. After five years, that recommendation has
yet to be implemented.

Finally, international peace and security originate
in regional peace and security. The efforts of the
United Nations will not be successful without the direct
support of regional stakeholders and the organizations
that represent them.

