Mr. Savua (Fiji): My delegation congratulates
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this
month.

Fiji agrees that actions that could contribute to
implementing the Secretary-General's recommendations
on ways and means to deal with the question of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons is
primarily a national responsibility. However, it is not
easy to remain constantly engaged without regional
and international support through the establishment of
effective partnerships, networking and information-
sharing. In that regard, we gratefully acknowledge the
continued valuable contributions to our region by
Australia, New Zealand, Japan, the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament, and
others too many to mention.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Secretariat for the comprehensive and succinct
report contained in document S/2006/109 of 17
February 2006. We note the adoption of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. For small countries
like Fiji, with small weapons stockpiles, it is
encouraging to see come into existence an Instrument
that will facilitate implementation of our stringent gun
laws and tight control of ammunition supply and
demand.

As a United Nations peacekeeping troop
contributor for the past 28 years, we understand only
too well the difficulties associated with trying to
maintain peace in areas with porous borders and acting
as easy conduits to the movement of weapons and
combatants. We are very much encouraged by the
recent emphasis by the Security Council on preventing
the cross-border movement of arms and combatants,
implementing the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, and monitoring arms embargoes.
We look forward to participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations in areas of relative peace
where these international instruments are implemented
and the areas of emphasis of the Security Council
diligently observed. However, in the peacekeeping
areas of the Sudan, Liberia, Kosovo, Baghdad, Basra
and Erbil, this initiative by the Security Council has to
be given time for hope to become truly ingrained.

These instruments will assist nations emerging
from conflicts to stabilize their economies and security
situations, and help them in making a significant
contribution to improving the lot of women, children
and the helpless, who often look at life with no hope
that their situation will change, because no one appears
to care. The Security Council, by its actions, leads the
international community in providing such hope and to
change the status quo.

The pervasive and destructive effect of the
uncontrolled and illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons on the natural resources of nations, as
well as the thriving trade in conflict diamonds, stymies
the development of countries, perpetuates the struggle
of the poor and multiplies the ill-effects of pandemics.
The implementation of adopted international
conventions and the insistence that nations conform
and take appropriate actions to strengthen their efforts
will have the added impetus of strengthening the
collective responsibility to act.

The Security Council's holistic approach to
action and the various resolutions and decisions that it
has adopted represent a welcome move in the right
direction to ensure that something is done. Resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security is one
such resolution. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations included in its report, adopted last Friday, a
paragraph that captures the sentiments expressed in the
resolution by requesting the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to develop a gender-training
strategy and to ensure the input of gender expertise in
the Integrated Training Service to coordinate that effort.

The Special Committee has in essence agreed to
implement the first phase of the item on women and
peace and security since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) five years ago.

My delegation welcomes the strong initiatives by
the Council to promote implementation on all issues
that have been subject to resolutions, conventions and
regional action plans. We thank the Council for all this
and the Secretary-General for monitoring the activities
and ensuring that they receive equal attention.

