Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as the Republic of
Moldova and Armenia align themselves with this
statement.
Let me begin by expressing our appreciation for
having been invited to participate in today's meeting
on behalf of the European Union. I would like to thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing.

The European Union-led military force (EUFOR)
in Chad and the Central African Republic was a
success story and proof of exemplary cooperation
between the European Union (EU) and the United
Nations, from the launching of the operation to its
successful handover on 15 March 2009. The European
Union provided a bridging military arrangement in the
region, pending the deployment of a United Nations
force, for a period of one year.

It is my honour to briefly introduce the report of
the European Union requested under Security Council
resolution 1778 (2007) of 25 September 2007. This is
the second of the two reports on the operations and on
the fulfilment of the EUFOR mandate requested by the
Security Council, and covers the final six-month period
from its full operating capability on 15 September
2008 to the mandate handover to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) on 15 March 2009. As Council members
will remember, the first report was delivered by
Secretary-General/High Representative Javier Solana
on 24 September 2008.

Throughout its mandate, EUFOR made a tangible
contribution towards protecting civilians in danger and,
in particular, refugees and displaced persons who have
been profoundly affected by the crisis in the region.
During the reporting period, it conducted over 2300
short-range patrols in the areas of the main internally
displaced persons sites and refugee camps, and over
260 long-range patrols in order to affirm its presence in
other areas as well. EUFOR activities also included
active engagement with humanitarian actors. The force
integrated human rights issues and the protection of
women and children in armed conflicts into its conduct
of the operation, consistent with relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Beyond its mandate, EUFOR provided medical
care for the local population. It also facilitated the
removal of unexploded ordnance devices, thus
contributing to the safety of the local population, and
extracted humanitarian non-governmental organization
(NGO) personnel from Ouandjia in the Central African
Republic in November 2008. Throughout its mandate,
EUFOR acted in an impartial, neutral and independent
manner and was recognized as such by all actors.
EUFOR's engagement with MINURCAT was
highly significant from the beginning of the operation
and was further intensified as the handover
approached. EUFOR assisted MINURCAT with
facilitation and the development of capabilities to train
and deploy the United Nations-trained Chadian
Detachement inte'gre' de securite officers. EUFOR
established infrastructure, including six spacious and
fully fledged military compounds in theatre, that were
transferred to Chad and onwards to MINURCAT at the
end of its mandate, thus setting the ground for the
deployment of the United Nations follow-on force.

EUFOR, EU members and other EUFOR troop-
contributing countries contributed in many other ways
to the transfer of authority to MINURCAT that took
place on 15 March 2009, including through early
planning, support to MINURCAT and the re-hatting of
an important part of the EUFOR contingents, which
made up most of MINURCAT's strength at the date of
the transfer of authority.

The European Union welcomes the holding of the
inclusive political dialogue in the Central African
Republic and stresses the need to keep this new
momentum. The EU is concerned about the recent
spate of violence in the North of the country. All
groups concerned must refrain from the use of
violence. In Chad, where the fragile situation also
contributed to slowing down progress on the overall
political agenda, the EU continues to actively
encourage the political process in the framework of the
13 August 2007 agreement in the context of
preparations for the legislative elections.

The EU also accords great importance to the
amelioration of relations between the Sudan and Chad
in order to reduce tensions in the region and to
contribute to a solution to the conflicts. In that regard,
we hope that the next meeting of the Dakar Contact
Group will take place shortly. The EU is concerned that
the expulsion of a number of humanitarian
organizations from Darfur and the subsequent reduced
capacity to deliver humanitarian aid could raise the
prospect of a large number of new refugees crossing
the border into Chad.

The European Union would like to welcome the
close cooperation with the United Nations at the
Secretariat and field levels throughout the mandate of
the European operation. In order to preserve the
positive outcomes of EUFOR, the European Union
would like to encourage the Secretariat and new troop-
contributing countries to sustain their efforts towards a
quick achievement of MINURCAT's full operational
capability.

I would like to assure the Council that the
European Union will remain active at the political and
diplomatic level in Chad and in the Central African
Republic. Although EUFOR's mandate has formally
ended, the European Union will remain an active
player in the region. Approximately 2,000 of the
soldiers who participated in the European operation
now serve under the MINURCAT banner, further
underlining European support to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

