The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
endorsement of and full support for the United
Nations action plan for Libya, reiterates its call
on all Libyans to work together in a spirit of
compromise in the inclusive political process
under the leadership of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ghassan Salame, and
underscores the importance of the role of the
United Nations in facilitating a Libyan-led political
solution to the challenges facing Libya.

"The Security Council welcomes all efforts to
strengthen an inclusive political dialogue among
all Libyans, including important efforts by Libya's
neighbours, international partners and regional
organizations within the framework of the Libyan
Political Agreement, endorsed by resolution 2259
(2015), and supports the Secretary-General's
call to consolidate the various initiatives under
the leadership of the United Nations. The Libyan
Political Agreement remains the only viable
framework to end the Libyan political crisis, and its
implementation remains key to holding elections
and finalizing the political transition.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the humanitarian situation in Libya, especially
in Derna, calls on all parties to exercise restraint,
reiterates that all parties must comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law
regarding respecting and protecting civilians, and
underlines the importance of safe and unimpeded
access of humanitarian personnel to civilians.

"The Security Council bears in mind that the
current political and security situation in Libya
is not sustainable and recalls the resounding
call of all Libyans for credible, inclusive and
peaceful elections in order to achieve a united and
stable Libya.

"The Security Council takes note of the call
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on 21 May for elections to be held in Libya
as soon as possible, provided the proper conditions
are in place. In this spirit, the Security Council
welcomes the ongoing technical preparations by
the Government of National Accord and Libyan
institutions, including the High National Elections
Commission, for national elections, including
the successful first round of voter registration.
The Security Council calls upon all Member
States to urge all Libyans to work constructively
to ensure that the required technical, legislative,
political and security conditions are in place for
national elections, including a new round of voter
registration, appropriate funding and security
arrangements and required electoral legislation,
as well as to promote the meaningful and equal
participation and representation of women in the
political process, including in the election process.

"The Security Council calls on all Libyans
to improve the atmosphere for national elections
by all means possible, including by working
constructively towards the unification of Libya's
military and economic institutions; unified and
strengthened national security forces, under
civilian Government authority; and the unification
of the Libyan Central Bank. The Security Council
recalls the need for Member States to cease support
to and official contact with parallel institutions that
claim to be the legitimate authority but are outside
of the Libyan Political Agreement, as stipulated
by it.

"The Security Council welcomes the success
of the first phase of the national conference process
launched by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General with the organization of 42
meetings in 27 cities and towns in Libya.

"The Security Council welcomes the
organization in a peaceful and organized process
of the first municipal council elections since 2015
in the city of Zawiya, on 12 May 2018, which mark
the first of a series of municipal polls that will take
place across the entire country.

"The Security Council welcomes the momentum
generated by the international conference on Libya
hosted on 29 May in Paris by President Emmanuel
Macron under the auspices of the United Nations,
in the presence of Faiez Serraj, President of
the Presidency Council of Libya; Aguila Saleh,
President of the House of Representatives; Khaled
Al-Meshri, President of the High State Council;
General Khalifa Haftar, Commander of the
Libyan National Army; and representatives of the
international community.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitment of these parties, as set out in the
Paris declaration, to work constructively with the
United Nations to organize credible and peaceful
parliamentary and Presidential elections, and to
respect the results of these elections.

"The Security Council recognizes the key role
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in consulting with Libyan parties to set the
constitutional basis for elections and to adopt the
necessary electoral laws.

"The Security Council takes note of Libyan
leaders' commitments to advancing these important
steps within the timeframe set out in the Paris
declaration and encourages all Libyans to work
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to implement them.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
recognition of these parties of the importance of
developing a constitutional basis for elections and
reaffirms its support for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General as he consults with the
Libyan authorities on a proposal and timeline for
adopting the constitution.

"The Security Council encourages all Member
States to fully support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and calls
on Member States, in particular those in the region,
to continue to urge all parties in Libya to engage
constructively with the United Nations.

"The Security Council notes the commitment of
the participants in the Paris conference to organizing
an inclusive political conference to follow up on the
implementation of the Paris declaration, under the
auspices of the United Nations, and with respect
for the timeframe and modalities determined by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council requests that the
Secretary-General report as necessary, following
consultations with the Libyan authorities, on support
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya for
the next phases leading to national elections."

This statement Will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2018/11.

The meeting rose at10.15 a.m.
