Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
very pertinent updates today. We are happy about
these encouraging updates, including on the significant
decrease in the number of security incidents disclosed
by the Special Envoy, particularly concerning the
prospects for the continuation of the peace talks. They
reignite hopes that had been dimmed for several months.

In responding to the briefings, Indonesia would
like to underscore three points. First, we welcome the
Jeddah agreement between the Government of Yemen
and the Southern Transitional Council, facilitated by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We thank the Kingdom
for its excellent work in that regard.

Some seem to believe that the timeline and objectives
of the Riyadh agreement are ambitious, but for the
people of Yemen who have suffered so much for so long,
an ambitious timeline and objectives are necessary. The
challenge is implementation. Indonesia strongly hopes
that the agreement will be implemented without delay,
as a building block towards a national-level political
settlement. As my delegation has repeatedly stated,
the only way to reverse the humanitarian crisis and
ease the suffering of the Yemeni people is through a
comprehensive political settlement.

That brings me to my second point. We strongly
support the efforts of the Special Envoy to resume talks
at the earliest possible moment. It is now almost a full
year since the Stockholm Agreement was reached.
While the Agreement has not been fully implemented,
it is evident that it has brought hope to Yemenis. There
is no doubt that there would have been no improvement
in the situation in Al-Hudaydah without the Agreement.

Building on the gains of the Stockholm and Riyadh
Agreements, the intra-Yemeni political process should
be resumed, under United Nations facilitation, with
the participation of all legitimate parties concerned,
including women and youth. It is critical that Yemenis
own the process and the outcome; accordingly, we
support a Yemeni-led process facilitated by the United
Nations. It is also crucial that whatever the result, it be
well understood by the parties and properly implemented
and that it trickle down to the situation on the ground.
Regional key countries play a pivotal role in supporting
the peace process. A nationwide ceasefire and an end
to the conflict should be the ultimate objectives for all.

Thirdly, further progress is required in
implementing the Stockholm Agreement, in parallel
with a resumption of the political process. That
process should include the swapping of prisoner and
dialogue on Taiz. We also expect further progress
in Al-Hudaydah, the maintenance of the ceasefire
and the demilitarization of the area around the ports.
Al-Hudaydah is crucial, not only because it is key to
humanitarian assistance, but also because it is a source
of revenue for the Yemeni people. Implementation must
not be derailed.

Lastly, my delegation calls on Ansar Allah
authorities to protect and grant unhindered access to all
humanitarian workers operating on the ground as they
carry out their work to deliver humanitarian assistance.

As this is the penultimate briefing on Yemen this
year, Indonesia calls on everyone to make a big push in
the month ahead to boost hope for all Yemenis as the
year comes to a close.

