Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Let me start with our
thanks to you personally, Mr. President, and to the
members of the Security Council for today's strong
statement on the situation in Debaltseve. I will speak
on that issue later.

We are grateful to the members of the Security
Council for their continued support of the Minsk
process since the first agreements on a peaceful
settlement were adopted, on 5 and 19 September.
Ukraine welcomes the Council's support for the recent
12 February agreements, which do not substitute for
but, rather, reinforce those adopted last Semptember.

The Russian side quite obviously positions itself
as a devoted proponent of the peace process and a
guarantor of the effective implementation of the Minsk
agreements. It even proposed resolution 2203 (2015),
which has just been adopted. Yet that is all on paper;
what happens in reality is quite the opposite.

Ukraine has demonstrated a responsible attitude to
fulfilling the international obligations it has undertaken.
The arrangement on ensuring the ceasefire regime
starting 15 February has been fulfilled as stipulated in
the documents adopted in Minsk and in the Normandy
format with the participation of the Presidents of
Ukraine, France and Russia and the Chancellor of
Germany. Withdrawing heavy weaponry after ensuring
an unconditional, comprehensive and sustainable
ceasefire - with the assistance and monitoring of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the support of the trilateral contact
group - was to be the next step.

Unfortunately, despite hopes for a responsible
position on the part of all the parties that adopted the
12 February declaration in support of the package of
measures on the fulfilment ofthe Minsk agreements and
the signatories to that set of measures - including the
Russian Federation and the so-called Donetsk People's
Republic and Luhansk People's Republic - there has
been a failure to comply with the agreements, and the
hope for peace has virtually been ruined. Instead, at the
moment there are attempts to return everyone to war
and an escalation of the situation.

Yesterday, after telephone negotiations with the
President of Russia, the Chancellor of Germany and
the President of France, there was an agreement to hold
negotiations at the level of the representatives of the
general staff of the armed forces of Ukraine, the general
staff of the armed forces of the Russian Federation and
representatives of Luhansk and Donetsk. Negotiations
were held this morning via video teleconference. While
restoring the access of the OSCE mission to Debaltseve
was to be the outcome of the negotiations, the Russian
party blocked the opportunity. Militants in control of
Debaltseve have declared the continuation of offensive
operations, thereby flagrantly violating all of the
previous arrangements and the entire package of the
Minsk agreements.

From midnight on 15 February until this morning,
Ukrainian positions were shelled more than 160
times - not with small arms, but with mortars, artillery
systems, rocket systems and tanks. Eleven servicemen
were killed and 36 wounded as a result of those attacks
by the terrorists. Yet the Ukrainian military has kept its
weapons silent, unless it was under direct attack.

On the very first day ofthe ceasefire, the Russian side
illegally brought the fourteenth so-called humanitarian
convoy into the east of Ukraine. As before, that was
done without the consent of the Ukrainian side and
without activating the international mechanism that the
12 February arrangements clearly envisaged.

I have not mentioned that the number of trucks, as
well as their contents, does not match what was declared
in the documents. I think it will not be a surprise to any
member of the Council to hear that heavy weapons and
equipment continue to be shipped to the east okaraine.
Today at least 12 armoured vehicles and 54 trucks with
ammunition broke into Ukraine through the Izvaryne
border checkpoint, which the Ukrainian Government
currently does not control.

The situation in Debaltseve is incredibly tense.
Again with the support of Russian forces and heavy
weapons, the militants are incessantly and violently
attacking Ukrainian positions in and around the town.
Taking advantage of the situation of the Ukrainian
military refraining from taking action, in line with
the ceasefire, the militants and Russian forces have
done their best to surround the town. The militants'
ringleader blatantly threatened to kill every defender
of Debaltseve unless they laid down their weapons.
He also threatened to move westward and seize the
city of Kharkiv. Civilians are also falling victim to the
indiscriminate shelling of the town by the terrorists.

The cruel assaults on Debaltseve and many other
locations essentially make a mockery of the ceasefire
concept and undermine the very essence of the peace
process. Against that backdrop, we call on the countries
participating in the Minsk negotiations - Germany,
France and Russia - to make every possible effort to
ensure the fulfilment of the Minsk plan based on the
5 September Minsk protocol, the Minsk memorandum
of 19 September and the documents adopted on
12 February in Minsk.

We call on the countries Members of the United
Nations to express a decisive protest against the
blocking of the work of the OSCE special monitoring
mission. We also call on the permanent members of
the Security Council to prevent further violation of the
fundamental principles and rules of the United Nations
and avert the unleashing of full-scale warfare in the
very centre of Europe.

To become a real contributor to a peaceful settlement
of the conflict, the Russian Federation needs to
withdraw all of its armed forces from the territory of
Ukraine and to secure the Russian-Ukrainian border, as
well as to force Russian-backed separatists to fulfil the
provisions of the Minsk agreements.

The chance for peace must be used. The unity of
the entire civilized world in solidarity with Ukraine
gives hope for the restoration of peace.

