Mr. Zenna (Ethiopia): At the outset, let me
commend you, Mr. President, for arranging this
meeting. Ethiopia, as a country that co-sponsored the
first resolution as a member of the Security Council,
deeply regrets that 12 years had to pass without
compliance, and the Government of Iraq still chose not
to take the final opportunity afforded to it by resolution
1441 (2002). The onus to avoid war has always been
on the Iraqi regime. And the regime failed to avert war.

Ethiopia firmly believes in the collective security
envisaged by the Charter. As stated by the Secretary-
General before this Council yesterday, "The Council,
which have now had Iraq on its agenda for 12 long
years, must rediscover its unity of purpose". The
Council's unity of purpose needs to be restored and
further strengthened.

Now is the time to look forward, not backwards.
There is a big humanitarian challenge ahead of us. Now
is the time for the Council to look into the
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people, during and
after the current crisis.

We believe the Council should continue to play a
central role in that regard. As such, it is imperative for
the Council to draw up a mechanism that will allow for
the provision of immediate humanitarian assistance to
the needy. It should also consider long-term
rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes. As
already requested, the Council should act with urgency
to resume the oil for food programme by giving the
required legislative mandate to the Secretary-General
and by adopting the draft humanitarian resolution
before it.

We also support the call of the Secretary-General
for both sides to adhere to their obligations under
international humanitarian laws governing the conduct
of war, including the treatment of prisoners of war.

In conclusion, Ethiopia appeals to the members of
the Security Council, particularly to the five permanent
members, to demonstrate leadership in carrying out the
solemn duty entrusted to them by the United Nations
Charter.

