Ms. DiCarlo: We meet today in the wake of yet
another series of violent escalations that threatened
to plunge Gaza into war. Over the past several weeks,
Special Coordinator Mladenov has led unprecedented
United Nations efforts with the Government of Egypt
and other regional and international partners to prevent
another devastating outbreak of hostilities, respond
to the most urgent humanitarian needs and support
intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

The recurring violence highlights the urgency of
that initiative. In several rounds of hostilities throughout
the reporting period, Palestinian militants fired some
195 rockets and mortars towards Israel. On 7 August,
one Grad rocket reportedly landed in an open field near
the city of Beersheba - the furthest that a projectile
has been fired since the 2014 hostilities.

Israel targeted sites in the Gaza Strip on at least
125 occasions. Eight Palestinians, including a pregnant
woman and her l8-month-old baby, were killed, while
56 Palestinians and 28 Israeli civilians were injured.
Such exchanges, which have escalated in recent months,
underline the fragility of the interim periods of calm
and the need for longer-term solutions.

In recent weeks, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
also deteriorated further due, in part, to additional
restrictions that Israel imposed on the movement of
goods through the Kerem Shalom crossing. That was
in reaction to the launching of incendiary kites and
balloons from Gaza, which have burned thousands of
acres of Israeli fields, forests and agricultural land.

On 15 August, Israel fully reopened the Kerem
Shalom crossing and expanded the fishing zone to
nine nautical miles. The Secretary-General welcomed
the decision as having a significant impact on the
struggling Gaza economy and on efforts to de-escalate
the situation. However, on 19 August, Israel closed the
Erez pedestrian crossing to the residents of Gaza and
the West Bank, except for humanitarian cases, citing
continued Violent incidents at the fence.

As we work towards the full lifting of the closures
on Gaza, in line with resolution 1860 (2009), I call on all
parties to ensure that the urgently needed humanitarian
supplies reach the Gaza Strip. Such supplies should not
be held hostage to political and security developments.

I also reiterate the previous calls of the Special
Coordinator to Hamas to provide full information on
the Israeli nationals who are being held in Gaza, as
required by international humanitarian law. The United
Nations is taking steps to increase its capacity on the
ground to better support energy, water, health and job-
creation projects endorsed by the Palestinian Authority
and the international community. I am pleased to note
that many donors and international organizations are
looking into increasing their allocations for Palestine.
That is the appropriate response to Gaza's crumbling
infrastructure and collapsing economy. In particular,
I am encouraged by the World Bank's increased
$90-million allocation for the West Bank and Gaza,
including for some 4,400 short-term employment
opportunities. The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) is also accelerating its emergency
economic assistance programme with support from
several donors. Both efforts focus on employment for
women and young people as a priority. The UNDP
programme aims to have 40 per cent ofthe resultingjob
placements for women - a critical step given that the
unemployment rate for Palestinian women continued to
be significantly higher than for men, exceeding 78 per
cent in Gaza in the second quarter of 2018.

That follows the launch in May of the Decent Work
for Women programme - a joint Italian, UN-Women
and International Labour Organization initiative
to promote equal and decent work opportunities
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory - as well
as the launch last April of a UN-Women project, funded
by Japan, to support women in Gaza. Improving the
socioeconomic status of Palestinian women is essential
to peace and stability, as women remain more vulnerable
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory. Those
are also important efforts to strengthen women's role in
preventing conflict, in line with the Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security.

However, I am deeply concerned that funding
for United Nations emergency fuel, which sustains
some 250 critical facilities in Gaza, has now run out.
Approximately $4.5 million is urgently required to
ensure a minimum level of essential services up to
the end of the year. Also of concern is a dangerously
short supply of essential medicines, with 40 per cent of
essential drugs completely depleted.

The United Nations is working with the
Governments of Israel and Palestine on reviewing
the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism to improve its
functionality, transparency and predictability. The
Palestinian Authority has also made great efforts to
reassert its engagement in support of Gaza. I look
forward to its full and active participation in that regard.
I also welcome Egypt's continued efforts to facilitate
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, critical to advancing
not only Gaza's humanitarian and development
objectives but also Palestinian national aspirations. I
reiterate the Secretary-General's call on all parties to
support those efforts.

We have been regularly updating the Security
Council and its members on the unprecedented
financial challenge that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) faces this year. The Secretary-General has
warned that failing to address UNRWA's remaining
$217 million funding shortfall will have serious
humanitarian and development consequences, as well
as implications for regional stability. I thank Member
States that have taken steps to assist in closing the
shortfall and call on others to increase their support
to UNRWA. It is imperative to maintain a strong
collective mobilization.

Turning to the broader situation, violent incidents
continue to take place throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory and Israel. In Gaza, 13 Palestinians
were killed by Israeli security forces during continued
protests near the perimeter fence, including one medical
worker and four children. Some 1,000 Palestinians and
one Israeli soldier were also injured. On 21 August,
Israel's Military Advocate General announced that
military police investigations would be opened into the
deaths of two Palestinians killed during protests near
the fence in recent months. While Israel has a duty to
protect its citizens, it must exercise maximum restraint
in the use oflive fire and refrain from using lethal force,
except as a last resort. I further call on Hamas to avoid
violence at the fence and refrain from putting children
in harm's way. Children should never be targeted or
instrumentalized in any way.

On 26 July in the West Bank settlement of Adam,
a 17-year-old Palestinian stabbed an Israeli civilian to
death and injured two others. He was shot and killed by
one of the victims. It is deplorable that Hamas and others
once again chose to glorify that attack. After a period
of relative calm in Jerusalem, on 27 July, the one-year
anniversary of the resolution of last year's unrest at the
Holy Esplanade, clashes erupted at the site between
Palestinians and the Israeli security forces, during
which 10 Palestinians and four Israeli police officers
were injured. On 17 August, an Israeli-Arab man was
shot dead by Israeli security forces in Jerusalem's Old
City, after attempting to stab them. Following both
incidents, Israeli security forces closed the entrances
to the compound for a few hours before restoring full
access. With the celebration of Bid Al-Adha this week
and the Jewish holidays approaching, I urge all to do
their part to avoid provocations at Jerusalem's holy
sites. The Special Coordinator conducted a series of
meetings with Christian, Jewish and Muslim religious
leaders in Jerusalem to discuss the importance of
maintaining calm, rejecting violence and ensuring
the status quo is preserved at the holy sites. He will
continue his engagement with all stakeholders.

On 14 August, Israeli authorities announced they
would publish a tender for 603 units in the Ramat
Shlomo settlement in East Jerusalem - the first
such announcement since 2016. In Area C, a tender
for 511 housing units was published and construction
based on previously approved plans continued. On
1 August, the Israeli Civil Administration confirmed
its intention to expand the municipal boundaries of
the Amichai settlement to include the outpost of Adei
Ad. If implemented, it would result in the first outpost
legalization under Israeli law since 2014. I reiterate the
long-standing position of the United Nations that all
settlement activities are illegal under international law
and an obstacle to peace.

Israeli authorities demolished 18 Palestinian-
owned structures in Area C and East Jerusalem for lack
of building permits, which are nearly impossible for
Palestinians to obtain. As a result, eight Palestinians
were displaced, including six children. On 1 August,
Israel's High Court of Justice indicated that it had not

found sufficient reason to prevent the demolition of the
Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar. It instructed the
State to present an alternative relocation site, on which
the parties have not agreed. Demolition is on hold while
the Court considers the case. I reiterate United Nations
calls on Israel to cease the demolition of Palestinian
property and efforts to relocate Bedouin communities
in the occupied West Bank. Such actions are contrary to
international law and undermine the two-State solution.

I would like to conclude by highlighting the
efforts of ordinary women and men - Israeli and
Palestinian - who overcome cynicism and despair
by taking tangible steps to promote tolerance and
forge a shared future. They include volunteers who
drive Palestinian patients to medical appointments
in Israel; youth leaders who are finding creative
ways to build a shared future among Jerusalem's
communities; scientists working together to solve
regional environmental challenges and Palestinian
and Israeli women mobilizing constituencies for peace
and promoting the participation of women in the
political process, in line with resolution 1325 (2000).
As outlined in the 2016 Middle East Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex), such initiatives provide a crucial
foundation for broader peace efforts. I invite Member
States to continue to generously support them. Even
as the international community focuses on resolving
the current crisis in Gaza and returning a legitimate
Palestinian Government to the Gaza Strip, the
perseverance of those individuals reminds of the need to
review our efforts in the context of our broader goal to
end the Israeli occupation and achieve a future with two
States living side by side in peace, security and dignity,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and
previous agreements.

