Mr. Akram (Pakistan): My delegation would like
to join others in expressing our appreciation to
Mr. James Morris for his excellent and comprehensive
briefing. We are aware of the outstanding work that the
World Food Programme has performed in so many
crises - including in a neighbouring country,
Afghanistan - and we have a very high regard for that
organization.

In the context of the presentation that we heard
this afternoon, the central issue for us to explore is the
specific link between the food crisis in Africa and the
threat to peace and security. I would be very interested
to know whether Mr. Morris has any thoughts about
exactly how that relationship exists - whether it exists
in a negative way and possibly could be established in
a positive way.

Mr. Morris has said that our goal is not to
politicize food aid but to depoliticize it - in
Zimbabwe, for example - and that food should be
available to all on the basis of humanitarian principles.
I think that is absolutely correct as far as it goes. But,
for example, could we use the provision of food
assistance - food security - as an incentive for
conflict resolution in some of the crises faced in Africa
and perhaps elsewhere? Without politicizing and
without depriving people of humanitarian needs, could
the provision not only of food aid but also of
agricultural assistance, development and technical
support be utilized as elements of conflict resolution in
Africa and elsewhere?

Secondly, I should like to pose perhaps a more
immediate question to Mr. Morris. There is a looming
drought and a conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea in
the Horn of Africa. How does he think the drought has
exacerbated the conflict or has acted to the contrary? I
believe that the food aid received by Ethiopia is
perhaps more generous than that received by Eritrea.
Are there any reasons for that, and, if so, are they
related to the conflict that is under way? Those are
some thoughts that arise from the briefing.

Finally, I should like to say that I support the
proposal of my colleague Ambassador Valdes that the
Security Council receive a similar briefing with regard
to the situation in Iraq.

