Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
briefing and to pay tribute to her teams on the ground.
I would also like to add our voice to those thanking
Nujeen Mustapha for such an amazing and compelling
briefing, for telling her story and for sharing it with
everyone here. I think that we all found it very moving
and that we owe it to her to try and make a reality of
some of the issues we have been talking about, such as
how to make life for the Syrian people better and bring
the crisis to an end. I will come to that in a minute, if
I may.

On the political process, I would just say that the
United Kingdom shares in full the statements made
by the representatives of the United States, France and
Poland so I will not rehearse those arguments. Instead, I
would like to ask some questions, first, of Ms. Mueller.
We are very interested in access trends. We would
like to know what the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs considers the key access
improvements in the past three months and where the
challenges still lie.

Secondly, ifI may, I would also ask a question of
Nujeen Mustapha. She has come all this way to tell
us her story. We heard that there are 175,000 persons
with disabilities in Idlib alone. The story about having
to hide in the bathroom brought the situation to life
for everyone in the Council and clearly illustrated the
human cost that people in Syria are facing. What is it
that we in the Security Council could most do to help
her and all those in the situation in Syria that she faced
in Aleppo? What should it mean for us tomorrow, the
day after and in six months' time? If there is one thing
that the Council can do, it would be very useful to get a
sense of what she would like it to be.

I would also like to address some questions to other
speakers. Ihave four questions. The first one is easy. It is
to ask our Russian friends not to keep telling lies about
the White Helmets, which is a volunteer humanitarian
organization. We have had this debate in the Council
several times, and it has been proved beyond doubt that
they are not terrorists but humanitarians. That is the
first question.

Leading on from that, we appeal to our Russian
and Chinese friends, who were talking about progress
on the ground in Syria, to support the United Nations
monitoring cross-border mission. We ask them to
support it in the Fifth Committee and to allow it to have
the funding it needs so that the cross-border assistance
can proceed, as the Council has intended and has set out.

The rest of my questions, ifI may, are addressed to
the Syrian representative, who, I noticed, does not look
at women when we speak. Ithink that is quite interesting.
I would like to ask him a question given what we heard
from Nujeen about persons with disabilities and in
recognition of the fact that, throughout the United
Nations, issues relating to persons with disabilities
have always been non-political. They have always been
areas where every Member State can cooperate. It is not
a political issue. What are the Syrian authorities doing
to address the situation of persons with disabilities,
particularly women and girls and those in the worst
hit places, like Aleppo and Idlib? I would really like to
know the answer to that question and we hope for some
positive news.

The third question is about the lack of access for
humanitarians to Rukban camp. Thirteen children
have died of preventable causes recently. Why is it "not
possible" to allow unconditional United Nations access
to that camp?

My fourth question is to ask for an unequivocal
assurance from the Syrian authorities, through the
person of the Syrian representative today, that the
ceasefire in Idlib will be respected without qualification.

