Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Annabi for his updating report.

The United Kingdom very much welcomes the
Secretary-General' s report. We support its judgements and
we warmly commend the work which the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is doing
on the ground there.

We feel that significant progress is being made at
last in the areas of judicial reform and integration of the
local police forces. An independent judiciary and effective
police enforcement are essential to our wider objective of

 

Bosnian ownership of reform. I am glad, too, that
Mr. Annabi has reported to us progress, again, in
establishing a State Border Service. The advances made in
supporting a free and fair society in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are important for the stability of the Balkan
region has a whole. In this context, we are looking forward
to seeing the report from Special Representative Carl Bildt
on this subject when he comes to New York next month.
I want to make two brief specific points. My first is
on the Judicial System Assessment Programme (JSAP),
which the report refers to in describing the termination by
the end of this year of that Programme. This is a valuable
Programme, in the United Kingdom's View, the findings of
which will be fundamental to the badly needed reform of
the judicial system in Bosnia. The reports which JSAP is
now issuing need to be implemented. We understand that
the United Nations is not envisaging any extension of
JSAP's activity in this area after its mandate expires and I
would encourage the Secretariat to consider how
implementation of this programme is going to be best
pursued. If this means handing the implementation on to
another organization, then we will need to consider what
preparations are necessary to ensure continuity. I should
welcome Mr. Annabi's comments on that.

My second point is on an exit strategy for UNMIBH.
The Secretary-General's report does not give us a sense of
the overall plan for the Mission's future activity. While
JSAP is a specific example of a programme that is
completing its objectives and winding up its activities, there
is no similar trajectory for the bulk of UNMIBH's activity
and we would be very pleased to see a more focused
assessment of achievements to date and a game plan for
future action. That does not detract from our admiration
of what UNMIBH is doing, but I think it is sensible to look
forward in that sense.

