Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): My Government
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We would like to thank you
for having convened this open meeting and for having
given us the opportunity to speak here today.

Timor-Leste would like to commend the
Secretary-General for his timely and comprehensive
special report on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2003/243). We
thank the Secretary-General for his commitment to
ensuring that the intent and goals of Security Council
resolution 1410 (2002) are fulfilled within the time-
frame which it set forth.

We would like to express our deep gratitude to
the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, for the comments that he made this
morning. We would also like to express our gratitude
for the leadership and advice of Special Representative
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, as well as to the
Deputy Special Representative, who is here with us
today. Their work has been invaluable at every level, in
particular with regard to the development and
strengthening of infrastructures, public administration
and law-enforcement capabilities.

We join other delegations in expressing our
profound condolences to the Government and the
people of the Republic of Korea for the very recent loss
of the young soldiers in Oecussi.

We note in particular that the Secretary-General's
proposals for adjustments to the downsizing schedule
do not alter UNMISET's broad concept of operations,
its withdrawal date or its ultimate goal of aiding the
viability and adequacy of Timor-Leste's security
capability.

Timor-Leste reiterates its appreciation for the
support, understanding and patience of the Security
Council, UNMISET and the donor countries. Because
of their aid and support, we have indeed accomplished
much in just a few months. We continue to count on
their support in all areas, in particular in providing
financial and technical support to our defence and
police forces.

It is not necessarily surprising that various pro-
militia and anti-Timor-Leste groups from across the
border continue to agitate and provoke strife and
violence in Timor-Leste. Our independence struggle
was difficult and lasted for decades. Some former
militia, unhappy with independence, democracy and
freedom, whether in Indonesia or in Timor-Leste, have
not given up. Their terrorist attacks in the border area
in January and February of this year reflect a
coordinated plan to destabilize Timor-Leste and to
destroy a nation created with the help of the Security
Council and the international community. Only
yesterday, the Timorese people in the Atabae region
captured another former militia member armed with an
SKS rifle. Nevertheless, the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste remains absolutely confident that such
terrorism and outside criminal interference will not
prevail. The Council of Ministers is currently in the
process of considering counter-terrorism conventions,
which will help us comply with Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001).

The Secretary-General's report (S/2003/243)
takes note of the significant progress being made in
bilateral relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia.
Strengthening relations with our neighbours remains a
top priority. We are grateful for the continued
cooperation and good will of the Government of
Indonesia. We expect to remain on track with our
border negotiations and on addressing refugee and
other issues. Relations with Indonesia today are
fraternal and excellent.

A few weeks ago, the Serious Crimes Unit,
created during the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor indicted
some key Indonesian former military leaders. Due to
the sensitivity of the issue, President Xanana Gusmao
and Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri sent a high-level
delegation led by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, Mr. Ramos-Horta, to convey to the
Indonesian authorities the concerns and the official
position of Timor-Leste. As in any democratic country,
the independence of the judiciary is guaranteed in
Timor-Leste. While respecting the decision of the
judiciary in Timor-Leste, the Government is also
seeking, with the Indonesian Government, better ways
to attain justice and truth. We reiterate our firm
conviction that reconciliation and healing will
positively impact relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia.

Timor-Leste is also continuing its good relations
with Australia. The difficult negotiations on petroleum
and gas development in the Timor Sea are nearing a
successful outcome. More globally, Timor-Leste
continues to develop good relations with all nations.
We are indeed honoured to be a member of the
community of nations. We became a member of the
Non-Aligned Movement last month at Kuala Lumpur.

Internally, Timor-Leste is working hard to
develop and establish the legislation, laws and
democratic institutions necessary to ensure justice and
security. We are only a few months old. We do need
more trained judges, lawyers, corrections personnel
and facilities, as well as professional police and
military personnel. However, we remain confident that
the drive, democratic commitment and will of the
Timorese people will keep us moving forward in that
regard. Moreover, we know that we can count on the
continued help of the international community in
achieving those goals, both bilaterally and through the
United Nations.

Timor-Leste appreciates the wisdom shown by
Security Council members in having resolution 1410
(2002) provide for a constant reassessment of security
needs and for a scheduled downsizing. The Secretary-
General is continuing to re-assess the implementation
of UNMISET's downsizing process to ensure that it
realistically relates to the situation at hand. In
particular, we believe that the adjustments in
downsizing will maximize the effectiveness of
UNMISET in helping Timor-Leste to face very serious
ongoing security threats. The Government of Timor-
Leste wholeheartedly endorses and supports the re-
assessment, recommendations and proposals contained
in the Secretary-General's report.

The Government of Timor-Leste is consciously
working, within its own resource constraints, towards
the objective of providing a secure and stable
environment for the future development and stability of
the country. The contribution of UNMISET towards
that process is significant and must continue at the
required levels while Timorese security forces develop
to their fullest capacities.

Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri recently discussed
the contents of the special report of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council with Special
Representative Kamalesh Sharma and expressed his
full support for the proposals contained therein. The
Prime Minister highlighted in particular the crucial
importance of the proposals related to the
strengthening of police capacity through enhanced
training and the provision of additional equipment. He
thanked the Secretary-General for the proposal to
deploy an international formed unit to provide the time
required for those actions to bear fruit. The Prime
Minister also fully supported the proposal for a pause
in the draw-down of UNMISET's military component
and for the enhancement of its capacities to undertake
operations against incidents of the type observed in
Ermera and, recently, in Atabae.

The proposals put forward in the Secretary-
General's report represent a proportionate, considered
and well-balanced response to emerging perils
threatening to destabilize the security situation in the
country. Those threats could jeopardize the significant
investments made in the past by the international
community and the Timorese Government.

The Prime Minister has also promised to find,
with the help of donor countries, the budgetary support
required for the accelerated development of the
national police force through the recruitment and
training of 500 additional police officers who, upon
completion of training, would be the points of contact
with armed groups. Obviously, those officers would
need to be equipped in a manner that would enable
them to effectively counter the nature and range of
weapons of the type used by armed groups. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste will take the necessary actions in that regard at
the appropriate time.

On the one hand, there is the clear requirement to
ensure that the draw-down in UNMISET's military
component and the lack of required capacities in the
police do not lead to a premature testing of capabilities
by armed groups. At the same time, it is also of the
utmost importance that Timor-Leste be adequately
equipped for and protected against the strong
possibility that the security preparedness of the nascent
State will be tested by armed forces after the departure
of UNMISET. The present proposals contained in
Secretary-General's special report, along with the
actions that will be undertaken by the Government of
Timor-Leste, provide for both requirements in a
balanced manner.

I would like to conclude by respectfully
requesting the support of all Security Council members
for the recommendations contained in the Secretary-
General's special report. We would like once again to
reiterate our firm commitment to the promotion of
sustainable development, stability, security, the rule of
law and respect for human rights.

