Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/318) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his
comprehensive briefing. After having extensive talks
with him in Kabul on the occasion of the Security
Council mission to Afghanistan, we welcome his first
presentation to the Security Council. I also welcome
the Ambassador of Afghanistan to the Council.

I first wish to share my impressions regarding the
Security Council mission to Afghanistan conducted
from 21 to 24 June - an important period after the
Consultative Peace Jirga and before the Kabul
Conference. The visit was very productive thanks to
the excellent organization of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well
as to the sincerity of our interlocutors.

We had substantive talks with members of the
executive and legislative branches, meeting with
President Karzai, Foreign Minister Rassoul, the
Speaker of the Wolesi Jirga, Mr. Qanuni, the chairs of
the standing committees of Parliament and members of
the Cabinet. These included extended interaction with
Afghani institutions including the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission, the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission. We also had useful discussions with civil
society. We visited the NATO training mission. We also
met with the main international stakeholders, including
United Nations agencies, the International Security
Assistance Force, NATO and the European Union.
During our field visit to Jalalabad, we met with local
authorities, United Nations specialized agencies and
families located in the returnee settlement.

During our contacts, we reiterated the Security
Council's support for and enduring commitment to the
people of Afghanistan and its Government in furthering
peace, development and stability. We emphasized the
messages in the mission's terms of reference. We
particularly stressed the central role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, solidarity with Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura and UNAMA. We
underlined the necessity of free and fair elections. We
welcomed the strong participation of women
candidates. We emphasized the importance of
economic and social development. We encouraged the
Afghan authorities to further their efforts to uphold the
rule of law, human rights, women's rights and
children's rights. We indicated the importance of
combating the narcotics industry and trade. We stressed
the importance of regional cooperation.

We were briefed on various issues, including
challenges to the legislative elections scheduled to be
held on 18 September, the security situation,
reconciliation and reintegration, and the importance of
regional cooperation. We would like to thank the
Afghan authorities and UNAMA for all of the
arrangements they have made. The official mission
report will be prepared soon.

If you would permit me now, Sir, I would like to
make a few remarks in my national capacity regarding
the report of the Secretary-General and the situation in
Afghanistan. We commend the report, which provides a
detailed outlook. We agree with its contents and
observations. I also welcome Mr. De Mistura, who held
meetings with my authorities in Turkey before coming
to New York. We appreciate and support his activities.

I wish to emphasize three points: the
empowerment of the Afghan leadership, a
comprehensive approach, and regional cooperation.
First, the Istanbul and London Conferences brought
new impetus. The key words should be Afghanization,
Afghan leadership and Afghan responsibility in the
period ahead. Afghan ownership should be supported
by the international community. Afghan administration
10-42978
should be empowered. Parliamentary elections in
September 2010 will be part of this process. There
should be an Afghan-led political process and the
United Nations should be part of it.

Secondly, a comprehensive approach should be at
the forefront. It should include security, governance,
the rule of law, human rights and social and economic
development. It should not be limited solely to military
means. Four areas need special attention:
comprehensive economic development, a strong, well-
trained and well-equipped Afghan military and police,
inclusive national reconciliation led by the Afghan
administration, and modern education and justice
systems to effectively combat extremism.

Another key is transition, although it should not
be understood as an exit strategy. We will continue to
increase our civilian efforts. Turkey has announced the
establishment of a new Turkish provincial
reconstruction team in Jowzjan. The Turkish civilian-
led team will be based on the successful experience of
our first PRT in Wardak province. It will bring
additional civilian capacity and complement ongoing
development efforts in that regard.

Thirdly, regional cooperation and dialogue should
be enhanced. Turkey hosted the fourth Turkey-
Afghanistan-Pakistan trilateral summit in January with
a focus on education. We hosted the Istanbul Summit
with the participation of the neighbours of Afghanistan.
The Istanbul statement was the first regional
manifestation since the Kabul Declaration of 2002 to
emphasize regional ownership. We believe it provides a
solid basis to enhance regional cooperation. Regional
cooperation was also discussed at the London
Conference.

As a follow-up to the trilateral process, the
Foreign Ministers of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey
met in Istanbul on 7 June. They discussed the level of
cooperation reached at the trilateral process, current
developments related to Afghanistan, including the
Peace Jirga convened in early June, and the upcoming
Kabul Conference. Turkey will continue its regional
contributions by hosting the Fourth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan after the
parliamentary elections.

Before concluding, I wish to emphasize that
Turkey sees the Kabul Conference as a milestone in
promoting dialogue and harmonizing the civilian and
military strategies towards a future vision for
Afghanistan. Last but not the least, we would like to
offer our condolences for the Afghan UNAMA officer
who was killed the other day.

