Ms. Vilde (Latvia): I would like to thank the Dutch
presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's
important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Director of the non-governmental organization Groupe
de recherche, d'etude et de formation femme-action, for
their useful briefings today.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.

Peacekeeping is one of the key instruments available
to the United Nations in discharging its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, yet achieving
lasting peace in many places has been a tremendous
challenge. Peacekeeping environments have become
more complex and riskier than ever, and, regrettably,
attacks on peacekeeping missions and peacekeepers
have risen in recent years. Latvia pays tribute to all
the men and women who have served and continue to
serve in United Nations peacekeeping operations for
their courage and dedication, and we honour those who
have lost their lives in serving the cause ofpeace. Much
more needs to be done to bring the perpetrators of such
attacks to justice.

In the past few years since the major peace and
security reviews, much has been done to improve our
approach to United Nations peacekeeping. Latvia fully
supports efforts to make United Nations peacekeeping
more responsive to the challenges of the twenty-first
century. Yet our work and commitment to making
United Nations peacekeeping operations more adaptable
and relevant to the current complex challenges must
continue. It is especially important to bridge the gaps
in United Nations capabilities when it comes to rapid
deployment of peacekeeping missions. In this regard,
Latvia particularly welcomes the work on improving
cooperation with relevant regional actors, such as the
African Union and the European Union.

The ultimate goal of United Nations peacekeeping
reform must be peacekeeping missions with realistic
mandates that meet the practical necessities of the
host nation or area of deployment. Better planning,
equipment and training are essential to effective
mandate delivery, protection of civilians and security
of United Nations personnel.

Improving the security of United Nations
peacekeepers, as detailed in the report of former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
Santos Cruz, is our shared responsibility. We all need
to invest in changes to improve leadership, operational
behaviour, the use of force, defensive posture, the
selection of peacekeepers, predeployment training and
equipment. Often the root of the problem lies in the
lack of situational awareness and localized intelligence
analysis especially when missions are exposed to
asymmetric threats.
We fully support United Nations efforts to better
integrate modern technologies and intelligence
capabilities into United Nations peacekeeping. Latvia
has contributed intelligence specialists to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) since early 2016.
Moreover, in recognition of the Mission's critical need
for intelligence- and information-analysis capacities,
Latvia increased its contribution to MINUSMA
last year.

We also recognize the inherent value of the
involvement of women in peacekeeping. Latvia fully
supports the ongoing work to align United Nations
peacekeeping reform with the provisions of the women
and peace and security concept. We also commend the
efforts of the Secretary-General to eradicate sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations system.

The pursuit of political settlements should be our
overall aim. However, to achieve lasting peace, United
Nations peacekeeping must be part ofa larger approach
within United Nations conflict-prevention efforts.
We must strive to use all United Nations instruments
to ensure that all people can live in a more peaceful,
prosperous and secure world.

