Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Mr. Craig Boyd, Director of United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), for their briefings. I also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/503) and the
participation in this meeting of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.

On 17 September we witnessed yet another
cowardly attack on AMISOM. troops by those opposed
to a negotiated political process and a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Somalia. The attack
claimed the lives of 24 people, including peacekeepers
and civilians. Many more were injured.

Apart from this senseless killing of peacekeepers
and civilians, and as pointed out in the Secretary-
General's report, the conflict continues to destroy lives.
Between 20 and 50 lives are lost every week as a result
of almost daily fighting, and thousands of people have
been displaced, thus worsening the humanitarian
situation. Furthermore, the conflict continues to have a
negative impact on the whole region, owing to the
proliferation of small arms and the disruption of
international trade as a result of piracy, and to pose a
threat to international peace and security.

Uganda reaffirms its support for the Djibouti
peace process, as it represents the best opportunity for
lasting peace in Somalia. We commend the efforts
made by the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to
advance the political process in the country, and we
support the continued commitment and efforts of
President Ahmed in reaching out to opposition groups
in the search for lasting peace. We welcome the
humanitarian assistance given to the country and the
support that has been extended to AMISOM. We call
upon the United Nations and other partners to enhance
their support to enable AMISOM. to effectively
implement its mandate. We also call upon African
Union member States to provide additional personnel
to enable AMISOM. to reach its authorized capacity of
8,000 troops.

While we commend the progress made by the
TFG in the political process and the support extended
to the Government and to AMISOM, the recent attack
on peacekeepers and the continued killing and
displacement of civilians are reminders that the
international community needs to do more. Al-Shabaab
and other extremist groups continue to control parts of
Mogadishu and the countryside, wreak havoc on
society and hold the people of Somalia hostage to their
extremist views.

In view of the magnitude of the challenges in
Somalia, we need to ask ourselves if the present
strategy of adopting an incremental approach is solving
the problem in the country. Is the current approach
commensurate with the gravity of the situation on the
ground? The primary responsibility for maintaining
peace and stability in Somalia ultimately lies with the
TFG and the people of Somalia. However, the
commitment and support of the United Nations, the
African Union and subregional actors such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development are
essential to supporting the TFG in assuming its role
effectively.

We believe that more resources and faster
deployment are needed in order to strengthen the TFG
and rein in the extremists. A lot more needs to be done
in addressing the urgent issues of peace, security and
reconstruction of the country. The efforts of the TFG
require additional support from the international
community if the country is to quickly recover from
the devastation of war. The TFG should be supported
in its efforts to re-establish key national institutions.
Critical areas such as security, health, education,
energy and infrastructure need to be addressed in order
to radically change the situation on the ground. This
will give the people of Somalia a greater sense of hope.

The success of the commendable efforts of the
TFG in unifying and reconstructing the country will
depend significantly on the availability of adequate and
predictable resources. We therefore call upon the
international community to support the TFG vigorously
in national institution-building.

As provided for resolution 1863 (2009), the
presence of AMISOM. in Somalia is a transitional step
towards the envisaged United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Therefore, the Council should hasten the
necessary preparations towards re-hatting AMISOM.
Furthermore, the Council should deal decisively with
all the spoilers in Somalia who continue to flout the
resolutions and decisions of the Council, to destabilize
the country and the region and to pose a threat to
international peace and security.

Lastly, we thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, and the staff of
the United Nations agencies and humanitarian agencies
for the support they have extended to the Somali
people in the current circumstances.

