Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Spanish presidency for having organized this
debate. In the spirit of your concept note (S/2015/793, annex), Germany and France have decided to issue
a joint intervention. I shall deliver the first part, and
my German colleague the second. This unprecedented
initiative reflects the depth of the Franco-German
friendship and our shared willingness to change both
expand the Security Council and to change its working
methods. The excellent Spanish concept note stresses
that the Security Council has demonstrated creative
thinking with respect to evolving circumstances by
establishing a practice and procedures that enjoy
legitimate confidence and demonstrate efficiency in its
work.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the President
of the General Assembly and the Vice-President of the
Economic and Social Council for their introductory
remarks. France and Germany strongly favour
strengthening relations between the various United
Nations bodies, in full respect for the powers set out
in the Charter. Much has been said about the Economic
and Social Council, but we feel it important to mention
two important partners of the Security Council: the
Human Rights Council and the International Criminal
Court (ICC).

Respect for human rights and harmonious
development are inextricably linked to peace and
security. Germany and France encourage more frequent
briefings to the Council by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights or his deputy, the Special Advisers of
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect, as well as other
human rights mechanisms. The protection issues are at
the heart of the Council's activities and its mandated
peacekeeping missions; this is the heart of a more
preventive approach to crises. It is therefore natural
that the Council should interact directly and frequently
with those who are primarily responsible for these
issues, as well as in post-conflict situations with the
Peacebuilding Commission, as has already been noted.

There is no lasting peace without justice and the
fight against impunity. France and Germany are in
favour of more extensive contacts between the Council
and the International Criminal Court, either through
visits here by the Prosecutor or of the Council to The
Hague, and of the improved sharing of information
across peace missions in cases where the ICC is
investigating, given that the Court's activities are in
fact intrinsically linked with the justice provisions of
the mandates of these operations. We can only regret
that some Council resolutions are not implemented as
they deserve. Consistency requires that the Council
itself drew the consequences of the resolutions it has
adopted with regard to ICC referrals.

The responsibility to protect depends on the
Council's ability to avoid obstacles when it must act to
prevent or stop mass atrocities situations. As Council
members know, France and Mexico have proposed an
initiative to regulate the use of the veto in the case
of the most serious crimes, as defined by the Rome
Statute. Our German friends, like 80 other States on
all continents, have given us their support. This is a
pragmatic initiative aimed at achieving a collective and
voluntary commitment on the part of the permanent
members. Aware of this challenge, and seeking
the broadest possible effort, Germany and France
have decided to support the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
whose objectives are complementary to the French
initiative.

