Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security

 

Council for this month. There is no doubt that, with your
broad experience and well-known wisdom, you will
successfully guide the work of the Council and lead it to
the desired outcome. I also thank and congratulate
Ambassador Legwaila Joseph Legwaila of Botswana, on his
successful presidency of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss a
very important question, which deserves close attention by
us all and treatment commensurate with the seriousness of
the situation and its potential for danger. In addition to its
being an issue which threatens the peace process in the
Middle East, jeopardizing its continuation and success, this
situation wrongs and oppresses all Palestinians in the
Palestinian territories. It constitutes collective punishment
far beyond what is needed to fight violence and terrorism
and to maintain security.

Our interest in the continuation of the peace process
on the Palestinian-Israeli track and its extension to other
tracks, and in peace, security and safety for all the peoples
of the region, including the Israeli people, is the basis of
our participation in today's debate.

At the same time, we fully realize the need for
measures to curb the violence and terrorism which have
been, and continue to be strongly condemned by my
Government no matter where it is perpetrated, or by whom.
I must recall that for decades Jordan has taken a firm and
principled position against all forms of terrorism. Jordan
has cooperated with all efforts to counter terrorism, most
recently the Sharm El Sheikh Summit and the Washington
follow-up meeting. It has done so because terrorism and
violence threaten the peace process and destabilize the
region as a whole. They also impede the establishment of
economic, social and political institutions, and their ability
to develop our region.

We acknowledge all this, but we also realize that
action to deal with this phenomenon must be based on the
rule of law and must be in accordance with justice and
objectivity. That cannot be achieved through measures
contrary to those principles or by applying double
standards. In dealing with security issues and with violence
and terrorism, Governments must adopt no measures that
fail to take into account legal and international
commitments and the social and practical difficulties arising
from these measures, or the negative repercussions for
security generated by this fear and frustration. That would
impede the positive efforts made towards development and
bring back the atmosphere of tension, conflict and
extremism which we hope that we have put behind us
once and for all.

I do not want to deal with the deteriorating situation
in Lebanon, as the Council will discuss that question later
this evening. However, we believe that what is happening
in Lebanon is cause for deep concern, and that it is part
of an attack against the peace process that could threaten
the peace and security of the region. We will express our
position on that issue at the appropriate time.

We in Jordan are deeply concerned about Israel's
actions against the Palestinian people in the Palestinian
territories, about which the Council has heard a report
from the representative of Palestine. Such actions
including the bombing of homes, the confiscation of land,
and the imposition of restrictions on the movement of
people and goods within the Palestinian territories, which
is tantamount to the full siege and starvation of the
Palestinian people - innocent people who have nothing
to do with terrorism and violence. Such practices run
counter to right, justice and law, and are thus in violation
of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which applies
to all territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem. They also represent a violation of Security
Council resolutions. Above all, they are incompatible
with, and do not lead to the creation of, a positive
atmosphere for the implementation of the accords
concluded between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization. They also weaken the support given to the
peace process by the people of the region. We should
urgently try to stop this development. We should stand
against it in the future in order to clear the atmosphere,
reinforce mutual trust and create the climate necessary to
continue the positive dialogue between all parties to
achieve the desired peace.

While we hope that the Security Council and the
international community as a whole will work seriously
to reverse the course of events in the Palestinian
territories and to prompt Israel to desist from all its unfair
practices against the Palestinian people, and to reconsider
its policy in its entirety, we also hope that the
international community will stand by the peace process
in order to enable the Palestinian National Authority and
the Palestinian people to achieve their goals and to get
beyond this difficult stage.

We call upon the Council to create the proper
atmosphere and to urge the parties concerned to return to
the negotiating table, to implement the agreements
concluded between the Israeli Government and the
 

Palestinian Authority and to work towards the negotiations
on the final stage, to push the peace process in general
towards the objective of comprehensive peace, to establish
security and to find radical solutions to the conflict from
which the region has suffered for so many decades.

We are confident that the adoption of responsible,
moderate and just measures and the continuation of
dialogue will enable us to what we all aspire to - namely,
narrow the circle of violence and to establish peace,
security, safety and tranquillity for all the peoples of the
region.

