Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Mr. Miroslav
Jenca, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his comprehensive update.

Kazakhstan's position on the Middle East peace
process remains clear and unchanged. We support
negotiations aimed at a two-State solution and urge for
their resumption, as soon as possible and preferably in
a bilateral format without preconditions. The ultimate
goal should be the restoration and promotion of the
peace process, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the land-
for-peace formula and the Quartet road map. We echo
other delegations in emphasizing the importance of
ending Israel's illegal settlement activities, which are
clearly not helping to bring peace to the region and are
violations of international law. We also believe that
violence is counterproductive and will lead only to
further confrontations between the parties.

We underscore the importance of achieving
intra-Palestinian unity, and in that regard welcome the
results of last week's talks in Cairo and acknowledge
Egypt's commendable efforts as a bridge-builder. We
hope that the Palestinian reconciliation agreement will
contribute to the resumption and further advancement
of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.

On the humanitarian and economic fronts,
Kazakhstan is particularly concerned about the grave
situation in Palestine. The checkpoints imposed on Gaza
only aggravate the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation and diminish the prospects for peace. It will
be important to ensure that all the necessary measures
are taken to improve Palestinians' economic situation,
as outlined by the Secretary-General during his recent
visit to Israel, Jordan and the Gaza Strip. We believe
that such steps will make a major contribution to the
security of both sides and create a platform conducive
to peace negotiations. We therefore call for economic
concessions to the Palestinians to be finalized in order
to ease daily living conditions in the territory of the
Palestinian Authority.

We welcome the progress made by the Government
of Lebanon with its new electoral law, enacted by
Parliament on 16 June, and hope the changes will
ensure the holding of the free and fair parliamentary
elections planned for May 2018. The Lebanese Armed
Forces continue to serve their people with commitment,
and their success against the threat of terrorism is well
recognized. They and the country's security apparatus
should be actively supported both technically and
financially, including under the umbrella of the
International Support Group for Lebanon.

Concerning Libya, Kazakhstan welcomes the
United Nations action plan for resuming an inclusive
political process facilitated and led by the United
Nations, which was presented by Special Representative
Salame at a high-level event on Libya on 20 September.
We are of the view that the Libyan Political Agreement
remains the only viable framework to end the political

crisis, and that all international efforts to bring about an
inclusive political dialogue among Libyans should be
consolidated under the leadership of the United Nations.

On Yemen, we are deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and cholera
epidemic in the country. Last week in this Chamber
(see S/PV.8066) we heard about the horrific numbers
of the humanitarian crisis, which is an entirely man-
made one. If we are to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe
and large-scale famine, effective strategies must be
established, including a cessation of hostilities and a
ceasefire, unhindered humanitarian access and the
launch of a sustainable political agreement.

Lastly, Kazakhstan hopes that the efforts of
the sponsors of the peace process, together with
international and regional organizations and all the
parties to the negotiations, can lead to a lasting and just
peace in the Middle East.

