Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would

like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate

on the important issue of small arms and light

weapons. Taking into account the extremely high

human toll that small arms take each year and the

threats they represent to peace and stability in various

countries and regions, they are one of the most
pressing problems facing global security today.

We thank Ms. Hoppe for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General on small arms, which provides a
comprehensive overview of the progress achieved in
the implementation of the 12 recommendations laid out
in his report of 20 September 2002.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. Therefore, I will limit my statement to a few
remarks.

The implications and consequences of the
proliferation of small arms are very disturbing. In some
societies, they create a vicious circle of violence and
crime that traps entire populations in an endless cycle
of war and large-scale human rights abuses, including
the exploitation and misuse of children as child
soldiers. We also note with concern the link between
the illicit exploitation of natural and other resources
and the illicit trade in small arms.

In that regard, we believe that more efficient
action on the part of the international community is
needed to address those issues. We strongly support all
measures in the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We
believe that, if implemented by all Member States,
those measures would greatly mitigate the negative
impact of small arms on civilians and societies around
the world and contribute to preventing their illicit
trade.

We note with satisfaction that progress continues
to be made towards the objectives of the Programme of
Action. However, there is clearly room for its wider
implementation. We urge all Member States to
demonstrate stronger political will in order to
strengthen that global instrument.

The upcoming five-year comprehensive review
conference on the 2001 United Nations Programme of
Action this coming summer will be, in our view, an

important opportunity for States to discuss the extent
of the progress achieved in implementing that
instrument and, hopefully, to adopt a comprehensive
plan of action for the future. We also welcome the
adoption of the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. Even
though the Instrument is not legally binding, it is an
important step in the implementation of the 2001
Programme of Action.

United Nations arms embargoes are an important
multilateral tool of the Security Council and the
international community for responding to armed
conflict and violations of international norms. We urge
all Member States to respect and enforce all Security
Council resolutions, including those imposing arms
embargoes. As United Nations mandatory arms
embargoes are legally binding, we believe that all
Member States have to make their violation a criminal
offence in their national legislation. The authority of
the Security Council and the United Nations may be
greatly undermined by persistent violations of United
Nations embargoes and the impunity of the violators.
The observations of expert and monitoring groups
dealing with United Nations arms embargoes in various
countries clearly demonstrate that violations in that
area are widespread and systematic. We believe that the
Security Council should not hesitate to use coercive
measures against Member States or entities that
deliberately violate those embargoes.

In that regard, the Security Council should
strengthen its commitment to finding practical and
effective ways to further improve the design,
monitoring and compliance aspects of arms-embargo
regimes. In that connection, we welcome and support
the draft resolution prepared by your delegation,
Mr. President. We urge the Council to adopt it as soon
as possible.

The destabilizing effects of small arms on post-
conflict societies have been increasingly recognized in
the work of the Security Council. An essential part of
successful small-arms control in countries in post-
conflict situations is a well-governed security sector
that comprises civil, political, judicial and security
institutions.

With regard to its mandates for peacekeeping
operations, the Council should continue to strengthen
provisions pertaining to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
as well as measures for the collection and destruction
of illicit and surplus weapons. We believe that effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes must be undertaken as a key component of
any post-conflict strategy.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
agree with the observation of the Secretary-General
contained in his report as regards the need to
strengthen interaction between the Security Council
and the General Assembly in developing a coherent
and comprehensive United Nations policy on small
arms and light weapons. In our view, better interaction
and cooperation between States at the regional and
subregional levels and with the United Nations in
tackling the problem of the proliferation of small arms
should also be an important part of that comprehensive
policy. Slovakia stands ready to contribute to, and
support, those efforts.

