Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate once again in the Security
Council's deliberations on Timor-Leste. We thank the

Council for its ongoing support for that country. Today
I wish to particularly mention the lead role being
played by South Africa, by Ambassador Kumalo
especially.

On behalf of my country, I want to again thank
the staff of and contributors to the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) in the
field and Special Representative Khare and Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and his team here at the
head office for the leadership they provide. I also want
to express my appreciation for the statement today by
my friend Ambassador Nelson Santos, on behalf of
Timor-Leste.

Australia deplores the shocking attacks on
President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmao on
11 February. The actions of the perpetrators represent a
terrible attack on the democratically elected leadership
of one of Australia's nearest neighbours and underscore
the continued fragility of the security situation in
Timor-Leste. Our thoughts and hopes are with
President Ramos-Horta for his ongoing recovery and
return to good health.

At the same time, Australia congratulates the
Government of Timor-Leste for its careful and
measured approach to the events of 11 February, which
helped to ensure that the situation remained calm in the
immediate aftermath. We call upon the people of
Timor-Leste to continue to embrace peace in these
difficult times.

As the Prime Minister of Australia, the
Honourable Kevin Rudd MP, has made clear, Australia
is a steadfast friend and neighbour of Timor-Leste and
will continue to be at the forefront of international
efforts to assist it to become a stable and more
prosperous nation. During a visit to Dili on
15 February, the Prime Minister made clear Australia's
commitment to continue to stand shoulder to shoulder
with Timor-Leste and to contribute enhanced assistance
to help provide security and much-needed longer-term
development.

We are supporting Timor-Leste's security directly
through our leadership of the international security
forces, as well as our contribution of police to the
United Nations police. In meeting that security
responsibility, I want to acknowledge the cooperation
we received from UNMIT and other international
partners. I also want in particular to express our
appreciation to New Zealand for its continuing
contribution to the international security forces.

As was stated earlier, at the request of the Timor-
Leste Government, Australia is providing additional
Australian military and police assistance to support
Timor-Leste in response to the events of 11 February.
Australia is also discussing with Timor-Leste a long-
term bilateral approach to strengthening Timor-Leste's
own security institutions, and we look forward to
liaising closely with the United Nations and other
donors in that regard.

As recognized by Ambassador Santos today, the
Government and people of Timor-Leste must take the
primary responsibility for the development of a stable
and more prosperous nation, including through
political and economic reform, development of the
private sector and provision of health services,
education and housing. Australia acknowledges the
continuing commitment of Timor-Leste's leaders to
addressing those challenges, which Prime Minister
Gusmao has been quick to reaffirm in the wake of the
events of 11 February. Political reconciliation and
support for democratic processes by all political
leaders and others in Timor-Leste will be fundamental
to a secure and prosperous future. That is a challenge
we hope UNMIT can continue to address, although
ultimately it is a responsibility for the leaders and
people of Timor-Leste. Australia recognizes the
important contribution made by UNMIT to supporting
democratic reform and political consolidation in
Timor-Leste.

The events of 11 February emphasize how
important it is for Timor-Leste to continue to work to
strengthen its justice system as a basis for long-term
stability. Any perceptions of impunity for those who
commit crimes threaten to undermine the Timorese
people's confidence in their justice system. Australia
welcomes the efforts of the United Nations and other
donors to strengthen Timor-Leste's justice system and
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation for
continued endeavours in that vital area.

Tackling the challenges of underdevelopment will
be central to stabilizing Timor-Leste's political and
security environment. During his Visit to Dili on
15 February, the Australian Prime Minister
foreshadowed that Australia was looking to provide
additional support to help Timor-Leste tackle high
levels of unemployment, particularly among youth.

Finally, as a key donor to Timor-Leste and
mindful of the broad and complex range of
development cooperation taking place, Australia looks
forward to continuing to work in partnership with the
Government of Timor-Leste and closely with other
donors to ensure a carefully coordinated approach.

It is especially important that the international
community, led by the United Nations, continues to
support Timor-Leste at this time. Australia welcomes
the Secretary-General's report on UNMIT, which
recommends a 12-month mandate extension with a
continuation of current police levels. A 12-month
extension of UNMIT's mandate will provide valuable
continuity, certainty and security for Timor-Leste.
Importantly, the next 12 months will provide a valuable
opportunity for Timor-Leste to implement its hard
decisions on the road to reform while it has the support
of UNMIT and the international community.

This will be a critical year for the Government of
Timor-Leste to move ahead to address the challenges
and advance the political, social and economic reforms
to which it is committed. Australia is committed to
continuing its strong support for Timor-Leste during
this difficult but important transition.

