Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Holkeri for his excellent introduction
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/348) and
for his briefing on the situation in Kosovo. I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro and thank him for addressing the Council.

The clashes and acts of violence which took place
in March, with their toll of dead and wounded and the
destruction of religious and cultural sites have
undoubtedly revealed the precariousness of the
situation in Kosovo and the climate of mistrust and
suspicion which still reigns within Kosovar society.
Those acts of violence, which we have unanimously
condemned, have derailed the peace process in Kosovo
and have seriously hampered efforts by the
international community to build a democratic, tolerant
and multi-ethnic Kosovo. In particular, those events
have struck a heavy blow to the return of refugees and
displaced persons and to the freedom of movement,
two key elements of the "standards before status"
policy.

On this occasion, we wish to pay tribute to all
Kosovars and to the international presence in Kosovo
for measures taken to put an end to the unfortunate
clashes, and to assure security for all communities. It is
reassuring to note that the security situation is
gradually improving, but more must be done in order to
keep such acts from happening again.

The open letter addressed on 2 April 2004 by a
great number of Kosovo leaders to the people of
Kosovo, in which they committed themselves to
restoring multi-ethnicity and to promoting
reconciliation, is a praiseworthy initiative aimed at
restoring trust within the Kosovar communities.
Similarly, the commitment of the Kosovo Government
to finance reconstruction of damaged or destroyed sites
and to try those responsible for violence is a strong
signal that could boost national reconciliation efforts.

But the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has a responsibility to
bear. We can only welcome its determination to ensure
that those who are responsible for violence will be
punished. Additional efforts are required in that area.
Understanding and coexistence among all Kosovars
must, henceforth, be a priority objective in order to
strengthen tolerance and mutual trust, and to rise above
past resentments.

In order to achieve those objectives, we must
remain committed to the principle of establishing a
multi-ethnic Kosovo and we must forcefully
underscore the need to fully implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the "standards
before status" policy. The successful implementation of
the "standards before status" policy will make it
possible to consider the fundamental question, which is
the final status of Kosovo.

In that regard, the 31 March 2004 launch of the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan was a major
milestone and a valuable starting point for assessing
the progress achieved in attaining the eight standards
set for mid-2005. As does Mr. Holkeri, we hope that
the Serb community will ultimately join the standards
process.

The opening on 23 April 2004 of the Liaison
Office for Coordination of International Cooperation
and Regional Dialogue in the office of the Kosovo
Prime Minister, aimed at strengthening cooperation
between UNMIK and the Government, is another
noteworthy development that should be welcomed.

Despite such considerable achievements, inter-
ethnic clashes have shown that much remains to be
done. An economically prosperous, democratic,
tolerant and multi-ethnic Kosovo is still a difficult
objective to attain. Therefore, it is essential for direct
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina to resume as
soon as possible, and for contacts among all elements
of Kosovo to be furthered.

A multi-ethnic Kosovo requires a unifying and
responsible dialogue, along with sincere collective
efforts in the interest of Kosovo, which will help bring
all Kosovars together, put an end to acts of
intimidation and violence, improve the security
situation, meet standards for the sustainable return of
refugees and displaced persons to their places of
origin, and ensure respect for the rights of minorities.

Active participation by all communities in the
Provisional Institutions and resolution of the problem
of parallel structures in Kosovo are essential elements
in our common efforts. My delegation supports the
appeal of the Secretary-General to all communities to
join efforts in applying the standards. The
implementation of standards undoubtedly will be
further facilitated by an improved economic and social
situation. To achieve its objective in Kosovo, the
international community must not abandon the
Kosovars. Consistent political and financial support on
the part of the international community is more than
ever necessary.

