The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.

Isaiah Berlin, the very well-known philosopher, once
expressed the view that the primary duty of politics was
to avoid "extremes of suffering". This sage counsel has
too often gone woefully unheeded, and nowhere more so
than in the case of Rwanda. The genocide in that country
all too brutally exposed the enduring, darker side of
human nature and the reality of suspicion, destruction,
hatred and unrestrained violence.

 

I doubt that anyone in this Chamber can look back at
that time without remorse and without a great deal of
sadness at the failure to help the people of Rwanda in their
time of need. The unchecked brutality of the ge'nocidaires
made a mockery, once again, of the pledge "never again".

For the United Nations, the Rwandan tragedy came
close to extinguishing belief in our capacity to fulfil its
founding purpose. The presence of United Nations
peacekeepers on the ground created a perception among
civilians that they would be secure from violence. That
such confidence in the United Nations was ill-founded is a
matter of great shame and disappointment to all who
support the principles and ideals which underpin the
Charter.

Still, that those soldiers in blue berets, whose cries for
support were so studiously ignored, still managed to save
tens of thousands, is a source of pride and inspiration.

(spoke in French)

One peacekeeper, the Canadian Commander of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda, Lieutenant
General Romeo Dallaire, announced his retirement this
week. As he put it simply, "I am a casualty of Rwanda -
an injured officer." His moral integrity, vision, insight and
leadership under unimaginable circumstances shine as an
example.

(spoke in English)

I know that the words that have been so generously
expressed by many around the table about his work, and
that of all those who served in the field, will go a long way
towards helping heal some of the scars of that experience.

The report of the Independent Inquiry into the actions
of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide graphically
chronicles, as we heard this morning, the lapses, blunders
and shortcomings. It also draws lessons to which we must
pay close attention.
We owe a great deal of gratitude to Prime Minister
Carlsson and his colleagues for their work. Like many
members, I wish to commend Secretary-General Arman for
making certain that we did not forget and for publicly
acknowledging this Organization's failure in the tragedy.

The Council must share in the responsibility for this
tragedy. The best way to honour the victims now is through
a firm commitment never to turn away from civilians
victimized by armed conflict, but instead to focus energy
and attention to protect them, in both word and deed.

The Inquiry's recommendations make clear what
needs to be done. First, the culture of impunity must end.
There is an undeniable, growing international consensus
that those responsible for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity should be held to account. The
establishment by the Council of the Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda moved this forward.
The adoption of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court is its clearest expression yet. Council members
have a special responsibility to ensure that the Statute of
the Court is ratified rapidly and to make sure it works
effectively. This will be a major deterrent to future abuse.
Let the message be unambiguous and clearly understood:
violators will be pursued, prosecuted and punished.

The report of the Inquiry also makes it very clear
that information flow must be improved. It leaves no
doubt that the Council must enhance its ability to analyse
and monitor volatile situations and that information-
sharing within the United Nations system must be made
better, especially between the Council and United Nations
departments. To that end, we welcome the efforts by the
United Nations Secretariat and by the United Nations
humanitarian agencies to develop a framework for
coordination with an emphasis on prevention and
preparedness.

For its part, the Security Council needs to continue
to broaden its range of interlocutors and sources of
information. The more varied its channels, the greater the
chance that it will hear the signals of looming dangers.

This Council has nothing to fear from allowing the
voices of suffering and oppression to be heard early, often
and openly. This does not undermine the Council's
legitimacy or its capacity to act. On the contrary, it serves
to strengthen it.

Rapid and resolute response is also essential. Yet at
a time when requests for troops to help protect civilians
are growing, the capacity of the United Nations itself to
manage complex missions is under great strain.
Enhancing United Nations standby arrangements,
including a rapidly deployable mission headquarters
capacity, is vital to reversing this trend. So is a
coordinated, integrated approach to identify, mobilize and
commit the necessary military - and, indeed, civilian -

 

resources. Yet efforts to implement these forward-looking
approaches are, quite frankly, left to languish.

The Security Council is on the frontline with regard to
this fundamental question. It is not enough just to authorize
peace operations; it is time for the Council to become more
actively engaged in making sure the capacity is there to
carry out these missions quickly and effectively.

The Council also needs to ensure that United Nations
operations are given adequate finances, the necessary
resources, suitably robust mandates and clear rules of
engagement to carry out the tasks assigned to them.

There are signs that the Council is taking this to heart.
Missions in Sierra Leone, the Central African Republic and
East Timor have the mandates and personnel commitments
to adequately protect people and to address the realities on
the ground. But the Council's response in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo suggests that there is still room for
improvement.

Together, these measures, if we follow through, will
allow us to better resolve conflict, promote peace, enhance
human security and help to prevent humanitarian disasters.

But if we are honest with ourselves, there is no
certainty that the most severe abuses, such as those that
occurred in Rwanda, will not happen again. Indeed, there
is ample evidence to the contrary. Preventive efforts will
not always succeed. The spiral into extremes of human
suffering cannot always be constrained.

In these most exceptional situations, the protection of
civilians requires strengthening our disposition to intervene
with force if necessary. Let me be very clear. Military
intervention is called for only in the most severe cases:
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and massive
and systematic violations of human rights and humanitarian
law causing widespread suffering and loss of life. The test
we have in mind is very difficult. The threshold is very
high.

The goal of intervention is not to threaten the
territorial integrity of the State, but to bring an end to
widespread suffering. Indeed, outside intervention to protect
people is conceivable only when those who control the
State are unable or patently unwilling to fulfil this basic,
fundamental trust.

In our view, any discussion about the use of force to
alleviate extremes of suffering and the Council's role in
such action needs to address three considerations, the first
of which is the justification for action. The cumulative
weight of international human rights and humanitarian
law, the global trend against impunity and the precedents
set by the Council itself all justify action. There is a
growing body of common law that is beginning to
establish new humanitarian standards that must be
recognized.

Secondly, we must look at the guidelines for action.
Once the determination has been made that the violence,
real or anticipated, meets the test, there are other factors
with which to guide a decision to intervene or not to
intervene, including whether time has finally run out on
other peaceful means to resolve the threat; whether there
is a danger that the threat, if left alone, jeopardizes
regional or international security; and whether not being
able to intervene everywhere means we must not
intervene anywhere.

Thirdly, there must be a framework for action. This
should be permissive enough to stop massive and
systematic violations, but clearly balanced with strong
safeguards to ensure that it is not misused. To this end,
we need to be certain that the severity of the crisis is
fully corroborated; that military force can and will
contribute to ending widespread suffering and loss of life;
that the level of force employed is appropriate to the
circumstances; that the use of force is multilateral and
widely supported; and that it is part of a longer-term
strategy to build and sustain peace.

Many have suggested that this is a debate that the
Council is not yet ready to engage in. However, it is a
discussion we cannot and should not avoid having, and
the sooner we have it, the better. The price of inaction
has simply been too high - for the victims of the
Rwandan genocide, for others subject to extreme abuse,
for the security of people generally and for the credibility
of this Organization.

Perhaps if we had grappled with this very difficult
subject earlier and worked to arrive at some common
agreement on it, we might have done more to avoid the
Rwandan genocide or to stop it once it began. Second
chances are rare, but we have one now. Perhaps the most
important proposal contained in the report of the Inquiry
is that for a system-wide action plan to prevent genocide,
to which I would add all crimes against humanity and war
crimes. As the representative of Jamaica said, the
Millennium Assembly offers an opportunity to work
towards this goal and, as the Secretary-General suggests,

 

to "reassert the centrality of international humanitarian and
human rights law". (A/54/2000, para. 211)

In that context, the legacy of the Rwandan genocide is
not just tragic; it is also hopeful. In his very graphic and
dramatic book, Philip Gourevitch tells of how a group of
young, defenceless Hutu girls in a Catholic convent school
refused to leave the side of their Tutsi friends, even though
ordered to do so by the ge'nocidaires. Given the choice of
freedom from that kind of suffering, they chose to stay, and
paid the ultimate price: their lives. The courage and
sacrifice of those young women in that convent school
should be a guide and inspiration to people around this
table and everywhere, for we can do no less.

The development of a United Nations action plan to
protect people from the most egregious forms of abuse and
from the most serious violators will be too late for past
victims but, hopefully, not too late for us and for future
generations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Rwanda, on
whom I now call.

