Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure for our delegation to
have you, Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado,
presiding over this briefing of the Security Council
on Colombia. Our delegation expresses its heartfelt
congratulations to Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
recent appointment as Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Verification in
Colombia. We also thank him for the very informative
briefing he just provided, despite the very short time
that he has been leading the Verification Mission. We
would like to express to him our hope that his high
level of training and accumulated experience will serve
as his guide in carrying out this new, challenging and
very sensitive responsibility to the best of his abilities.
We wish him every success. We also would like to
pay tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Arnault, for his
excellent work.

We welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and thank him forjoining
us today. We wish him a pleasant stay in New York.
We also reiterate our appreciation for the presence
of Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, who has been with us
since yesterday, in the debate on the Middle East (see S/PV.8449) and today's discussion on Colombia.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea strongly
condemns the treacherous terrorist act perpetrated
by the National Liberation Army (ELN) against the
police academy in Bogota on 17 January, with deadly
results and leaving many wounded. We express our
total condemnation of such terrorist acts. We join with
the Government of Colombia and the families of the
victims with the profound hope that the perpetrators
will be identified and brought to justice.

Our delegation expresses its satisfaction and
admiration for the spirit of willingness, devotion and
dedication of His Excellency Mr. Ivan Duque Marquez,
President of the Republic of Colombia, who in the
short period of his presidency has already begun to
promote important initiatives to advance the peace
process in Colombia. His visit on 12 October to one
of the most important territorial areas for training
and reintegration, in Pondores, whose purpose was to
affirm his Government's intention to support the peace
agreement and those committed to returning to civilian
life, shows, with this act of supreme political will, his
direct involvement in this Governmental task.

We welcome the Government's "Peace with
legality" plan, presented in mid-December, which
aims to cover and stabilize further areas affected by
the conflict and is focused on eradicating the violence
that has been endured for decades. We believe it to be
a very credible project, considering the damage that
criminality - in the form of murders, drug trafficking
and human rights violations - has caused in Colombia.
It is important that the plan be duly supported, given
its comprehensive nature, which includes multiple
initiatives within and outside the scope of the peace
agreement, and that this will for peace be translated
into tangible achievements on the ground.

We welcome the inauguration, at the end of
2018, of the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and
Non-repetition, designed to promote understanding of
the events that took place during the armed conflict,
recognition of responsibilities and reconciliation. We
believe that, with the support of the Government and
other institutions, the Commission should be able to
operate in accordance with the powers conferred on it
by law.

We regret the 4 October incident in which
investigators from the office of the Attorney General
forcibly entered the premises of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. We understand that all entities created to
facilitate the peace process enjoy powers conferred by
law and that the recruitment of operational personnel
also follows a legal procedure, which is why their
offices must enjoy full autonomy ifthe exercise of their
functions is to be guaranteed.

We cannot end our statement without expressing
our concern about the growing distance between the
new Government and the National Liberation Army.
The truth be told, the ELN must refrain from attacking
the civilian population and consider the possibility of
handing over hostages, which would make a significant
contribution to future negotiations, and it would also
have a significant impact on the population.

In conclusion, our delegation would, on the one
hand, like to express its recognition and appreciation
for the continued significant support that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and the
United Nations agencies in the country have dedicated
to encouraging the Colombian peace process. On the
other hand, we urge the Government, as well as other
political institutions of the State, the political parties,
civil society and the population in general, to take the
greatest advantage possible of the work of the United
Nations for the reconstruction of Colombia. Finally, we
express the hope that the local elections scheduled for
next October will be held in a climate of calm and peace
and free from all types of violence.

