Mr. Mladenov: Over the past decades, a broad
consensus has been built around the understanding
that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict can be resolved
only on the basis of a two-State solution. Palestinians
and Israelis have accepted this vision. Countries of the
region have also repeatedly endorsed this outcome.
At the beginning of June, the Secretary-General and
Ministers from some 30 countries gathered in Paris to
discuss how to put forward incentives that could kick-
start momentum towards that goal. The underlying
message from Paris was clear - we must act
decisively now or continue dealing with the damaging
repercussions for years to come.

Despite all these efforts and despite the two-State
vision remaining the professed goal of both sides, the
conflict grinds on. Negative trends on the ground
continue to jeopardize prospects for peace. Hope
dwindles as the once formidable constituencies for
peace erode on both sides. Extremists rise, seeking to
set the agenda and shape reality. Radicalism feeds fear,
mutual distrust breeds desperation, and ultimately all
this fosters violence and terror.

Earlier this month, Israel was rocked by a brutal
terror attack. On the evening 0f8 June, two Palestinians
opened fire in the heart of Tel Aviv, killing four Israelis
and injuring nine others. Just a few hours ago, a 13
year-old Israeli girl was viciously stabbed to death by
a Palestinian attacker who entered in her home in the
West Bank. And on 21 June, a Palestinian teenager was
shot and killed on a highway by the Israeli security
forces.

If the first two events were clearly acts of terror
and the second was referred to as "a mistake" that
cut short an innocent life, all three incidents clearly
illustrate the environment of fear in which Palestinians
and Israelis alike have lived for generations. I
unequivocally condemn all these tragic losses of
life. Both tragedies, unfortunately, provide political
fodder for cynical advocates of divisiveness, further
undermining trust between the communities. I extend
my sincere condolences to the families of the victims
and call on the authorities to swiftly bring to justice
those responsible for these acts.

Palestinian frustration cannot be wished away; it
cannot be vanquished by aggressive security measures,
arrests or punitive home demolitions. Neither is it
helped when Israeli ministers openly reject the very
notion of a Palestinian State or call for the complete
annexation of Area C; but nor will the violence and
terror fuelled by resentment bring about a Palestinian
State. A peaceful future for both peoples cannot emerge
on the back of statements that glorify terror and justify
killing. Mutual respect cannot come as a result of
stabbings, shootings and car-rammings.

Recognizing the urgent need to reverse this
destructive dynamic, the Middle East Quartet has
worked with the parties and key regional stakeholders
to discuss how to preserve the two-State solution. Last
September, the Quartet expressed its serious concern
about the current trends on the ground and its strong
support for significant steps that would help stabilize
the situation, show meaningful progress towards a
two-State reality, and restore belief among Palestinians
and Israelis that negotiated peace remains feasible.
In February, the Quartet noted the absence of such
constructive steps and decided to prepare a report on
the situation on the ground, including recommendations
on the way forward. I am pleased to be able to brief the
Security Council today on the conclusions of the report.

Let me begin by thanking President Abbas and
Prime Minister Netanyahu and their teams for their
constructive engagement and contributions, without
which the report would not have been possible. In
completing our work by consensus, we in the Quartet
have been guided by the belief that our role is to build
bridges, to state the facts in an unbiased manner, and
to engage constructively with the parties, the region
and the broader international community in order to
provide for a constructive way forward.

The report will not provide a complete review ofthe
humanitarian, political, legal, and security aspects of
the situation. It focuses on the major threats to achieving
a negotiated peace and offers recommendations on the
way forward. In it, the Quartet pledges its active support
for ending the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
and reaffirms that a negotiated two-State outcome that
meets Israeli security needs and Palestinian aspirations
to statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that
began in 1967, and resolves all permanent status issues
is the only way to achieve enduring peace.

The Quartet believes, however, that important
progress can be made now on the ground by each side
independently demonstrating a sincere commitment
to advancing the goal of two States. To that end, there
is an urgent need for both sides to comply with their
basic commitments under existing agreements and to
take steps to prevent entrenching a one-State reality of
perpetual occupation and conflict

Allow me to outline the three trends that the Quartet
report has concluded severely undermine hope for
peace. First are continuing violence and terrorism and
the incitement that fuels them. Second is the continuing
policy of settlement expansion and related policies in
the West Bank. Third is the situation in Gaza and the
lack of control over Gaza by the Palestinian Authority.
Let me stress once again that these negative trends can
and must be urgently reversed in order to advance the
two-State solution on the ground.

The report will provide more detail on these trends
and expand on the reasons why we in the Quartet are
concerned about them. The main objective of the report
is not to assign blame, but rather to provide a way
forward to support the goal we all share of achieving
a negotiated two-State solution. We hope to provide
a constructive path that can help advance the two-
State solution on the ground and create the conditions
necessary for meaningful negotiations in the future.

The report contains recommendations to both sides,
and specifically to the Palestinians and Israelis in relation
to violence, incitement to violence. Israeli settlement
construction and related policies, and Palestinian unity
and institution-building. It reiterates its call from
September of last year on Israel to implement positive
and significant policy shifts, particularly in Area C,
consistent With the idea of transitioning to greater
Palestinian civil authority, as contemplated by prior
agreements. As the Quartet said back then, progress in
the areas of housing, water, energy, communications,
agriculture and natural resources can be made while
respecting Israel's legitimate security needs.
I hope that, on the basis of the report, the two parties
will engage with the Quartet in order to constructively
move the process forward. Once the full text of the
report is published i which we hope will be tomorrow
morning -I also encourage the Secuirty Council to
welcome it and support the efforts of the Quartet.

In closing, let me once again emphasize the urgent
need for the parties to engage in the implementation
of the recommendations in the report. The Quartet
has outlined a reasonable set of steps that, if
implemented sincerely and resolutely with the support
of the international community, could set Israelis and
Palestinians firmly along a navigable course towards
establishing a comprehensive peace, with historic
implications for the entire region. But let me also be
unequivocally clear that a permanent status agreement
ending the conflict can be achieved only through direct
bilateral negotiations, the outcome of which cannot be
prejudged by unilateral steps.

As the Secretary-General said in Jerusalem two
days ago,

"No solution to the conflict will be possible
without the recognition that both Palestinians and
Jews have an undeniable historic and religious
connection to this land. No solution can come
through violence; it must be based on mutual respect
and the recognition of the legitimate aspirations of
both peoples. No solution can be imposed from the
outside; it must be based on direct negotiations on
the final status issues."

A peaceful future is what is at stake here. Taking
bold steps to move beyond the empty platitudes,
beyond the mutual accusations, and beyond the deeply
entrenched lack of trust will require leadership and
vision that have been starkly absent from this conflict
for far too long. It is time for both sides to rise to the
challenge. I can assure you, Mr. President, that the
Secretary-General, including through his role in the
Quartet, will continue unwaveringly to support Israelis
and Palestinians in overcoming their divisions and
achieving a just and lasting resolution to the conflict
and the establishment of a Palestinian State living side
by side with the State of Israel in peace, security and
mutual recognition.

