Mrs. Elarja Flitti (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, in my personal capacity and on behalf of His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States, and Ambassador
Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of
the Arab League to the United Nations, I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, on your wise
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would also like to extend our highest appreciation
and thanks to you and your delegation for holding this
important debate, which comprehensively addresses
issues in the Arab region and the Middle East.

I want to underscore the importance of continued
coordination and cooperation between the Arab League
secretariat, with all its different departments, and the
United Nations and all of its relevant organs, including
the Security Council, in a way that serves and bolsters
the security, stability and safety of our region.

The Arab region is facing crises and challenges that
have dangerous security, economic and humanitarian
repercussions for its residents. Such repercussions
have spilled outside the region in some cases. There
is no doubt that Arab States are aware that they must
work towards addressing those crises in a spirit of
collective solidarity and responsibility and by reaching
long-term solutions that deal with the causes that led
to them in the first place. Arab States understand the
need to propose solutions that alleviate the suffering
of the people, especially women and children, which
results from civil upheavals, fabricated conflicts and
organized terrorist attacks.

Those crises and challenges have persisted in our
region for many years. We see some parties offering
help and assistance in different ways. At the same
time, we see that some parties in the region have
taken the crises as an opportunity to expand, by
fanning sectarian flames, financing armed militias and
escalating violence and extremism. That interference
has destabilized the region and led to menacing
consequences, most recently to the safety of waterways
and international navigation routes.

It is clear that Iranian interference in the affairs
of the Arab region has served to increase and prolong
crises in the area and created even more obstinacy and
extremism in the positions of some. Unfortunately,
such interference is not benign. And it must stop, as
it is a direct violation of a basic principle enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, namely, the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of its States
Members. That has been confirmed by statements and
resolutions emanating from the Arab summits, the
most recent of which being the statement issued at the
emergency summit convened in Mecca in May.

Through their regional organization - the Arab
League - Arab States continue to work diligently
to resolve the raging conflicts by offering more
opportunities for dialogue and allaying their dangerous
humanitarian repercussions, based on the principle
that the peoples of our region are historically well-
known as peace-loving and peaceful. Undoubtedly,
as the international community, including the
Security Council, we must spare no constructive
effort to help surmount this difficult phase in our
contemporary history.

The Palestinian question is a central concern for
all Arabs. We are all aware that the situation in the
Palestinian territories is increasingly deteriorating.
The Israeli Government recently announced the
construction of 3,000 settlement units in the occupied
West Bank. Before that, however, it demolished 100
residential units belonging to Palestinian civilians in
Sur Baher, in East Jerusalem. Those Israeli settlements
are illegal and violate resolution 2334 (2016), which
condemns settlement activity and the confiscation
of Palestinian land. Without a doubt, the continued
construction of those settlements in that illegitimate
and cancerous manner erodes the ability to establish
the two-State solution and limits attempts to establish
peace in the region.

The Council is therefore fully responsible for
upholding its credibility and role in safeguarding its
international legitimacy and the international rule of law
by holding Israel, as the occupying Power, responsible
and to account for its continuous violation of Security
Council resolutions, not to mention its violation of
international humanitarian law, which prohibits the
transfer of residents to occupied territories.

The unanimous international consensus on the
Palestinian question is very clear, especially in terms
of the two-State solution, which is the only possible
means to end the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It entails
putting an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories since 1967 and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Any attempt to seek solutions to the conflict in a
way that moves away from international legitimacy,
violates legal principles or marginalizes the United
Nations consensus will not succeed, as it would be based
on a wrongful foundation that believes that military
force is the only means to secure rights. The Security
Council recognizes only the primacy of rights and law
as the foundation for any lasting and just settlement of
the Palestinian question.

The Arab Summit held in Tunisia in March
reaffirmed the importance of a comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East as a strategic Arab
option, embodied by the Arab Peace Initiative, which
was adopted by all Arab States at the Beirut Summit in
2002. It is the most comprehensive plan to address all
final-status issues, including the issue of refugees.

Moreover, at the Summit and in its outcome
document, Arab leaders reaffirmed their categorical
rejection of the recognition of Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel and stated that East Jerusalem is the capital of
the Arab Palestinian State. They furthermore warned
against any measures that could change the current
legal and political status of Jerusalem, which would
have dangerous repercussions for the peace, security
and stability of the entire Middle East.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
profound gratitude for the holding this important
meeting. On behalf of the Arab League and its
Secretary-General, I would like to express our deepest
appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and his team, as well as his envoys in the Arab
region, for their sincere and continuous efforts towards
arriving at a final settlement of all the crises there.

