Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria) (spoke in English): Let
me, on behalf of the Nigerian delegation, thank you
and other Council members for organizing this public
meeting on the situation in Iraq.

Nigeria welcomes the opportunity this open
debate affords Member States to express their views on
an important issue that has bearing on international
peace and security and goes to the core of collective
security, on which our Organization is based. This
singular action demonstrates the continued
determination of the Council to make itself accountable
to the membership of the United Nations. We also
commend the courage and willingness ofthe parties to
bring their differences to the Security Council for
deliberation and eventual determination.

This demonstrates recognition of Article 2,
paragraph 3 of the Charter, which stipulates that all
Members shall settle their international disputes by
peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace, security and justice are not endangered.

The situation in Iraq has been on the agenda of
the Security Council since 1990, following the invasion
of Kuwait by Iraq. The United Nations is still involved
in the matter with the objective of restoring peace to
the region and, in the process, has underscored the
inadmissibility of the threat or the use of force in
international relations, except when sanctioned by the
United Nations Security Council. In this regard,
Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284
(1999) have set out the obligations of Iraq in the field
of disarmament and the full accounting by Iraq of all
weapons of mass destruction and other prohibited
items.

It is necessary to put on record that the United
Nations has made tremendous progress over the years
in disarming Iraq and destroying most of its weapons
programmes. While the process has not been without
problems, experience has shown that, when the
international community has been united and acted
collectively in accordance with the Charter and
international law, it has been possible to move the
process forward in a way that contributes to peace and
enhances the legitimacy of our Organization.

Nigeria's position has been all along that Iraq
must comply with all its obligations under the relevant
United Nations resolutions in order to lift the
restrictions that have brought untold suffering to the
ordinary people of Iraq. In the meantime, we have
always supported and advocated for relief measures,
such as the oil-for-food programme, in order to cushion
the effects of sanctions on the most vulnerable
segments of Iraqi society, especially women and
children.

Today, we stand at the threshold of another
crucial decision on Iraq and the way we go about
addressing the situation will have far-reaching
implications for multilateralism and the ability of the
United Nations to promote the attainment of world
peace, security and development of the entire world
and not just a section of it. In this regard, Nigeria
believes that the unfinished business of disarmament in
Iraq is a source of concern, given the threat it poses to
international peace and security. Iraq has not fulfilled
all its obligations under the relevant United Nations
Security Council resolutions, and its continued breach
of those resolutions is a slight to the authority of the
Council and undermines the legitimacy of our
Organization. Iraq, therefore, has the responsibility to
comply fully with all its obligations and must allow the
immediate return of weapons inspectors without
conditions.

The time to act is now. Iraq must seize this
moment to demonstrate to the world its peaceful
intentions, its respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and its determination to
rejoin the comity of nations as a peace-loving country.

In the regrettable event of Iraq failing to comply
with all relevant United Nations Security Council
resolutions, in particular its disarmament obligations, it
would be legitimate and indeed justifiable for the
Security Council, acting in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter, to review the situation and
take the steps necessary to ensure compliance. The
international community has, in the past, demonstrated
its ability to act with resolve through the Security
Council to deal with any situation that poses a threat to
international peace and security. We are confident that
it will rise to the occasion and act no less forcefully in
this case. In this regard, Nigeria has been following
keenly the ongoing consultations within the Council
chamber and in the capitals of Council members, with a
view to responding appropriately to the situation in
Iraq. We believe that the process of consultations, no
matter how painful and difficult and indeed frustrating,
is the right path to go. We encourage the parties to
continue in that process and to avoid the temptation to
act alone or without Security Council authorization, as
such a move could only do incalculable harm to our
Organization and its ability to deal with future threats
and situations.

We need to continually remind ourselves that the
United Nations was established purely "to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war". It is
therefore incumbent on all Member States to continue
to work for the protection of the credibility and
integrity of our organization, lest by default we set in
motion actions that can weaken the United Nations and
deter it from its critical role for international peace and
security. Nigeria will continue to deploy its best efforts
to insure that the United Nations continues to function
effectively as an organization dedicated to peace.

In view of the fact that the debate we are having
today is in the context of compliance with United
Nations resolutions and international law, we cannot
fail to note that there are many other Security Council
resolutions, which some Member States, have so far,
failed to honour or comply with. We call on the
concerned parties to implement all United Nations
resolutions and thereby advance the process of peaceful
settlement of disputes. The selective enforcement of
resolutions is just as unhelpful as non-compliance.

