Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): Once again,
we have witnessed a futile attempt by Armenia to
whitewash its ongoing aggression against Azerbaijan.
Armenia's allegation of the non-compliance of
Azerbaijan with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council is yet another attempt to present a distorted
View of the fundamental documents pertaining to the
settlement of the conflict. In contrast to the assertions
of the Armenian representative, in its resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993), and 884 (1993), the
Security Council reaffirms the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Azerbaijan, including
the Nagorno Karabakh region. They recognize and
condemn the invasion and demand the immediate,
complete and unconditional withdrawal of the
occupying Armenian forces. To refresh the memory of
the Armenian representative, it should be noted that it
was the Armenian side that rejected the timetable for
the implementation of those resolutions.

Armenia's military provocations, aimed at
violating the ceasefire regime, are regular aggressive
acts against the Republic of Azerbaijan, and are
deliberately concealed. By distributing its so-called
ceasefire violation reports here in the United Nations,
and speaking now about the joint investigative
mechanism, Armenia seeks to justify its own continued
illegal military presence and the use of force against
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country.
It tries to camouflage the fact that at present the front
line extends far beyond the Nagorno Karabakh region,
reaching the Aghdam and Fizuli districts, and that
Armenian soldiers are deployed on those and other
occupied territories of my country. Throughout 2015
alone, as a result of Armenia's illegal occupation and
ceasefire violations, a number of Azerbaijani army
servicemen were killed. Azerbaijani soldiers are being
killed, maimed and wounded defending Azerbaijan's
territorial integrity, sovereignty and State borders. In
contrast, Armenian soldiers are on Azerbaijani land.
Without using evasive terminology, therefore, I would
like to ask my Armenian colleague what the Armenian
soldiers are doing in Aghdam. What are they doing
in Fizuli? What are they doing in Kelbjar? Those are
districts of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

While continuing to deny its involvement and role in
the conflict, the Government of Armenia openly claims
its ownership, and exercises effective control over the
Nagorno Karabakh region of my country. In its national
security strategy of 2007, Armenia claims "to act as
a guarantor of the security of Nagorno-Karabakh". No
explanation is provided, however, as to how those
guarantees, which affect a portion of the territory of
Azerbaijan, fit into international law.

As a self-proclaimed champion of democracy and
human rights, Armenia should recall its President's own
words about his role in the massacres committed against

Azerbaijani civilians during the conflict. When asked
whether he had any regrets about the death of thousands
of people as a result of the Armenian attacks against
Azerbaijani civilians, he said frankly, "I have absolutely
no regrets," since "such upheavals are necessary, even
if thousands have to die". Another notorious example,
again from the President of Armenia, then Defence
Minister of Armenia:

"The most important thing is not the territory.
It is that one ethnic group is left in Armenia. In
Vardenis and other regions, Azerbaijanis used to be
70 per cent of the population. Our cultures are not
compatible. We can live side by side but not wihin
each other."

Another notorious example is also self explanatory:

"Before Khojali, the Azerbaijanis thought .that the
Armenians were people who could not raise their
hand against the civilian population. We were able
to break that stereotype."

Those words come from the person who holds
the highest political and military post in Armenia.
They speak for themselves, making any statement on
behalf of the Armenian Government in the United
Nations irrelevant and absurd, and providing yet
another example of so-called democracy and respect in
Armenia.

