Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is pleased to see the Minister
for External Affairs of Angola presiding over today's
meeting of the Security Council. We also welcome
the briefings of the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, and those of Mr. Said
Djinnit, Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union and Mr. Vijay Pillai,
Adviser to the Office of the Vice President for the
Africa region of the World Bank.

The delegation of Senegal greatly appreciates the
opportunity provided today by the Angolan presidency
to discuss the burning issue of the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in the Great Lakes region. The
subject is important in that it directly concerns a dozen
countries in the heart of Africa in a sensitive region
that for decades has unfortunately been afflicted by
multidimensional crises with diverse causes resulting
from the convergence of historical, demographic,
economic, social and political factors. It is also
important for the numerous initiatives that are currently
under way with the aim of halting this crisis-provoking
dynamic and turning it into a virtuous cycle of stability,
prosperity and inclusive, sustainable development.

A review of the situation in the Great Lakes region
points inevitably to how closely the issues are tied to
the land, to natural resources, to the division of power,
the rule of law and good governance, all factors that
create fertile ground for intercommunal clashes. We
recall the genocide that occurred in Rwanda in 1994
and the intra-communitarian wars in Burundi, which
were tragedies that culminated in a spiral of instability
in that important region of the continent.

In addition to the evolving aftermath of those
tragedies, other regional conflicts have exacted a heavy
toll on the trust and relations among States, creating
challenges and substantial limits to necessary regional
cooperation. Indeed, various reports on the subject,
including those of the Secretary-General, reveal an
emerging pattern in the the causes and manifestations
of the crises wracking the region. Without being
exhaustive, we can identify the following, inter alia:
the growing number of armed non-State entities;
inter-community or ethnic tensions; problems pertaining
to governance and democracy; the illegal exploitation
of natural resources that fuel conflicts; the cyclical
flows of refugees and internally displaced persons, and
their resulting humanitarian consequences; the high
number of civilian victims in that context ofinsecurity;
sexual and gender-based abuse, particularly against
women and girls; and lest we forget, the poignant case
of children who are often recruited by warring parties.

Given those crucial challenges, the momentum
launched by the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region is of critical relevance, in that it allows us
to establish a holistic regional approach that, above and
beyond providing localized and necessarily piecemeal
responses to conflicts and crises, takes into account of
the need for prevention, integration, and the promotion
of peace and sustainable development in the region.
Similarly, the Senegalese delegation believes that the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region, which was signed in 2006 by members
of that organization, represents a reference point for
stimulating and coordinating regional efforts in the
following areas: peace and security; democracy and
good governance; economic development and regional
integration; and humanitarian and social issues.

A similar approach seems to justify the conclusion
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which, as its name suggests, is specifically designed to
handle the challenges raised by the chronic insecurity
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I take this opportunity to call on the signatory
countries to strengthen their commitment and
cooperation in promoting the effective implementation
of that important regional instrument.

Analyzing several crisis situations in Africa
teaches us that, when duly assumed, regional leadership
can be a decisive factor in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. It is therefore important to work to
better harmonize the policies initiated by the various
subregional, regional and international organizations
with regard to the Great Lakes region with a view to
effective and coordinated action on the ground at every
stage, from early warning to the lasting resolution of
conflicts, including peacebuilding, which is in and of
itself a considerable tool for preventing the resurgence
of crises. Moreover, taking into account the importance
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, the delegation of Senegal stresses the
importance of strengthening of a partnership with
greater synergies between the Security Council and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
which your country, Sir, is leading so effectively. We are
convinced that sharing efforts and resources will build
the capacities and effectiveness of regional entities in
preventing and resolving conflicts.

The security challenges facing the region require
the reinforced commitment of the international
community and optimal regional cooperation in order,
among other things, to end the threat of armed groups
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and effectively combat the illegal exploitation
of raw materials. We also need a strong commitment
of the States of the region and regional and subregional
organizations, supported by the relevant international
bodies, to assuming responsibility for electoral
processes in an effective and sustainable manner, which
very often take place against a background marked by
tension that can lead to devastaing conflict.

We also take this opportunity to commend the
outstanding contribution of women in the region to
peace and reconciliation, in particular through the Great
Lakes Women's Platform, which allows women to make
their voices heard and to participate more actively in
the decisions and social and economic development of
the region. The programme is a concrete embodiment of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, and has already chalked up
significant achievements that draw in further support
at regional and international levels.

In conclusion, I should like to stress the importance
of the development aspect of the search for solutions to
the challenges facing the Great Lakes region, and call
for the full inclusion not only of women, but also of
young people, who need to be included in the private
sector of the Great Lakes region.

