Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I also thank Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Fisher for his
briefing on the situation in Haiti. I would like to convey
Australia's deep gratitude to all the staff of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
for their hard work in consolidating stability in Haiti.
We acknowledge the efforts made towards recovery and
stabilization in Haiti over recent years, in particular
in the face of a range of complex challenges and the
impact of natural disasters such as Hurricane Sandy
and Tropical Storm Isaac.

In order to address the difficult challenges ahead,
it is vital that Haiti build, with the continued support of
the international community, a system of Government
that functions effectively and can build the capacities of

the country, and thereby serves the needs of the Haitian
population. In that context, we share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General and others about
the ongoing political stalemate in Haiti, including in the
establishment of the provisional electoral council. The
stalemate erodes confidence in the political system,
could undermine the prospects for making further
development gains and could potentially undermine the
valuable progress achieved so far. Credible, free and
fair elections in 2013 are critical for Haiti's recovery,
reconstruction and development. We urge that there
be progress in appointing members to the provisional
electoral council, so that partial legislative, municipal
and local elections can be organized and then a
permanent electoral council established.

Acknowledging the close link between political
stability and economic development, we welcome
Prime Minister Lamothe's statement that Haiti is open
for business. But we note that political stability will
strengthen that prospect.

The support that MINUSTAH is providing to
prepare for elections must continue, including the
technical assistance provided to electoral council staff.
However, responsibility for overcoming the political
impasse rests with Haiti's leaders themselves and will
require new patterns of political consensus-building
across key issues.

While we welcome the overall stable security
situation, the marked increase in major crimes in the
second half of last year is a concern. Efforts to support
the protection of vulnerable groups in Haiti therefore
remain an important part of the work of MINUSTAH. In
particular, as others have mentioned, sexual and gender-
based violence continues to have a devastating impact
on vulnerable groups, particularly women and children
in impoverished districts, displaced persons camps and
remote areas. It is important that the capacity of both
the Haitian National Police and the judicial system be
built to investigate and prosecute perpetrators of sexual
and gender-based violence.

More broadly, a functional legal system is vital
to ensuring accountability, upholding human rights
and delivering access to justice - and to building
confidence among citizens in the institutions of the
State. We support the Secretary-General's proposal
to develop a national justice development plan to
strengthen the rule of law and buildjudicial capacity.

Although there has been a drop in cholera infection
rates, we remain concerned about the epidemic and
the increasing cholera mortality rates. Following the
devastation caused by Hurricane Sandy, Australia
we wre pleased to contribute to the the Caribbean
Community progreamme for the provision of drinking
water, sanitation, et cetera for Haitians at risk from
cholera. We strongly support the Secretary-General's
initiative for the elimination of cholera in Haiti and the
leadership of Dr. Paul Farmer as his Special Adviser.

We welcome the work that is beeing done to
develop a plan for MINUSTAH's reconfiguration and
conditions-based consolidation, as well as the inclusion
of the consolidation plan in the annex to the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/139). The definition of core
tasks for the Mission will enable it to take forward its
work in partnership with Haitian authorities in areas
in which it can have the most positive impact. In our
view, the four areas of focus constitute an appropriate
consolidation of MINUSTAH's efforts. An important
aspect in taking forward the plan will be to identify
and review appropriate measures for assessing progress
against key benchmarks, especially as we continue to
review MINUSTAH's mandate and force levels.

Policing is particularly important, as is often the
case with stabilization missions - in this case, building
the capacity of the National Police to gradually assume
full responsibility for security throughout the country.
We recognize the joint efforts of the international
community and MINUSTAH in assisting the Haitian
National Police to meet major benchmarks set out in its
five-year development plan.

Creating durable and transformative change such as
that being undertaken by Haiti takes time. Strengthening
institutions and establishing good governance to
the stage of providing security, justice and jobs and
breaking cycles of poverty and violence is a long-term
effort. The challenge for the international community,
therefore, is to sustain its collaboration with Haiti. The
recent finalization of the integrated strategic framework
for 2013 to 2016 between the United Nations system
and the Haitian Government is a very welcome step
forward in that continuing partnership. We welcome
the alignment of the framework with Haiti's strategic
development plan, and we encourage the continued
close collaboration between MINUSTAH, the United
Nations system, the Haitian Government and Haiti's
other international partners to ensure a congruence of
focus and effort.
