Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by welcoming you, Madam
President, and by saying how pleased we are that you
have agreed to preside over this important meeting. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and informative report on the situation in Iraq
(S/2003/715) and on the work of the United Nations on
the ground pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003). I would
also like to warmly thank Special Representative
Sergio Vieira de Mello and his entire team, who are
working in particularly difficult circumstances. I also
wish to welcome Mr. Adnan Pachachi, Ms. Aqila Al-
Hashemi and Mr. Ahmed Chalabi, who are members of
the recently established interim Governing Council. We
have listened very carefully and with great interest to
the statement made by Mr. Pachachi, who heads the
delegation of the interim Governing Council.

As French Foreign Minister Dominique de
Villepin has publicly stated several times in recent
days, the position of France is well known, as is the
position of the European Union, which was made
known yesterday during the Foreign Ministers' meeting
of the European Union's General Affairs and External
Relations Council. I would simply like to recall a few
main points here.

What are our goals? France wants to see the
successful political and economic reconstruction of
Iraq. Like the Secretary-General, we are convinced that
the solution is political rather than military. We want a
swift restoration of Iraqi sovereignty. The people of
Iraq - who have been left exhausted by two wars, a
dozen years under sanctions and decades of political
repression and violations of human rights - have
suffered enough. It is incumbent upon the international
community to help Iraqis once again become masters
of their own future, as well as of their resources,
without delay.

In that regard, the recent establishment in
Baghdad of an interim Governing Council having
certain executive and budgetary powers is a first,
positive step towards the establishment of a
representative and internationally recognized
Government to be established by the Iraqi people. Like
the Secretary-General, France believes that this body is
a partner with whom the United Nations and the
international community should be able to work as a
first element of Iraq's provisional administration,
whose establishment is called for in paragraph 9 or
resolution 1483 (2003). The first step must be
completed and the process of national and regional
dialogue must continue. We welcome the active role
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in setting up the Council. That is something
everyone has appreciated.

How are the goals to be achieved? France fully
supports the approach taken by the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, in particular with
regard to the following five points.

First of all, we agree fully with the Secretary-
General's analysis and proposals regarding the political
transition, as well as with his resolve to work on
respect for human rights as a matter of priority.
Promoting human rights and the rights of women must
be at the very heart of the work on State and national
reconstruction. The recommendations to draw up a
road map and a clear timetable are very relevant, and
they should be pursued. The people of Iraq need a
visible and credible political prospect in order that they
may regain hope and be able to mobilize constructively
to ensure a successful political transition. As the
Secretary-General has said, "There is a pressing need
to set out a clear and specific sequence of events
leading to the end of military occupation".
(5/2003/715, para. 107)

Secondly, we also fully support the approach
pursued by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative. That approach is based on inclusive
dialogue at the national and regional levels. Only an
inclusive approach at the national level will make
possible the emergence of a sovereign Government that
is legitimate and representative of all Iraqi society, as
well as pluralistic and respectful of the rights and
freedoms of all. Moreover, as the Secretary-General
has stressed, the regional dimension is of great
importance. Only a process that involves Iraq's
neighbours will make it possible to ensure the
emergence of a Government that is accepted and
recognized. That is essential to stability in the region.

Thirdly, we agree with the statement made by the
Secretary-General on the distribution of roles between
the United Nations and the coalition within the
framework of resolution 1483 (2003). Within that
limited framework, it is the Coalition Provisional
Authority and not the United Nations that is given the
responsibility for administering Iraq, ensuring the well-
being of its population and restoring security and
stability in the country.

Fourthly, we fully support the various proposals
made by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for the gradual development of the
responsibilities of the United Nations. In particular, we
support the creation of a United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the implementation of a work
programme for the remaining part of this year focused
on the facilitation of the political transition, the
promotion of human rights, humanitarian assistance
and the orderly conclusion of the oil-for-food
programme. We believe that those activities should be
gradually broadened, as the Secretary-General
proposes, to include a truly central role for the United
Nations in the conduct of the political dialogue and the
preparation of a new constitution. That broadened role
should also lead to active participation in technical
assistance for reform, whether in the area of electoral
assistance, the establishment of rule of law or the
judicial, administrative and public service sectors. We
believe that only the United Nations has the legitimacy,
impartiality and expertise necessary for ensuring the
effective rehabilitation of the State. It is essential to
preserve their independence, which is the guarantee of
legitimacy. As the Secretary-General has proposed, the
United Nations can also provide excellent counsel for
carrying out the demobilization and reintegration of
former soldiers, which is crucial for the sustainable
stability of the country.

Fifthly, we encourage the Secretary-General to
assume an ambitious approach to the role of the United
Nations in the process of the economic and financial
reconstruction of Iraq. The increased mobilization of
the international community involves promoting the
transparency of the financial, commercial and
economic mechanisms currently being established. We
think it is essential that the future International
Advisory and Monitoring Board of the Development
Fund for Iraq really has the role foreseen for it in
resolution 1483 (2003) and has the real power to verify
that the Iraqi oil resources are used in accordance with
the provisions of paragraphs 13 and 14 of resolution
1483 (2003). We believe that it is equally important
that the orderly conclusion of the oil-for-food
programme is carried out transparently and efficiently,
without discrimination with respect to suppliers. We
hope that donor efforts will take place within an
appropriate multilateral framework. We support the
holding of a donors' conference in October and the
idea of creating a special multilateral fund, managed
collectively under the aegis of the United Nations
Development Programme and the international
financial institutions. Finally, it seems essential to
ensure that the launching of the process of economic
reconstruction, including the rehabilitation of the
petroleum sector, is carried out in full respect of
relevant international law, in particular the Geneva
Conventions and the Hague Regulations.

Resolution 1483 (2003) made it possible to regain
the unity of the Security Council. But that resolution
remains an imperfect and limited framework. France
remains convinced that everyone will benefit from
establishing a genuine international partnership and a
global approach to the security, political, economic and
social problems that places the United Nations right at
the centre of the reconstruction process. We note with
interest that the debate and reflections are starting to
point in that direction. Prolonged instability and
insecurity in Iraq would be harmful for all. We are
concerned at the current situation, which has caused
the saddening death of American and British soldiers.
Winning the peace is in the common interest of Iraqis,
the countries of the region, the coalition and the
international community as a whole. France will
continue, vigilantly and in an open and constructive
spirit, to shoulder its responsibilities as a member of
the Security Council. The Iraqi people can count on our
sense of responsibility and our concern to help
reconstruct and rehabilitate their country.

