Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I very much welcome
this opportunity, early in the new year, to participate in
the Security Council's discussion on the Peacebuilding
Commission, and to do so in my capacity as

Chairperson of the Commission's country-specific
meeting on Sierra Leone.

Allow me to refer to my statement before the
Security Council made on 22 December 2006 (see S/PV.5608), when I was invited to brief Council
members on the outcome of the country-specific
meetings on Sierra Leone that had taken place in
October and December 2006. While various activities
have been ongoing in Sierra Leone itself, as well as at
an informal level within the Peacebuilding
Commission, I believe that my 22 December statement
still very much reflects the state of play as concerns the
Commission's involvement with Sierra Leone. Allow
me, therefore, to refrain from repeating the overview
that I presented at that time and instead make a number
of additional remarks that may feed into today's
discussions.

First, I very much welcome the interest shown by
the Security Council in the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as demonstrated by
today's debate. The same is true for the interest shown
by other bodies within the United Nations, such as the
General Assembly - which intends to discuss the
Commission's work next week - and the Economic
and Social Council, and by those outside the United
Nations. Today represents a good opportunity to
strengthen our common focus on our shared interests,
that is, to assist Sierra Leone and Burundi - as the
first countries under consideration - in building peace
and in preventing any possible relapse into conflict.

Secondly, I wish to stress that good progress has
been made in Sierra Leone in addressing the identified
gaps in critical areas. Allow me to highlight just a few
recent developments.

A national steering committee on peacebuilding
has been established by the Government of Sierra
Leone and the United Nations to relate to the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund. It will bring together Government, the United
Nations, donors and civil society representatives to
jointly address peacebuilding priorities.

Also in Sierra Leone, consultations are ongoing
to finalize the priority plan for funding from the
Peacebuilding Fund. Once the review process
stipulated in the terms of reference for the Fund is
completed, it is expected that a country envelope in
excess of the initially indicated $25 million will be
made available.

At the Peacebuilding Commission's most recent
country-specific meeting on Sierra Leone, members of
the Commission urged the international community to
lend support to the Government of Sierra Leone in
order to broaden its donor base and secure assistance,
including further debt relief. I am pleased to note that
the World Bank's International Development
Association and the International Monetary Fund have
agreed that Sierra Leone has made sufficient progress
to reach the completion point under the enhanced
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.

The Commission also called on the international
community to provide, in a timely manner, adequate
resources and support for the upcoming presidential
and parliamentary elections, including capacity-
building to ensure women's equal participation in the
political process. In this area a great deal of progress
has been observed. The initial resource gap of $7
million for the election has been reduced to less than
$3 million, with further pledges expected. Progress has
been made in establishing an independent National
Electoral Commission to prepare credible elections.

The signing of an electoral code of conduct by
eight political parties, the strengthening of the Sierra
Leone police and the countrywide discussions on a
media code of conduct for electoral reporting are other
examples of progress.

Finally, allow me to revert to the process of the
Peacebuilding Commission's discussions in New York.
Next week, members of the country-specific meetings
on Sierra Leone will discuss a work plan for the work
of the Commission on Sierra Leone. This work plan is
to guide our activities in the coming months leading up
to the next country-specific meeting on Sierra Leone,
due to take place in March or April. It sets a timeline
and defines the actions to be undertaken by the Sierra
Leone Government, the United Nations system and
other stakeholders. Ownership, especially at the
national level, and close coordination between New
York and national actors are crucial. A key focus of the
work of the Commission on Sierra Leone in these
coming months will be the development of an
integrated approach to outline clearly the commitments
made by the Government of Sierra Leone and the
international community.

I am confident that in the spirit that has guided
the Commission's discussions thus far, we will be able
to continue to engage in meaningful discussions in the
country-specific meetings on Sierra Leone and, in the
process, contribute to the building of peace in Sierra
Leone. It will require the involvement of all the
stakeholders: the Government of Sierra Leone, the full
membership of the Peacebuilding Commission,
potential other donors, the United Nations country
team and the individual United Nations bodies on the
ground, non-governmental organizations, civil society
and the private sector.

It will also require continued support by the
Security Council, and I therefore very much welcome
the Council's continued engagement regarding the
Peacebuilding Commission and Sierra Leone in
particular.

