The President: I should like to inform the
Council that l have received a letter from the
representative of Nepal, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/476, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/453, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United
Nations assistance in support of its peace process.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to the following documents: S/2010/472,
containing the text of a letter dated 7 September 2010
from the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
S/2010/473, containing the text of a letter dated 9
September 2010 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council; and
S/2010/474, containing the text of a letter dated 14
September 2010 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1939 (2010).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
10-53441

