Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I wish
first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, and to join others in congratulating and
encouraging Ambassador Fowler on the timely initiatives
he has taken this year.

It made great sense for him to travel to the region
affected by the sanctions regime. Last year, the then
Chairman of the Sierra Leone sanctions Committee, the
representative of Sweden, had the same idea. This has
proved to be an extremely useful exercise. I think it
would be a good idea for the chairmen of other sanctions
committees to follow Ambassador Fowler's example.
Such travel gives us a far more realistic picture of the
ways in which sanctions regimes are applied and of their
impact on the affected regions, and provides the Security
Council with more specific and, I would hope, more
positive help in its work. I would just stress once again
that the Chairman's initiative here is very welcome
indeed.

 

I agree also with Ambassador Fowler's
conscientiousness in reminding us of the facts and in
regularly informing the members of the Security Council
about the scope of the humanitarian disaster caused by the
war in Angola. The Security Council must bear the
numbers and the scope of the tragedy clearly in mind when
we compare the Council's work on this subject with that on
other crises, especially those in Europe.

We should, I think, endorse the philosophy voiced by
Ambassador Fowler when he said that in order to restore
the means to attain a reasonable peace and in order not to
eliminate any possibility of discussion, we must reduce
UNITA's war machine. Obviously, this involves reducing
UNITA's material and financial resources. This brings us
back to the notion of sanctions.

We appreciate the realism with which Ambassador
Fowler undertook his mission. He made two trips and
sought in a concrete, simple and logical way to consider
what can be done to ensure that the sanctions work and that
UNITA's military capacity is consequently reduced. That
capacity is what is now preventing Angola from returning
to the road to peace and economic development.

In that connection, I must stress the great interest of
all of Ambassador Fowler's recommendations. I would
highlight recommendation nineteen, relating to the diamond
industry, for this is the crux of the war waged by UNITA.
The talks Ambassador Fowler held with individuals in the
diamond trade were useful. We must strengthen controls
and set better standards in that trade, and we must first and
foremost lay stress on the importance of certificates of
origin. This is a straightforward and direct recommendation.
We commend Ambassador Fowler both for bringing this to
the Security Council and for having already discussed it in
the field. We can only hope that those responsible for this
trade - which, of course, is a legitimate one - will ensure
that there are no departures from the standards and that,
through the institution of a more specific and serious
certificate of origin, UNITA's sources of income are dried
up. It would thus be very useful to follow Ambassador
Fowler's recommendation faithfully.

For our part, we have already stated that we will fully
support the activities of the expert panels to be established
by Ambassador Fowler; we are entirely willing to respond
to any request to nominate experts, and, as we have said,
are willing to provide material support for the work of the
expert panels.

Finally, we should welcome the response in the
subregion, at the seventieth ordinary session of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity, and among African countries to Ambassador
Fowler's recommendations. This is commendable, because
we know that some of the countries that have stated their
willingness to help strengthen the sanctions regime are in
a very difficult economic situation; their efforts are
therefore all the more highly appreciated. They deserve
strong support, because what is done with respect to
Angola can also be useful as an example to be followed.
We must recall the very harmful impact of the diamond
trade on the crisis in Sierra Leone. Everything that can be
done and everything that has been achieved thanks to
Ambassador Fowler's work and the support it will
provide to the Security Council, and thanks to the positive
response of African countries on Angola, should prove
useful also for other crisis areas such as Sierra Leone.

