Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): In the light of the discussion,
and bearing in mind the content of the resolution just
adopted, I wish to make a few observations.

The resolution is important primarily for two reasons.
First, it carefully defines the priorities of humanitarian
action, which require the full political support of the
Security Council. It defines an approach which merits
political commitment and the sustained practical effort of
the States Members of the United Nations. In addition to
the inherent value of humanitarianism, the action dealt with
in the resolution also represents a political priority. Most
United Nations Member States already understand that.
However, an additional emphasis on this priority,
pronounced formally by the Security Council, adds to the
understanding of the priority nature of these tasks.

The discussion tonight has shown that there are
distortions of fact and misinterpretations of international
law. Therefore, it is important that the resolution adopted
tonight set priorities correctly and clearly. That is the first
of the two basic factors of this resolution's relevance.

Secondly, the resolution contains an important element
of potential which could help the Security Council restore
its role under the Charter of the United Nations. Several
members of the Security Council have referred in their
statements to that potential. The resolution addresses a
number of areas of humanitarian activity where
humanitarian and security or political concerns meet.
These issues need to be addressed both at the level of
practical humanitarian action and at the level of political
policy-making. Thus, they remain among the important
concerns of the Security Council.

Finally, the resolution addresses the search for a
comprehensive solution. This solution will need to have
an adequate political framework. In this context, the
resolution refers to the recent initiative of the Foreign
Ministers of the Group of Eight countries. The statement
made by the Foreign Ministers of the Group of Eight on
6 May contains a comprehensive set of basic concepts
from which a search for peace can start. These concepts
need further elaboration and refinement, and the Security
Council should play a role in this process. We hope that
a determined effort in that direction will start before too
long. Such a process will also enable the Security Council
to address the causes of humanitarian crises, to which
some speakers tonight have referred.

We believe that that approach is a correct one. It is
gradual and not yet fully supported. The abstentions in the
voting tonight testify to this lack of complete support.
However, we would like to appeal to all Council members
to understand that the unity and resolve of the entire
international community are the essential conditions for
the success of the efforts for peace, and we believe that
the resolution adopted tonight is a relevant contribution to
that end.

