Like others, we also would like to wish a speedy recovery for Deputy Special Envoy Matar. We thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing and, as always, we express the full support of the Dominican Republic for the political process in the Syrian Arab Republic with a view to helping Syrians to start building once and for all the hope, trust and confidence they need to emerge from this horrible conflict. There is no military solution to the Syrian conflict. The only sustainable solution is one that will be based on the broad political process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and on the will to achieve its full implementation. We hope the Syrian Government understands this. We are pleased with the arrangements for the holding of new and hopefully revitalized talks among the parties in Geneva next week, within the framework of the Constitutional Committee. To achieve a successful outcome on these talks - an outcome that is conducive to a renewed commitment to the political process - all parties need to engage constructively, in good faith and with mutual respect. We therefore encourage the members of the Constitutional Committee to direct all their efforts towards alleviating the precarious living conditions of the Syrian population and restoring their prospects for a life of peace and dignity in which their rights are protected and fully met. Again, the resurgence of hope and trust in the political process is at the core of the country's future reconciliation. Women's voices must resonate louder than ever in all aspects of the broader political process, but especially in the Constitutional Committee, as a fundamental part of creating a new national configuration based on the rule of law, respect for human rights and the fundamental freedoms of all citizens. We reiterate our call for the full, meaningful and equality-based participation of women at all stages of the constitutional talks. Allow me to highlight a few points on reconciliation. For the Dominican Republic, reconciliation in Syria will be possible only if it is based on a credible political response to the legitimate aspirations of Syrians and if it is in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Reconciliation will be possible only if durable solutions are implemented for the entire civilian population, including the internally displaced persons and refugees spread across the region and beyond. These people need to be able to return to their homes or to wherever they choose to live in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner. The families of detainees, abductees and missing persons need to know the fate of their loved ones. It is their right. We therefore request that Special Envoy Pedersen redouble his efforts and achieve greater results in this regard, including by listening to the families themselves and working with them to design ways for them to move forward. Mr. Pedersen has our full support in this endeavour, and we respectfully request that he provide more information on this matter at his next briefing. In conclusion, we remain extremely concerned about the current compounding crises present in Syria. The impacts of the economic crisis as well as its potentially devastating inability to cope with a coronavirus disease outbreak threatens to throw the country into unforeseen and unprecedented despair. The Security Council has a long-standing moral responsibility to alleviate the suffering of the people, starting with joining with efforts aimed at preventing increased suffering and at ensuring that mounting humanitarian needs are met in a principled, unhindered and sustained way. Let us join our forces together to achieve that end through solidarity, using our common humanity as a starting point.
