Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We join previous delegations in conveying our
appreciation for the convening of this meeting. We also
thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Dr. Hala and Ms. Amina
Khoulani for sharing their moving and regrettable
testimonies and briefings on the issue before us today.

Although the humanitarian situation in Syria
remains difficult, the issue of detainees and missing
persons must remain a core issue, ofwhich the Security
Council must continue to accord its useful consideration.
It should be recalled that this issue is one of the five
priority objectives, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015), and that it is not only necessary to building
confidence between the parties to the conflict but
would also ease tensions with the millions of refugees
in neighbouring countries who lack information on
the whereabouts and well-being of their families who
are allegedly detained or missing, including women
and children. Recent reports on this issue are clear
and unambiguous. While arbitrary detentions across
the country continue to be perpetrated by all warring
parties, nowhere has the phenomenon been more
widespread than in areas under Government control.

In that context, the parties should take all possible
measures to account for persons reported missing as
a result of hostilities and provide their relatives with
any information they have about their whereabouts.
Moreover, we recall that resolutions 2254 (2015) and
2258 (2015) urge all parties to the conflict to release
any person arbitrarily detained, especially women and
children, and call on the Government authorities to
immediately release any individual whose continued
detention cannot be legally justified. We also believe
that the families of victims of enforced disappearances
have the right to know the truth about the circumstances
of the disappearance and fate of the victims and to
recover the remains of their relatives who allegedly
died while detained or were executed.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea commends the
work of the working group on detainees, abductees,
the handover of bodies and identification of missing
persons, with the participation of the United Nations,
and encourages them to spare no effort to secure the
combined release of as many people as possible. In that
regard, we welcome the recent prisoner exchange in the
framework of the Astana process and we agree with
other delegations that all detainees must be released.

On several occasions, the Secretary-General has
noted in his reports the situation of the personnel of
United Nations agencies, programmes or funds who
have been arrested or have disappeared in Syria. We
therefore call on all parties to take all measures to
ensure that they are released and allowed to continue
their humanitarian work.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that progress
in reaching a political agreement and enduring peace in
Syria cannot be made without urgently addressing the
need to deliver justice to Syrian victims and survivors,
as well as their families. Accordingly, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea supports initiatives to establish
a national reparations mechanism in the Syrian Arab
Republic to assess damages, hear complaints and award
appropriate individual or community reparations and
other suitable remedies, financial or otherwise.

