Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on having
put on the Council's agenda the item on the situation in
Liberia, thus giving us the opportunity to hold this debate,
 

open to all the States Members of the United Nations.
Many thanks.

We are grateful for the very thorough report of the
Secretary-General, which contains a very interesting
paragraph on the efforts of the United Nations system and
the Bretton Woods institutions to cooperate in the economic
and social development of Liberia. Without such
cooperation, any political agreement would have a very
flimsy foundation.

I am also grateful for the presence here of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Liberia.

This being the first time we have made a formal
statement on the activities of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), I wish to emphasize the
enormous importance we attach to the peace process and to
reconstruction in Liberia. This national and regional effort
supported by the United Nations has, in general, shown
positive results, and, until the occurrence of the recent
events on which I shall comment later, it symbolized the
way in which complementary regional, national and
international efforts can be coordinated to bring peace and
stability to a country.

In fact, and in the first place, the parties to the
conflict, after many disagreements, have concluded a series
of agreements, beginning with Yamoussoukro and Cotonou
proceeding to the Abuja Agreement of last year, thus
setting the course of a peace process.

Secondly, the African region, through the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and its
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and the political follow-up
of the situation by friendly, concerned countries, such as
Ghana and Nigeria, among others, has made a direct
commitment to the peace aspirations of the people of
Liberia.

Thirdly and finally, the international community,
through UNOMIL, humanitarian cooperation, support for
the needs of economic and social development and the
monitoring of human rights and the electoral process,
inter alia, is strengthening national and regional efforts. In
this context, the Secretary-General' 5 Special Representative,
Ambassador Nyakyi, has been of fundamental importance.

Thus, from the standpoint of the United Nations, this
three-pronged design is the best one for the Organization's
intervention in areas of conflict. However, as always and as
has been made clear by the analysis of the situation we
have heard this morning reality is much more complex
than the design. However, we must point out that,
considering the situation that obtained in the country in
the recent past, the peace process was making relatively
good progress, even with the delays and setbacks that we
all acknowledge, towards the elections to be held in
August 1996.

This is why, in addition to the hopes raised by the
circumstances I have mentioned, we must express
immense regret at the acts of violence that have occurred
since 28 December and the shadow of mistrust they have
cast. In the report we are considering today, the
Secretary-General presents a somewhat chilling account
of the suffering of the civilian population in Liberia, and
this gives rise to our deepest concern. This deplorable
resurgence of violence, together with the delay in
disarmament and demobilization, is in no way in keeping
with the expectations aroused by the signing of the Abuja
Agreement, and it naturally casts doubt on the credibility
of its signatories.

It is essential that the relatively calm situation
achieved before these Violations of the cease-fire be
restored. But it is obvious that without displays of
genuine political will to carry out successfully the peace
process in Liberia, the international community would be
less enthusiastic about maintaining support for the
activities required to do so.

We especially regret the suffering of the civilian
population, in particular the loss of human life, the forced
displacement of citizens and the unfortunate recurrence,
in a United Nations peace-keeping operation, of the use
of human shields, as a result of the fighting in
Tubmanburg and Kle. In this context, we wish to
highlight the efforts that were under way before the latest
outbreak of violence to facilitate the return of the 750,000
Liberian refugees.

We must pay special tribute to the forces of
ECOMOG and express our solidarity with it and our
condolences for those recently killed and wounded. It is
essential for ECOMOG to have a status-of-forces
agreement that strengthens its security so that its
deployment may be completed as soon as possible.

In View of all these considerations, we wish to
support the Secretary-General's proposal and declare
ourselves in favour of a new extension of UN OMIL, and,
in particular, we agree with the final observations made

 

by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 41 to 45 of his
report.
We believe that one last effort by the United Nations
is required to consolidate the wide-ranging advances that
have been made towards peace and make it possible for all
these efforts to reach the desired conclusion.

As we can all see, we are at a decisive point in this
process. With a view to the holding of the legislative and
presidential elections on 20 August next, we must maintain
support for UNOMIL and strengthen the hope shared by all
that peace among Liberians, with the support of the region
and the international community, will be possible.

In conclusion, we appeal to the leaders of the various
factions to place the interests of the human beings, families
and civilian communities of Liberia above their own
political, personal, group or factional interests - legitimate
though they may seem - because ultimately, as I believe
all of us in this Chamber agree, only Liberia can bring
peace to Liberia.

