Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank the Chairpersons of the sanctions Committees
who provided briefings to this body this morning. I
would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. We join others in the unequivocal
condemnation of all terrorist acts, irrespective of their
motivation and wherever and by whomever they are
committed.

In January 2009, Liechtenstein submitted its sixth
report to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, in
response to the comments contained in the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment (PIA) prepared by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate. We appreciate
the PIA as a useful tool to measure success in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), and would like
to highlight some recent domestic measures taken by
Liechtenstein.

In March 2009, new legislation entered into force
aimed at preventing the use of the financial system for
money laundering and terrorist financing, thereby
substantively implementing the third European Union
Directive on Combating Money-Laundering. Also in
March, a new comprehensive sanctions act entered into
force. The law improves the legal basis for cooperation
with international organizations in the implementation
of sanctions and increases penalties for sanctions
violations. Liechtenstein will continue to take all
necessary measures, in conformity with the rule of law
and applicable human rights standards, to prevent any
potential abuse of its financial centre for terrorist
purposes.

We are grateful for the insightful report that the
Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) published recently.
We particularly appreciate the update about the status of
various legal proceedings challenging the compatibility of
the consolidated list with applicable human rights
standards, especially with respect to domestic
implementation measures.

We take note of recent findings as well as
ongoing proceedings of the Human Rights Committee,
the European Court of Justice, the European Court of
Human Rights and domestic courts in several
countries, as we have just heard from our colleague
from Pakistan. We encourage the Council and the 1267
Committee again to engage in a dialogue with
interested States on how to ensure that fair and clear
procedures exist for placing individuals and entities on
the consolidated list and for removing them, as well as
for granting humanitarian exemptions, thus fulfilling a
long-overdue target we set ourselves in the Summit
Outcome Document of 2005. The target date for further
reforms and review should be the upcoming renewal of
resolution 1822 (2008) at the end of this year.

In that context, we would like to recall the
discussion paper of May 2008, contained in document
S/2008/428, in which Liechtenstein, together with a
group of like-minded countries, formulated suggestions
for an expert panel to assist the 1267 Committee in the
consideration of de-listing requests before it. I would
like to stress that this is not a static proposal but simply
a starting point for a discussion in which numerous

concerns must be taken into account. In the light of the
developments that have taken place since last May, in
particular some of the most prominent court cases, we
are ready to contribute fresh ideas to such a dialogue.
We also know that a number of other countries from
various regions, Council members and non-members
alike, are interested in contributing in that respect.

Due process standards in the Council's terrorism-
related targeted sanctions are only one within a range
of issues that need to be addressed in order to ensure
that the international fight against terrorism is
undertaken in conformity with applicable standards of
human rights and international humanitarian law. In
this spirit, earlier this month we were pleased to host,
together with Mexico, a presentation at United Nations
Headquarters of the findings of the Eminent Jurists
Panel on Terrorism, Counter-Terrorism and Human
Rights. The report illustrates that security and human
rights are not mutually exclusive, but that human rights
are a necessary basis for legitimate and effective action
against terrorism. Human rights standards inherently
balance sometimes competing interests and provide
important guidance where difficult choices need to be
made. In recent years, this balance has been sorely
lacking in many parts of the world. We would therefore
like to echo the Panel's call for a leadership role for the
United Nations, and the Council in particular, in
restoring respect for human rights in the counter-
terrorism efforts of its agencies and Member States.

