Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I am grateful to you for giving the
Council once again an opportunity to examine the
situation in the Middle East, 11 days after the adoption
of resolution 1701 (2006).

A review of the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) for
the period 11 to 17 August 2006 (S/2006/670) shows
genuine cause for hope, overshadowed, unfortunately,
by recent developments in the field - notably, serious
Violations of the cessation of hostilities that was
decided on 14 August.

While thanking Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim
Gambari for his report on the prevailing situation in the
field, we cannot fail to consider the magnitude of the
tasks that remain to be undertaken, not only by the
actors but also by the international community.

As everyone knows, the delicate balance
achieved in resolution 1701 (2006) is fragile. The
implementation of this important document requires
the full cooperation of all parties if the elements are to
be applied in order to establish a new type of
relationship between Israel and its neighbours, one
based on mutual respect, integrity and the sovereignty
of each.

We condemn any violation of the cessation of
hostilities, from any quarter, because the logic of force
is not only contrary to the principles of international
law, but also, more to the point, it has revealed its
limitations. Whether we consider military activities
attributed to Hizbollah - which have reached a critical
point likely to drag the Lebanese State into the
maelstrom of an undeclared war with the Israeli State
and as an indirect consequence set the entire region on
fire through a build up of alliances that could follow -
or whether we consider the Israeli tendency to mistake
effects for causes in a war already rooted in Palestinian
territory, the solution cannot be found in the logic of
confrontation and exclusion.

The cycle of Violence has reached a critical
threshold with, on the one hand, the sophistication of
the arms used by the militias - which not only reduces
the chances of the implementation of resolution 1559
(2004) but also makes Israeli territory far more
vulnerable than before - and, on the other hand, the
risky strategy of targeted assassinations and the
kidnapping of high officials in the Palestinian
Government, with the recent cases of the Deputy Prime
Minister and the Secretary-General of the Legislative
Council. Paradoxically, that reminds us of the
kidnapping of Israeli soldiers, an operation that we
condemned at the time while asking that the victims be
released.

In our View, the systematic weakening of the
Palestinian Authority does not in any way serve the
objectives of the peace and stability of the region.
More than ever, the prerogatives of the Palestinian
Authority need to be restored so that it can play the
role we expect in the process of implementing the road
map, particularly taking into account the principle of
land for peace, with the resolute support of the Quartet,
the cooperation of regional organizations such as the
League of Arab States, and the full engagement of the
United Nations.

Certainly the surprise attack on 19 August by an
Israeli commando against Hizbollah positions in the
Bekaa valley - apparently to prevent the resupply of
weapons - shows, if it was necessary, both the
precariousness of the situation and how urgent it is to
deploy a strengthened United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). It also points to the need to assist
the Lebanese army in order to facilitate its deployment
in the south and in all sectors from which Israeli forces
have withdrawn or are in the process of withdrawing.
The successful deployment of the Lebanese army is
one of the keys to stabilization of the situation at the
Israeli-Lebanese border, one of the most sensitive
theatres of operation of the Middle East. Thus, we
cannot but encourage the effective deployment, in
keeping with the commitments undertaken by all
parties.

What is more, the fragility of the situation and the
risk of things getting out of control, with incalculable
consequences, necessitate the rapid deployment of a
strengthened UNIFIL. It must have a clearly defined
mandate so that troop-contributing countries will be
able to make the necessary arrangements in full
knowledge of the facts.

In a context of generalized precariousness, such
as that we deplore today, the efforts carried out by the
humanitarian workers to assist the wounded
populations and to restore the destroyed Lebanese
infrastructure deserve our recognition and our support.
This is an occasion to express thanks for all forms of
aid already granted or pledged by the partners of
Lebanon.

As regards Africa, we have always expressed our
active sympathy for many Lebanese families, who have
always been welcome and have found hospitality on
our continent, allowing many to recover, socially and
economically, from the traumas they endured.

The fragile situation leads us to echo the
Secretary-General's appeal for all parties scrupulously
to respect the cessation of hostilities and for a durable
ceasefire to finally be negotiated and established. We
also appeal to countries having an influence on the
actors in the conflict to energetically exercise that
influence in order to consolidate the process under way
and promote a lasting peace between Israel, its Arab
neighbours and all the peoples in the region.

The limits of force have been sufficiently
demonstrated so that henceforth the parties can show
more interest in the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and in initiating on a definitive settlement
of the Middle East crisis on the basis of the relevant
proposals already made. The ultimate objective would
be the consolidation of the national institutions of the
Palestinian people living in harmony with the Israeli
people.

The Security Council should grasp this
opportunity to accelerate the march of history in that
part of the world. That is how it can credibly endorse
the true aspirations of all for durable peace and
security.

