Mr. Amorim (Brazil): It is with great pleasure that I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. Your
competent guidance, which has already assisted the Security
Council in discharging its responsibilities effectively during
the first half of your tenure, will undoubtedly have a
favourable impact on the consideration of the item before
us today, to which both our countries ascribe such great
importance. Brazil is particularly satisfied to see you, the
Permanent Representative of Portugal, presiding over the
Security Council when the prospects for lasting peace in
Angola are so encouraging. The symbolism of this
circumstance will not go unnoticed. I would like also to
express our appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Zbigniew Wlosowicz, for his leadership in presiding over
the Council during the month of March.

I wish to pay a special tribute to the Secretary-General
for his timely visit to Angola, which has had a very
positive impact on the peace process. The efforts of his
Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, continue to be
essential for the successful conclusion of the process.
Likewise, the endeavours of the troika of observer States
deserve our recognition.

The Council has met during recent months in a
sombre mood of unease and apprehension over the situation
in Angola. Last Friday, however, a historic event of
momentous significance was witnessed by the Angolan
people in Luanda. After more than 30 years of devastating
war, a Government of Unity and National Reconciliation
was sworn in. While the frequent setbacks in Angola do
not allow us to welcome the latest developments without
a degree of caution, the establishment of the new
Government should indeed be hailed as a milestone. As
a single united Government of Angola takes up the
daunting task of providing all Angolans with the political
stability and economic development which they have so
long awaited, it is our sincerest hope that a successful
transition to democratic pluralism will replace, once and
for all, the violence and mistrust which have historically
marked relations between the Government and UNITA.

The Secretary-General's recent trip to Angola was
instrumental in keeping the process moving in the right
direction. His contacts with President Jose Eduardo dos
Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi contributed to bringing the
Government and UNITA closer together, thus providing
an added incentive for discussions on a programme of
Government. With the approval by the Angolan National
Assembly of a draft law, previously agreed upon between
the Government and UNITA, the status of Mr. Jonas
Savimbi was finally settled, and the last obstacles to the
establishment of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation were overcome.

We took pride in the fact that during his stay in
Angola the Secretary-General visited the Brazilian
battalion headquarters in Cuito. As in the past, and now
more than ever, Brazil remains ready to cooperate with all
Angolans in the construction of a brighter future.

We agree with the Secretary-General when he states
in his report that much remains to be done. The extension
of the administration of the Government to all areas of
the country, the demobilization of UNITA personnel, the
completion of the formation of the unified armed forces
and the national police are still challenges to be dealt
with. In his report, the Secretary-General proposed the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) until 30 June 1997
and its replacement as of 1 July by an observer mission.
We welcome this suggestion in the firm expectation that
the political scenario in Angola will continue to improve.
The international community must persevere in showing
its readiness to help Angolans. The arguments in favour
of the replacement of UNAVEM. III by an observer
mission are indeed persuasive in the light of present
trends.

Prosperity and national reconciliation in Angola are
now at hand. Brazil wishes to renew the expression of its

 

fraternal solidarity to the Angolan people as we contemplate
the promise of a new era of peace.

