Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela thanks
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
would also like to thank the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) for his briefing. We also welcome
Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In his briefing, he reviewed the activities of the
organization he chairs and indicated the priorities of
his country's chairmanship. My country would also
like to congratualte Serbia for having assumed the
OSCE chairmanship. We are certain that they will be
successful in their leadership with a View to resolving
the conflicts in the region. They can count on my
country's full support.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
in line with international law. Direct negotiation is
the most appropriate means for achieving that goal.
Likewise, on various occasions, we have underscored
that mediation by regional organizations is one of the
paths towards a negotiated resolution of conflicts, and
we therefore support the efforts of the OSCE. Under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
we can promote effective measures to be taken on
the ground through the contribution of regional and
subregional organizations and the OSCE, given the
three security areas it addresses, which are important
tools in responding to international challenges and
fostering stability and peace. That work will always be
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, with regular dialogue
under a system of coordination and complementary
actions in order to avoid any redundancy of effort in
the various areas.

We recognize that the OSCE has played an
important role in the rapprochement of peoples through
dialogue. This is reflected in the fact that, despite the
diversity of its 57 members, they have been able to
overcome differences by employing an inclusive model.
Important consensus has been reached in different
situations that have required such consensus.

We welcome the fact that during his chairmanship
Serbia will continue to work towards a peaceful
resolution of crises, confidence-building measures
and measures to strengthen solidarity, accountability
and cooperation. Those are essential elements in these
times and in situations such as in the dispute between
Armenia and Azerbaijan, where there are Security
Council resolutions that must be implemented within
the framework of a process of negotiations between
the parties. We also recognize the crucial role of the
OSCE in the Ukrainian conflict, in which important
diplomatic initiatives have been taken. Regarding the
situation in the Ukraine, we would like to reiterate our
support for the Minsk agreements signed by the Heads
of State of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany as
the only means of reaching a political resolution to the
conflict. We stress that the ceasefire must be respected,
there must not be an escalation of the conflict and there
must be a focus, beyond extraregional interests, on an
agreement being reached and on the continuity of the
diplomatic efforts for peace. We reject the discourse of
war. We think that an opportunity should be given to
options for the peaceful resolution of this crisis and a
process that will allow for the humanitarian needs of
civilians to be addressed, help to be provided to the
victims of the crisis and its root causes to be addressed.

We must continue to work to prevent conflict to
complement the principles of the OSCE through a
multidimensional approach that deals with current
challenges in the complex and multifaceted international
system. With regard to relations between the OSCE and
the United Nations, our country supports the process
launched within the organization to make missions
more effective on the ground and bring them in line
with the specific needs of each host country, always
on the basis of the necessary close cooperation with
the United Nations in general and the Security Council
more specifically.

In addition, we are sure that the OSCE, under
Serbian leadership, will be able to play a relevant
role in the cooperation to fight against transnational
threats, international terrorism, which we repudiate
in all of its forms, organized crime, drug trafficking,
trafficking in persons and illegal migration, as well as
in promoting tolerance and dialogue among cultures.
It will also help to fight effectively against xenophobia
and discrimination, thus ensuring respect for the rights
of national, religious and linguistic minorities.

Finally, we hope that the channels of communication
and coordination with the OSCE can be enhanced to the
benefit of international peace and security.

