Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
the permanent representative of Bangladesh in his
capacity as the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
coordinator for the Non-Aligned Movement. In
addition, my delegation should like briefly to address a
number of issues that we believe to be relevant to the
matter that brings us together today.

The convening of this Security Council debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding at a time when we are
immersed in the review of the Peacebuilding
Commission gives us the opportunity to emphasize the
importance of making substantive progress in that
process. We hope that the process will result in
agreement on the provision of sufficient means and
capacities to enable the PBC to fully carry out its
advisory role to both the General Assembly and
Security Council, and to work more effectively in
adopting comprehensive peacebuilding strategies that
promote security, development and governance, in
close coordination with all the agencies of the United
Nations system.

A specific goal should be to enable the PBC,
equipped with the necessary means and human
resources, to fulfil its advisory role while consistently
and coherently articulating cooperation policies aimed
at strengthening peace processes in countries emerging
from conflict.

A quick review of history will show that a
number of countries that emerged from situations of
conflict relapsed into violence or that they lacked the
capacity to stay on the path to sustainable socio-
economic development and were thus vulnerable to the
latent possibility of renewed conflict. This is further
confirmation that priority should be given to the link
that exists between the concept of security, on the one
hand, and social inclusion, the fight against poverty,
the strengthening of institutions and the promotion of
human rights, on the other. All of these components are
integral to the timely re-establishment of peace.

When we speak of peacebuilding, we think of
existing conflict situations that, because of their long-
standing nature, generate a perverse dynamic of
violence and destruction. In order to counter this trend,
it is essential to build the social fabric of the country,
generate political awareness, implement measures that
favour inclusion and convince the private sector of the
important role it has to play in the process of
reconstructing its country, together with the other
national institutions. Furthermore, the principal of
national ownership is the main foundation upon which
the entire peacebuilding process should be built. On
this point, I should like to reiterate that the
commitment and participation of the private sector are
key to ensuring the economic recovery of a country
emerging from conflict.

We have already mentioned the intrinsic
relationship between security and development. Trade
and business can flourish only in an atmosphere of
peace and stability. At the same time, however, peace
requires significant flows of trade and investment that
generate employment in order to combat pockets of
poverty and establish a framework for sustainable
development, which is an effective component for
neutralizing the threat of violence.

In this context, it is essential, in economic and
development terms, that the PBC, in coordination with
the international financial institutions and regional
organizations, be able to continue carrying out
medium- and long-term follow-up to establish the
conditions needed to attract private investment and
ensure the effective channeling of cooperation flows
through effective accountability mechanisms.

In securing and consolidating peace in nations
embroiled in conflict, we do not always follow the
logical chain of first establishing security and stability,
then maintaining peace and, after that, setting up
comprehensive development plans aimed at
consolidating that peace. Historically, experience has
shown us that there is an increasing need to include
early peacebuilding activities in the implementation of
peacekeeping processes. In this regard, it is vitally
important that, in the implementation of such
measures, the PBC can play a relevant advisory role in
planning those efforts, in close coordination with the
other relevant United Nations bodies that are directly
responsible for economic and social development, such
as the Economic and Social Council.

At the same time, bearing in mind the role of the
peacebuilding architecture in consolidating peace, Peru
believes that it is not viable to keep the work of the
PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund on separate tracks.
On the contrary, there must be close interaction
between them. The Commission must play a relevant
role in the formulation of resource allocation policies
for specific areas. Given the follow-up role played by
the PBC in peacebuilding processes, it is time for us to
consider creating a mechanism that would provide for
synergies and feedback between the Commission and
the Fund, bodies that share one common goal and
value: promoting and building peace.

All Members of the Organization have a shared
responsibility to strengthen the United Nations system
in order to maintain, preserve and build peace
worldwide. Today we have an opportunity to bring this
important goal closer by taking concrete steps to
strengthen the capacity of the Peacebuilding
Commission to fully and faithfully carry out the role
entrusted to it.

