Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to congratulate the presidency
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland for convening today's debate and welcome
this morning's participation by Lord Tariq Mahmood
Ahmad, Minister of State for the Commonwealth and
the United Nations. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their briefings.

The Republic of Argentina is committed to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Our foreign policy is therefore guided by
the conviction that multilateralism is essential for
international peace and security. In that regard, we
would like to reaffirm our commitment to the principle
of the peaceful settlement of international disputes. We
believe that every method of peaceful dispute settlement
is equally valid for conflict resolution; only through
such methods can just and lasting solutions be reached.

We underscore the obligation of all Member States
to agree to peaceably settle their disputes, as stipulated
by the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the
particular role the Charter entrusts to the Secretary-
General in the area of good offices and mediation.
Mediation and mediation support are very important
to the broader objectives of conflict prevention and
resolution. That is why we support the Secretary-
General's strategy to place preventive diplomacy at
the centre of his management efforts. In that regard, I
would like to underscore the support provided by the
Secretariat both through advice on specific technical
issues and in enhancing the capacities of regional
partners and national and local actors.
The complexity of contemporary conflicts
requires multidisciplinary approaches that allow for
broad and inclusive agreements that can withstand
the post-conflict test. Mediators should always take
into account the unique features of each case without
attempting to determine pre-established formulas or
exploit possible positive synergies with other equally
useful dispute-resolution mechanisms. We would like
to highlight in particular the contribution of regional
and subregional organizations to mediation processes
and stress the importance of women's participation in
all stages of the conflict resolution cycle, including in
mediation processes.

The possibility that mediation, a mission of good
offices or any other means of peaceful settlement
could achieve its objective and purpose depends on the
fulfilment in good faith of the obligations of the parties
involved. When the organs of the United Nations call
upon parties to a dispute to negotiate, they should do
so in good faith and refrain from actions that could
obstruct the obligation of both parties to resolve the
dispute by peaceful means. States not party to a dispute
must also contribute to its peaceful resolution and
refrain from engaging in behaviour that could hamper
the settlement of the dispute.

The use of the various dispute-resolution
mechanisms is subject to the requisite consent of the
parties to engage in a peaceful dispute-settlement
process. Nonetheless, it is clear that the higher
obligation of all Member States to settle disputes by
peaceful means can never be subject only to the consent
of the parties. Nor does it seem appropriate to make the
validity of a mandate granted to the Secretary-General
by the international community contingent upon the
consent of the parties to a dispute.

