The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

This is the first meeting of the Security Council
being held in public to take into account an assessment
and evaluation of its work during the preceding month.
This is an occasion on which I believe I should like to
pay a tribute to my colleagues in the Council who
decided to hold this public meeting in order to share
our thoughts, views and ideas about how the Council
works, particularly how it works during a very busy
month, and how we should look ahead to the future
with regard to the Council.

This meeting, of course, is restricted to
contributions by the 15 members of the Council, but it
is my fervent hope and wish that in the future there will
be an opportunity for non-Council members to join us
in this process.

We are privileged to have the Secretary-General
with us this morning. Today was a momentous day,
with the General Assembly taking action on his
reappointment to a second term. I would like to take
this opportunity at this formal meeting of the Security
Council to convey on behalf of all my Council
colleagues our deep appreciation for the services he has
provided to the world body and for his continued
commitment to the objectives and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We look forward in the
Council to working closely with him in the coming
years, and we believe that under his leadership the
Organization will achieve even greater glory.

The Security Council renews its trust in
Secretary-General Kofi Annan to carry forward the
United Nations mission of peace and security.

It has been a very difficult month for my
presidency, for Bangladesh, the colleagues on my team.
It has been very busy, and unexpectedly new items and
issues came up that took up our time. But let me say
also that quite a lot was achieved in this month,
particularly in discussing the major areas of conflict of
the world. We also devoted a day-long debate to the
prevention of armed conflict, discussing the first-ever
report of the Secretary-General on the subject. I must
say that this was a very comprehensive report, touching
on all aspects of conflict prevention in a broader
perspective.

And we believe that this subject, as it is at the
heart of the Council's primary responsibilities, will
receive our attention in the Council, as well as in the
other organs and organizations of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has scheduled a debate on 12
and 13 July on this subject, perhaps in response to the
Security Council debate under the presidency of the
Foreign Minister of Bangladesh. We believe there is a
desire among the members Council to adopt a
resolution on that subject as far as the competence of
the Security Council is concerned. So, I have been
advised that the Bangladesh delegation is preparing one
and will be circulating it for adoption, very soon
hopefully, under the Chinese presidency.

I am not going to recount what happened during
the month but let me take up one or two issues that I
believe may be useful for the round of discussion.

One aspect that came up time and again in our
deliberations is how decisions are translated into
action. We have to ensure that the Secretary-General is
given the human, material, and financial resources to
implement our decisions. We have to reflect on how the
follow-up of issues, not as routine calendar events, but
as conscious policy decisions, are to be pursued in a
proactive manner. What we have found is that, in view
of the issuance of a number of reports during the month
and of the required extension of the mandates of
various peacekeeping operations, the Council is
somewhat bound by the issuing of these reports. This is
not necessarily a bad thing, but sometimes the Council
does not consciously take up issues that need our
attention and need a very thorough, in-depth discussion
in the Council. So, we believe that subsequent
presidencies will be able to give that opportunity to the
Council, to give some thought to the issues that are not
constrained or bound by the submission of a report or
the extension of a mandate.

We also found a proactive attitude or the intention
to be proactive on the part of the Security Council in
the initiative of sending out missions to conflict areas.
In the past year, useful missions were the mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), the
mission to Kosovo. This month followed that trend. We
believe that this kind of proactive attitude on the part
of the Council through its missions to the conflict areas
have found considerable support, even outside the
Council, and we believe this activity should be
continued. In those cases, the Council has generated
major decisions by the Organization with regard to the
conflict areas. I have in mind the mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), which
engaged in real negotiations with the parties concerned
in the region. The mission came up with very positive
and forward-looking recommendations, and the
Council acted on those recommendations. We believe
we achieved a very good outcome of the deliberations
on that mission's report.

So, these are the issues that work well. This
month we adopted resolution 1353 (2001) on
cooperation with troop-contributing countries. I think
this is a major operational resolution by the Security
Council, and streamlines many of the deliberations that
used to go on between the troop-contributing countries,
the Council itself, and the Secretariat. This trilateral
relationship has been further refined, strengthened, and
re-made, I think, to the satisfaction of the troop-
contributing countries, in particular. We believe that is
a major area to which the Council has contributed. I
would encourage the Council in the future to also give
its attention to some of these operational areas, which
is necessary - apart from addressing the major
responsibilities - because refining those areas would
really help the Council and the mission of the Council
greatly.

The Secretary-General has reported at some
length in his recent report on the Brahimi report
implementation, addressing the problems concerning
civilian components in peace operations, with the need
of larger and wider civilian components in the
missions, such as the United Nations Observer Mission
in the Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC)and
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). The Council needs to bring that issue
into focus. We wish to hear the views of the Council
members today or in subsequent session on this topic.

Finally, the Council's relations with the press, the
media and the public need specific attention. We
should make an effort to see that the Council's work
receives the attention of the outside world. The
possibility of having a spokesperson of the Security
Council President was discussed informally at the
retreat. You, Mr. Secretary-General, suggested that and,
because of the rotating presidency, the option needs to
be examined further. I took up that idea seriously with
the Department of Public Information (DPI), and with
your spokesperson, Mr. Secretary-General. I would
leave it to the subsequent presidencies to address that
matter, but what we did this month was arrange that
every morning, the representative of the spokesperson
of the Secretary-General would come and meet with us
and work out the day's program, the issues, and how
the Council sees the issues as they emerge that day. I
am told that a five-minute meeting every morning
helped the spokesperson's office, as well as the media
representative, because he or she is the main conduit
between the Council and the media as a whole. That
worked well and we encourage successive presidencies
to follow that practice and build upon it for the greater
advantage of the Security Council.

With the strong support of the Council, we also
took considerable steps regarding communicating the
decisions and statements of the Council to the parties
concerned. The Council has agreed to issue a note on
that subject, identifying the way and the manner in
which such communications should take place. I
believe this is an improvement in the working methods
of the Security Council, and we are very happy and
proud that all of us couldjoin in that decision.

Those are the initial thoughts I wanted to share
with all of you and I would now like to open the floor
for your comments.

