Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun
and Simonovie for their appropriately bleak briefings.
In February, the international community received
a wake-up call to the truly shocking violations of
human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. In a 400-page report (S/2014/276, annex), the
United Nations commission of inquiry provided an
unprecedentedly detailed insight into the appalling
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Owing to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's consistent refusal to cooperate or allow
access to the country, the commission instead gathered
extensive first-hand testimony from witnesses and
victims now living outside the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. What they heard painted a picture
of authorities who are so frightened of losing control
that indoctrination begins in kindergarten; so scared of
what will happen if ordinary people get a glimpse of
the outside world, that just owning a tunable radio is a
criminal offence; and so insecure that religion is seen
as a sign of divided loyalties and an act of treachery.

The commission's report describes a regime so
paranoid that punishments are extended to whole
families; so cruel that those fleeing for a better life are
imprisoned, tortured and sexually violated; so callous
that it stood by and let hundreds of thousands die from
starvation rather than ask for international assistance.
The commission concluded that the systematic,
widespread and gross human rights violations being
committed in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea were components of a totalitarian State without
parallel in the contemporary world. They called on
the international community to protect the people of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, given the
regime's manifest failure to do so.

The international community cannot ignore such
detailed and grave findings. Since the report was issued,
we, alongside international partners, have worked to
ensure that the Commission's report is a beginning,
and not an end. The setting up of a presence of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Seoul is a practical demonstration of the international
community's determination not to forget the people of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. This field
office will continue the Commission's work of evidence
collection as an important step towards accountability.
It is a reminder to those at any level of the regime
apparatus who are responsible for these awful human
rights violations that the world is watching and that
they should consider themselves put on notice. If the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea fails to hold
violators to account, the international community must
be ready to do so.

Both the Human Rights Council and the General
Assembly have condemned in the strongest terms the
findings documented in the commission ofinquiry report
and have demonstrated the widespread concern across
the globe at the enduring misery of the North Korean
people. Both bodies by overwhelming majorities have
encouraged the Security Council to consider the human
rights situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. The United Kingdom supports the call for
the Security Council to consider appropriate action to
ensure accountability, including through consideration
of a referral of the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to the International Criminal Court.

Despite these calls from the United Nations
membership, there were those who opposed discussion
in the Security Council today. But the failure of States
to abide by the universal principles of respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as set out in
the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, is a legitimate concern
of the Security Council. Human rights, democracy
and strong institutions, founded on the rule of law, are
essential. Without these key foundations in place, peace
and security are at risk, both in individual States and in
the broader international community.

That is why the United Kingdom is pleased that the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has been added to the agenda of the Council today
and that we have been able to have this long-overdue
discussion. It is a signal to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea authorities of the international
community's focus on the issues highlighted in the
Commission of Inquiry's report. Our message to the
authorities in Pyongyang is this - listen and engage
with these concerns.

The majority of the recommendations in the
commission's report are directed towards the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea Government.
It is the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Government that holds the power to transform the lives
of its people for the better. Rather than continuing
to deny the existence of human rights violations and
refusing to engage with international concerns, we urge
them to accept and address them seriously.

We are disappointed that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea responded to the recent Third
Committee resolution by withdrawing its previous
offers of dialogue and its invitation to the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to visit the
country for the first time. The United Kingdom urges it
to reconsider. If done fully and without preconditions,
these would be positive first moves towards taking
the bold step of admitting that there are problems and
making a genuine effort to improve the human rights
situation on the ground.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
an opportunity. The United Kingdom, like so many
in the international community, stands ready to
adjust our position in response to any concrete steps
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea takes
to improve human rights in the country. But if the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues to
flout the obligations they owe to their people, then the
international community should be ready to take further
steps to address the situation. We urge the Council to
remain seized of this matter.

