Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I wish to thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed; Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings today. I would
also like to thank the United Nations staff in Yemen,
who work around the clock to deliver assistance despite
the serious security risks in the country.

The direct talks among the parties to the conflict
in Yemen, held recently in Geneva, provide a source
of relief. Jordan supports the positive development
at the political level and the inclusion of the Houthis
in an attempt to implement resolution 2216 (2015).
The declaration by President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour of a seven-day ceasefire, parallel to
the negotiations in Switzerland, was a welcome step.
We also welcome the fact that he has extended the
ceasefire. That is proof of the Yemeni Government's
genuine commitment to finding a negotiated political
and peaceful settlement, which they favour over any
other solution. The Government's tireless support for
the cessation ofhostilities following the ceasefire is due
to their belief that it can further successful negotiations
in Switzerland.

The negotiations in Switzerland mark a decisive
turning point in the current political crisis in Yemen.
Even ifit is only a beginning, we look forward to a more
definitive cessation of hostilities. Negotiations have
allowed us at least to begin to overcome the deadlock
that has characterized the political situation in Yemen
for some years now. Those who were engaged in the
negotiations in Geneva agreed to the implementation of
a ceasefire monitoring committee and a humanitarian
mechanism. We therefore underscore the importance
of such negotiations, even if they are but a beginning.
They took place at a timely moment, and the initial
results have been fruitful.

Similarly, we are looking forward to the next
cycle of negotiations, which are scheduled to begin on
14 January 2016, and we underscore the importance of
the framework for the negotiations, which is provided
by resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and the outcomes of the Yemeni
National Dialogue. We would also like to reiterate the
importance of pursuing negotiations, and we call on all
parties to participate seriously and in good faith in the
discussions because we are firmly convinced that the
solution to the Yemeni crisis is a political one involving
the re-establishment of the legitimacy embodied by
President Hadi Mansour and by the control of the
Government over all areas of Yemen, including all of
its governorates.

Jordan profoundly regrets and unequivocally and
robustly condemns all violations of the humanitarian
pause agreed by President Hadi Mansour. There
have been many reported violations of that pause,
particularly in the Taiz and Marib governorates. I
prefer not to go into detail concerning those violations,
but I would draw everyone's attention to the fact that
they have been duly documented in report S/2015/582.
Such violations are not limited to Yemen alone; we
have seen similar violations in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, with the launching of ballistic missiles. That is
a serious and alarming development and a clear act of
provocation. Nonetheless, the Yemeni Government has
maintained its commitment to respecting the ceasefire
and cessation of hostilities, while the coalition forces
have expressed their commitment to the truce and have
held back from responding to provocation.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen is a further
source of concern. We have always called attention
to the inextricable link between the humanitarian
situation and a political settlement, which go hand in
hand with the restoration of the legitimacy of the duly
elected Government of Yemen. Those three elements
go together. We need to identify the root causes of the
escalation ofthe humanitarian crisis in Yemen, owing in
part to the fragility and weakness of the country and its
institutions. We are aware that the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council - particularly resolutions
2201 (2015) and 2216 (2015) - are not being properly
implemented because of that weakness.

I would like to draw particular attention to the
humanitarian situation in the city of Taiz, which is
suffering the worst form of collective punishment by
being besieged. Because of the humanitarian blockade,
no aid is getting through, putting the city's population
of 400,000 at risk of their lives. We therefore call on
the international community to urgently respond by
exercising pressure on the Houthis and their partners so
as to open the roads and infrastructure for the delivery
of aid to that city and to ensure that no humanitarian aid
is diverted. During negotiations, we noticed the failure
to reach an agreement on enabling humanitarian aid to
reach Taiz, and we need to urgently remedy that.

Despite the violations of the humanitarian pause,
there is nonetheless grounds for hope because the
information gathered by the security forces indicate
that, despite the violations, it has been possible to
improve the humanitarian situation. Thanks to the
humanitarian pause, some aid has have been delivered
to other affected cities and regions, which makes it
very clear, once again, that a political solution lies in
the framework of the GCC Initiative, the outcomes of
National Dialogue and resolution 2216 (2015).

This might be the last statement made by my country
before the Security Council on the subject of Yemen.
As a parting appeal, we therefore call on all members
of the Security Council and the entire international
community to work together in shouldering our
responsibilities to the people of Yemen and implement
all possible measures aimed at helping the Yemenis
achieve progress on the path to peace and stability
in their country and among themselves, because our
brotherly country of Yemen and its people are known
for their generosity and wisdom. Its people look to the
Council to bring them hope and an end to the tragedy,
which has led to the suffering of children, women, men
and the elderly in Yemen.

It is also extremely important to listen to the
concerns of the country and to ensure that the GCC is
part of the solution, because Yemen has made it very
clear that the deterioration of the security situation in
that country is a serious threat to the region in general,
including the members of the GCC. They therefore need
to be part of any solution, and we need to keep an eye
on any repercussions resulting from potential political
insecurity in the broader region and any potential
spillover, should the situation in Yemen deteriorate
further. If that does happen, Yemen will become a
fertile breeding ground for terrorists to extend their
control and grip and to project the shadow of terrorism
throughout the region, becoming a much greater threat
than they already are, including for GCC countries.
As we have seen throughout the world, terrorists have
irrefutably demonstrated that what is happening in our
region will not remain contained there, but will impact
the entire world.

