Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for introducing the report of the Secretary General on small arms and light weapons (SALW) (S/2019/1011). We are also grateful to Mr. Damien Spleeters for his valuable briefing on the work of the non-governmental organization Conflict Armament Research. Russia has consistently advocated enhancing the role played by the United Nations in coordinating the international community's efforts to resolve the problem of the illegal trade in SALW. The illegal traffic in such weapons remains the main source of financing for terrorist and extremist groups and a major factor in the spread and exacerbation of local conflicts and armed violence. Despite progress in some areas, significant improvement has yet to be made in countering the illicit trade in SALW throughout the world. The pace of the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects remains inadequate. There has also been a loss of traction in the implementation of the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. We believe that the implementation of the Programme of Action would be more effectively facilitated by introducing a universal ban on the transfer of all types of SALW to entities that are not authorized by the Governments of recipient States; ensuring that States impose strict regulations and exercise direct control over brokering activities related to arms exports within the territory under their jurisdiction and limiting, to the extent possible, the number of brokers themselves; imposing a ban on the re-export of imported SALW without the consent of the initial exporting State; and banning the manufacture of SALW with expired licenses or without licenses from the countries owning the production technology. Finally, greater national control over all stages of the life cycle of weapons, from their manufacture to their use, would also help to significantly lower the risk of the uncontrolled proliferation of SALW. Such measures could be based on the relevant best practices of States, including those of Russia, which has well- developed legislation in that area. We stand ready to advise States interested in studying Russian best practices in SALW control. As part of its annual reporting, our country always presents its report on the implementation of the Programme of Action. It is a stand-alone, structured document that provides a holistic view of the effective implementation of the Programme of Action at the national level. However, we must point out that the report of the Secretary-General also contains a number of controversial points. In particular, we draw attention to the idea it raises of expanding the remit of the UnitedNations Register of Conventional Arms to include an eighth category of SALWs. It should be taken into consideration that the existing seven categories already include all major conventional weapons whose delivery, in certain circumstances, can be destabilizing. Furthermore, when taking decisions on an eighth category, we should bear in mind the negative precedent of the use of the Register for unintended purposes, namely, to define the scope of arms embargoes, as was the case with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Iran. In practice, that would significantly curtail the ability of States under sanctions not only to exercise the right of self-defence enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, but also to simply conduct law enforcement activities. In addition, we find the references to the international Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) questionable. The Treaty, which is far from universal, still does not fully allow for the implementation of its own provisions. For example, the ATT does not explicitly prohibit the unlicenced production of weapons or their transfer to non-State actors or include provisions governing the re-export of weapons. There are serious questions about the application of the Treaty in practice. Some parties to it continue to directly or indirectly supply arms to areas of internal armed conflict. In conclusion, I note that the Russian Federation shares the concerns of the international community with regard to the uncontrolled proliferation of SALWs and advocates the further consolidation of international efforts to counter them under the auspices of the United Nations. We agree that those issues require a comprehensive approach. We intend to continue to work closely on these issues with all stakeholders during this year's biennial review conference on the Programme of Action.
