Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Kosovo, Mr. Zannier, for
his presentation of the Secretary-General's report on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2009/149). The Russian
Federation has carefully analyzed this document. We
welcome the participation in today's meeting of the
President of Serbia, Mr. Tadie. We are grateful for his
assessments, and we share them.

We have also listened to the statement of
Mr. Hyseni, although it is not objective. Attempts to
accuse Belgrade in all the problems facing Kosovo just
underline the need to reintegrate the country into
Serbia.

Today's meeting coincides with a number of
tragic anniversaries in Kosovo's history. First and
foremost, it is ten years since the start of NATO's
bombardment of Yugoslavia, which was undertaken
without the sanction of the Security Council. Our
British colleague gave us a very detailed presentation
of the history of events, but it was selective in nature.
For example, nothing was said regarding the terrorist
activities of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army,
which carried out activities over ten years and led to
the tragic events of March 1999.

During the 78-day bombardment, it was mainly
civilian facilities that were destroyed - power plants,
bridges, other pieces of infrastructure. The Belgrade
television station was bombed merely because it had
made the wrong interpretation of the situation; it was
not enraptured at the destruction of its own country. A
passenger train was attacked for no known reasons.
The outcome was thousands of civilian deaths.

It was during the period of NATO bombardment
that the world spoke of a humanitarian disaster. The
political consequence was a marked decline of the
image of that regional organization in the eyes of the
international community, and I am referring to the
North Atlantic alliance. Even worse, it shook the very
foundation of international law. It provided a strong
push to Kosovar separatism.

Bloodshed was ended only as a result of
painstaking diplomatic efforts, substantially as a result
of Russia's involvement. The Security Council adopted
the well-known resolution 1244 (1999), which remains
fully in force. According to it, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo, which he heads, should
continue to discharge their mandated functions,
including ensuring the rights and security of national
minorities and achieving in the country the democratic
standards established by the international community.

In this regard, we cannot overlook another
sorrowful date: the fifth anniversary of the anti-Serb
pogroms in Kosovo that represented a brazen attempt
to expel the Serb population and eradicate its cultural
and religious heritage. As a result, thousands of Serbs
became refugees and many Orthodox monasteries and
churches, some under UNESCO protection, were
destroyed.

It is legitimate to recall these events in the light
of the recent scandalous ruling of the judges of the
European Court of Appeals, which freed a Kosovo
Albanian terrorist who had been sentenced by an
UNMIK court in June 2008 to 40 years in prison for
blowing up a bus in 2001. The judges considered either
that the evidence and testimony of witnesses were
insufficient, or that there were not enough bodies.
Eleven people died and 22 were injured in the incident.
We will demand information from the European
presence and the UNMIK leadership regarding the
measures that have been taken to punish those guilty of
that terrorist act.

Regrettably, United Nations demands that the
Kosovo Albanian authorities begin guaranteeing the
rights and security of Serbs remain unimplemented in
practice. The priority concern for standards for
minorities has been proactively replaced by priority
concern for the status of the province. Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence and the support
it enjoyed from a group of States were a reward for
extremism that, like it or not, set a very dangerous
precedent.

The year that has elapsed since Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence has confirmed
our concerns. It is clear that it will not be easy to
extricate the province from its socio-economic
collapse, but quasi-statehood has only exacerbated the
problems. Unemployment is rising, economic
indicators are stagnant, the province's internal
integration links have been torn to shreds, and the
social sphere remains a disaster. What is flourishing are
lawlessness and criminals; the struggle for power has
led to clan frictions and radicals are again raising their
heads.

It is especially lamentable that the task of
strengthening Kosovo's multi-ethnic nature has been
consigned to oblivion. Despite the implementation of
so-called democratic laws, in practice the rights and
security of Serbs and other national communities in the
province are ignored. As a result, the number of
returning Kosovo Serb refugees has decreased from
that of previous years. This fact is reflected in the
Secretary-General's report. Unfortunately, however, the
report is silent on the reasons behind this phenomenon,
principal among which is the obvious lack of the most
basic security conditions.

The only possibility of redressing the situation is
to keep UNMIK in Kosovo and, under its aegis and
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), to
reorganize the activities of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, European Union
and NATO presences. To that end, UNMIK must retain
not only its coordination and political, but also its
administrative functions. That objective will be
achieved only if the Security Council retains control of
the situation in the province through dialogue between
Belgrade and the United Nations.

We welcome the ongoing consultations between
Belgrade and the United Nations on six technical
issues to ensure the viability of the Serb community in
the province. It needs to be said that this topic is not
reflected comprehensively enough in the Secretary-
General's report. No one expected a rapid
breakthrough, but the mere resumption and
constructive development of dialogue are worthy of
support. The negotiations clearly enjoy good prospects,
including on the most complex topics, such customs
and courts. It is important to pursue dialogue between
Belgrade and the United Nations to protect the Serb
cultural and religious heritage in the province.

We have found an acceptable formula for
involvement in the consultations of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) under
United Nations auspices. At the same time, the nature
of EULEX's practical activities is far from being
status-neutral, in contradiction of the provisions of the
Secretary-General's report of November 2008, which
was endorsed by the Security Council. Incidentally, the
EULEX report, contained in annex I of the report
before us, contains not one reference to the fact that it
is acting on a status-neutral basis.

We will continue carefully to ensure that the
Security Council plays the leading role in Kosovo's
affairs on the basis of compliance with existing norms
of international law, the United Nations Charter and the
decisions of this Council.

