Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join others
in thanking the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
report and her statement today. She has comprehensively

covered recent judicial activities, the alarming situation
in Darfur and the persistent non-cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan regarding the implementation
of arrest warrants.

After the Prosecutor has reported to the Council
for the 16th time following the Darfur referral, we
have to note once again, with deep regret, that the four
arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) have not been executed. Ahmad Harun,
indicted for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
is still Governor of Southern Kordofan; Ali Kushayb,
indicted for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
remains at large in the Sudan; President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir, indicted for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, continues to defy the authority
of the Security Council; and Abdel Raheem Hussein,
for whom an arrest warrant was issued in March, is still
Minister of Defence.

As the Prosecutor's report states yet again, it is
primarily the responsibility of the Government of
the Sudan to comply with the Council's resolutions,
cooperate with the Court and surrender indicted persons
to the authority of the Court. Yet the Sudan still shows
not the slightest willingness to do any of those things,
and thereby continues to openly defy the Council's
authority. The situation is extremely deplorable.

We must therefore not weaken in our determination
to ensure that the four indictees will be held accountable.
We take full note of the fact that the Prosecutor calls on
the Security Council to ensure the Sudan's compliance
with resolution 1593 (2005). Similarly, Germany
reiterates its call to all States parties to the ICC to fully
honour their obligations under the Rome Statute, in
particular the obligation to cooperate and to execute
any arrest warrant issued by the Court. In that regard,
we fully support recent proposals aimed at ensuring
the Council's more active and consistent involvement
in cases of non-cooperation following the referral of
a situation to the ICC. In the age of accountability,
non-cooperation must be met with increased vigilance
on the part of the Council.

We commend the Office of the Prosecutor for its
continued monitoring of alleged acts of genocide and/
or crimes against humanity in Darfur, and attacks
on humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers from
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). In that regard, we are deeply
concerned about reports of continued, indiscriminate
aerial bombardments leading to the deaths of numerous
civilians, and the recent increase in violence in general,
especially in North Darfur. We remain concerned
about all forms of violence against civilians in Darfur,
especially sexual and gender-based violence and
violence against children, as well as reports of arbitrary
arrests and detentions. In that regard, we would like
to draw attention to the incidents that took place in
Hashaba in late September. According to various
sources, including United Nations reporting, the
violence in Hashaba included aerial attacks resulting
in the death of as many as 100 civilians. Furthermore, a
UNAMID patrol tasked with investigating the incident
was ambushed, and a South African peacekeeper died
in the attack. We call for a thorough investigation
of the attack on Hashaba, as well as of that on the
peacekeepers. Those responsible must be brought to
justice.

Germany's tenure as a non-permanent member of
the Council will soon come to an end. It was during
our membership that the Council for the first time took
a unanimous decision to refer a situation to the ICC.
It is our hope that it will show similar resolve in other
situations where very serious international crimes are
being committed. As a State party to the Rome Statute,
Germany will continue its strong support for the ICC.

