Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I would like to
congratulate Angola and Foreign Minister Chikoti on
having organized today's open debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, and the representative of the World Bank for
their briefings.

The Great Lakes region of Africa has been
tragically plagued by a long history of violent struggles
and conflicts. As stated by the Secretary-General in
his latest report (S/2016/232), the Great Lakes region,
22 years after the Rwanda genocide, continues to face
major political, security and humanitarian challenges.

In February 2013, in Addis Ababa, a series of
commitments to addressing some of the root causes
of instability in the Great Lakes region were agreed
by the signatory countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, under the auspices of the
United Nations, the African Union, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community. This Framework
remains a key reference for a comprehensive solution to
the crises in the region. However, its implementation, as
that of the Nairobi Declarations, remains fraught with
challenges. As the Secretary-General declares in his last
report (S/2016/233) on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), it is essential that the signatories
of the Framework honour their commitments in order
to achieve sustainable peace in the Great Lakes region.

More specifically, we highlight the fact that all
13 signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework have agreed, among other commitments,
not to interfere in the internal affairs of neighbouring
countries, to respect their sovereignty, territorial
integrity, legitimate concerns and interests, in particular
regarding security matters, and to neither tolerate nor
provide assistance or support of any kind to armed
groups. Regional interventionism has contributed to
destabilization in the area and should not be allowed
to take place, as it violates both the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework and international law,
perpetuating instability.

The situation of refugees and internally displaced
people remains worrisome. The already fragile
humanitarian situation has been aggravated by the
recent influx of 245,000 refugees from Burundi into
neighbouring countries. Their status and rights should
be fully recognized and respected. Reports that some of
them have been recruited by armed groups give rise to
serious concern.

We welcome the recent general elections in
Tanzania, the Central African Republic and Uganda.
We also take note that there are political questions
related to elections that remain unresolved in some
countries of the region. Notwithstanding the support
of the international community to find solutions, we
underline the need to respect national ownership in the
outcomes of these discussions.

The region of the Great Lakes is endowed with
abundant natural resources. The illegal exploitation and
traffic of these resources has for years helped finance
armed groups in the region, as stated in more than
one United Nations report. This illegal exploitation
also contributes to hindering the development of the
affected countries. To give a sense of the dimension of
the problem, in its report of January 2014 (S/2014/42, annex), the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo came to the conclusion that 98 per cent of
all the gold produced in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was smuggled out of the country. It is therefore
important to find ways to transform the natural wealth
of the region into a driver of sustainable development.
In this regard, the promotion of responsible extractive
industries and the building of national capacities and
legal institutions are key. Considering the broader
question of sustainable development, the private sector
can play an important role, as illustrated by the Great
Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference, held in
Kinshasa last February.

Brazil has cooperated with conflict resolution
efforts in the Great Lakes since the beginning of the
involvement of the Organization in promoting peace
in the region, having contributed troops to the United
Nations Operation in the Congo from 1960 to 1964, and
more recently, through the designation of General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz as Force Commander of
MONUSCO from 2013 to 2015. Presently, Brazil
contributes officers to two United Nations Missions in
South Sudan - the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei and the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan - and to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.

Brazil has also contributed to mitigating the
effects of the conflicts in the Great Lakes region with
humanitarian donations and cooperation with countries
ofthe region. In the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo,
we have financed initiatives aimed at assisting victims
of sexual and gender-based violence and in combating

impunity. Brazil has also partnered with UNICEF,
the United Nations Development Programme and
civil society organizations in an innovative project
that allowed hundreds of children formerly linked to
armed groups in the North Kivu region to be socially
reintegrated through the practice of the Afro-Brazilian
martial art known as capoeira.

As the current Chair of the Commission on
the Status of Women, allow me to reiterate the
importance of the participation of women in political
processes related to peace, the protection of civilians,
reconciliation efforts and the establishment of a
protective environment. Allow me to acknowledge the
political leadership exercised by women in the region,
and in particular the high percentage of women in the
Cabinet and Parliament of Rwanda.

Strategies that do not address the root causes of
conflict are unlikely to produce lasting peace in the
region. The complexity of the conflicts in the Great
Lakes region demand a comprehensive approach towards
sustainable peace, focused not only on prevention and
the primacy of politics, but also combating the illicit
flow and illegal exploitation of natural resources. That
comprehensive approach should, among otherinitiatives,
contribute to addressing the need for eradicating
poverty, promote socioeconomic development, build
institutions, provide access to justice and create more
inclusive and reconciled societies. Those strategies
should be carried out in close coordination with
national authorities and their established priorities,
always respecting national ownership.

Two of the six current country-specific configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) - Burundi
and the Central African Republic - are related to what
takes place in the Great Lakes region. My delegation
believes that the Peacebuilding Commission,
encompassing members from the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly, can have an important role in preventing the
relapse into conflict in the region. It is important to bear
in mind that peacebuilding is a task that reaches beyond
the security agenda and encompasses the entire United
Nations system. In that regard, we reiterate the need
for strengthening the relationship between the PBC and
the Security Council, with a focus on our collective
engagement with the promotion of sustainable peace in
the Great Lakes region.

