Mr. Mano Queta (Guinea-Bissau)(interpretation from French): The delegation of Guinea-Bissau would like to
congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency of this Council for the month of March. We are
convinced that our work will be marked by your wisdom
and competence. We would also like to pay tribute to your
eminent predecessor, Ambassador Madeleine Albright,
Permanent Representative of the United States, on the
effective way in which she presided over the Council last
month.

This meeting shows once again that despite certain
encouraging signs in the development of the situation in
Burundi, it continues to be a source of deep concern for the
international community.

My delegation would like to associate itself with the
thanks expressed to the Secretary-General for his exhaustive
and enlightening report on the situation in Burundi, which
was submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1040
(1996) of 29 January 1996.

We would also like to express our gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Marc
Faguy, to the Organization of African Unity, to the
European Union and to the humanitarian organizations for
their efforts to find peace and stability for the people of
Burundi. In the same spirit, we would like to pay tribute
to former President Julius Nyerere, to former President
Jimmy Carter and to the eminent leaders of neighbouring
countries for the remarkable role they are playing to help
that people achieve national reconciliation and restore
peace and stability to the region.

The Secretary-General emphasizes, especially in his
report, the fact that the settlement of the crisis in Burundi
will depend upon the political will of the parties to the
conflict. We endorse this view, and we therefore launch
once again an urgent appeal to all the parties concerned
to participate constructively in the comprehensive political
dialogues referred to in the draft resolution we are about
to adopt.

My delegation believes that the restoration of
confidence and security is one of the essential conditions
for United Nations institutions and non-governmental
organizations to carry out effectively their task in
Burundi. In this regard, we congratulate the President and
Prime Minister of Burundi on the positive initiatives they
have taken to foster the National Debate and to encourage
other activities for promoting peace.

Guinea-Bissau also welcomes the commitment of the
institutions of the State of Burundi in the campaign for
the restoration of peace by peaceful means and the
relatively positive signs mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report. We urgently ask the Burundi parties to
take into account the national interests of the State, to
begin a dialogue on a wider basis and implement the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

We hope that the adoption of the draft resolution
under consideration, which shows once again the
determination and commitment of the international
community, will encourage a frank and constructive
dialogue between all the parties in Burundi so that they
can overcome their differences and lay the foundations for
national reconciliation and national reconstruction.

We shall therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

