Mr. Burt (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking Australia's Minister for Foreign Affairs
for convening this important meeting as the National
Dialogue in Yemen draws to a close. The United
Kingdom also thanks its friends - Special Adviser
Benomar, Secretary General Al Zayani and Foreign
Minister Al-Qirbi - for their assessments, and assures
them that in response to all their remarkable efforts
the United Kingdom and the international community
remain deeply committed to the success ofthe country's
transition.

I was able to see the progress that is being made
in person, when I visited Sana'a once again earlier
this month. My discussions with President Mansour
reaffirmed the importance of the work of the United
Nations and the supporters of the initiative of the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) in support of
Yemeni reconciliation through an inclusive, peaceful,
transparent, constructive and conciliatory dialogue. I
was impressed by President Mansour's determination to
improve the security and economic situation in Yemen,
and His Excellency deserves all our support. I was
similarly impressed by the energy and determination
demonstrated by other parties to the National Dialogue,
with whom I and the United Kingdom have also been
in contact.

So we are pleased to hear that a conclusion to the
National Dialogue is close, with nearly all the nine
working groups ready to submit their reports. We would
urge all the participants to work together constructively
to find solutions to the remaining questions. IfI may
pick up on one particular point made by the Special
Adviser, it is that the National Dialogue was never
intended to provide every conceivable answer to
every available question. An agreement on a set of
principles for any outstanding issues would represent
reasonable progress if a fully negotiated settlement is
not achievable at this stage. A framework for the future
would indeed represent success.

The National Dialogue, of course, is just one piece
in a much bigger picture of political, economic and
security reform. On the economy, the Friends of Yemen
ministerial meeting on Wednesday underlined the
important steps that the Government of Yemen has taken
on establishing the mutual accountability framework
policy commitments and pushing through energy
sector reform. But delivery on those commitments, and
further disbursement of donor pledges, is crucial if the
political solutions are to be sustainable and the lives of
the people of Yemen improved. I look forward to seeing
progress on the development of a supreme national
authority for combating corruption, fuel subsidy
reform, implementation of proposals to remove ghost
workers and efforts to tackle youth unemployment.
Accelerating progress on aid disbursements must be a
priority for all international partners.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
critical. Baroness Amos's recent visit highlighted
again the acute nature of the situation, with more than
10 million people, almost halfthe country's population,
suffering from food insecurity. Child malnutrition
rates are among the highest in the world. Substantial
humanitarian need will persist in Yemen for some years
to come. The United Kingdom remains a committed
donor of humanitarian aid, and we have increased our
contribution to £70 million over the next two years.
It is essential that the United Nations deliver as one
in-country. Humanitarian needs must not be neglected,
and the economic challenges must be addressed, or the
prospects for a successful political transition process
could be severely undermined.

Looking ahead to 2014, the international
community must continue to work together to support
the Government of Yemen in the transitional period and
beyond. The Security Council's focus and continued
monitoring will be important. Spoilers cannot be
allowed to derail the transition. Embedding National
Dialogue decisions and supporting implementation will
be crucial. The continued attention of the Secretary-
General, the senior team, the GCC and the diplomatic
community in Sana'a will be vital to success, as indeed
will the support of all of us here.

Finally, in the midst of a difficult region, the
Security Council, as has been evident from a number
of comments made this afternoon, does not minimize
the achievements that the leaders and people of Yemen
have made to date in reaching their current position.
Difficulties have already been overcome, though a
tough further period remains. In remaining committed,
we honour what has been achieved, demonstrate our
support for fresh opportunities for the men, women,
young people and children of Yemen, and manifest our
hope that Yemen will produce its own pathway for the
future, along which we will be sure to walk with them.

