Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for presenting his
biannual report on the sociopolitical situation in that
country (see S/2012/813).

On 15 May we welcomed the important political
advances that Bosnia and Herzegovina made at the
beginning of this year (see S/PV.6771), set out in
the previous report of the High Representative (see S/2012/307). We welcomed the formation of a central
Government in February, following the compromise
reached by the main political parties, more than 16
months after the general elections of October 2010, and
the adoption in May of a national budget for 2012. All
those developments had inspired much hope for the
strengthening of the country's institutions and for its
economic recovery in the framework of Euro-Atlantic
integration.

Togo was delighted that a new dynamic, based
on compromise and a spirit of consensus, had started
among Bosnian leaders; that all political actors had
become aware of and understood the urgent need to take
the destiny of their country into their own hands; and
that, despite the obstacles on the path to strengthening
the central State and its institutions, Bosnian leaders,
without exception, were finally ready to work to
consolidate the unity of the country and promote
common interests.

But six months later, my country notes with regret
that the report just presented by the High Representative
on the issue before us appears to be in contrast with
the hope inspired by the previous report. This report
notes the stagnation and even setbacks on the political
front with regard to certain areas in which progress had
previously been noted and quite rightly commended by
the entire international community.

My country regrets the situation, which is hampering
the full implementation of the Dayton Accords of
14 December 1995, which put an end to armed conflict
in the country. We believe that the situation, which is
due primarily to the unwillingness of certain actors
to continue on the path of dialogue and compromise
and their manifest will to further weaken the central
Bosnian State, is very troubling and warrants the full
attention of the Council.

Togo is convinced that it is counterproductive for
certain entities within the Bosnian State, in Violation
of international agreements and of the sovereign
constitution of the country, to continue to take legal
and political steps against the central institutions in
the fields of competence of the laws of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those entities periodically
call into question the country's territorial integrity and
threaten to proclaim independence. It is regrettable
that such nationalist views undermine the institutions
of the central State and the efforts of the international
community to bring peace and stability to the country
and the region.
Togo remains convinced that only a frank and
sincere dialogue and a search for compromise can
lead to a lasting, definitive settlement of differences.
We therefore call on all Bosnian political leaders to
cease promoting any unilateral or communitarian
solutions and to fight extremism and agitation likely to
destabilize the country. We urge them, rather, to seek,
through discussions, the same consensus and general
interest that had led to the formation of the Government
in February.

Regarding the five objectives and two conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, Togo is pleased that the office in Brcko
ended, on 31 August, its supervision mandate of the
District, in line with the 23 May recommendations of
the Peace Implementation Council. We hope that event
will be a strong signal for all Bosnian political actors
to fully engage in constructive dialogue with a View to
adopting all the necessary reforms for the country to
move towards greater internal and regional integration.
It is only at this price that they will be able to ensure
peace and prosperity for their citizens.

Given the challenges still facing the country,
maintaining an international presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina could be necessary in order to help it
reach a lasting political accord that can consolidate the
central institutions and ensure peace in the country and
the region.

I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
my country's support for the efforts of the High
Representative and for the civilian and military
personnel working in the country to uphold the Dayton
Accords and the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

