Mr. Samhan Al-Nuaimi (United Arab Emirates)(interpretation from Arabic): It is my pleasure to
express my thanks and appreciation to you, Sir, for your
tireless efforts upon your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. I wish to convey the same sentiment
to your predecessor, the representative of Kenya.

The Security Council meets today to consider the
decision made by the Israeli cabinet on 21 June 1998,
pertaining to the expansion of the municipal borders of the
city of Jerusalem to include neighbouring settlements and
other illegal West Bank settlements. The measure aims at
annexing more occupied Palestinian and Arab land. It aims
at changing the demographic composition as well as the
institutional and legal makeup of this historic Holy Arab
City by uniting it geographically through a new network of
settlements and complicated roads, the ultimate aim being
to isolate it from the other cities and villages of the West
Bank, the Gaza Strip and the other Arab occupied regions.

This is a provocation not only to the Palestinian
people, but indeed a provocation to all Arab and Islamic
peoples. It is a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, the resolutions concerning international
legitimacy, the basic principles of the peace process and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

It is therefore a rejected measure. It will not give the
Israeli Government a legitimate or legal right to lay its
hands on any part of these lands, particularly since the
international community has condemned such Israeli
practices in many Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, all of which provide that the administrative and
legislative measures taken by the Israeli Government to
change the legal status and demographic composition of

 

Jerusalem are null and void and devoid of any legal
merit.

This Israeli decision, which coincides with the newly
declared direction to be taken by the Israeli Prime
Minister of calling for the convening of a second peace
conference in Madrid, and the political and legal
falsehoods in the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Israel made today before the Security
Council, all clearly reveal the aggressive tactics of the
Israeli Government based on expansion and prevarication
with regard to its legal and political commitments in
accordance with the peace agreement it has signed.

It also explains the continuing obstacles placed by
Israel to the resumption of negotiations on the various
tracks since taking power. It explains Israel's persistence
in conducting a relentless campaign of colonialist settler
measures, particularly in Jerusalem, among which was the
launching of the largest colonial settlement in Jebel Abu
Ghneim. It explains many other measures, such as the
arming of its settlers in order to promote their
participation in the policy of oppression, the demolition of
homes, the confiscation of lands, the encirclement of Arab
inhabitants, the suffocation of their movements and the
withdrawal of their identification cards.

All these measures aim at annexing the eastern part
of Jerusalem. It is a preparation for gradual illegal
deportation of Palestinian Arabs, the original inhabitants
of this Holy City, in order to replace them with tens of
thousands of new settlers from all parts of the world. All
these measures have grave consequences which will lead
to increased suffering among the Palestinian people and
to an escalation of violence and tension in the region, as
well as the resultant endangerment of international and
regional peace and security.

The State of the United Arab Emirates, while
condemning all these Israeli violations, reaffirms its full
support for the demands of the Palestinian people. We
support their rejection of all Israeli colonialist settler
policies on Palestinian land, particularly the city of
Jerusalem. We believe that all such violations and
measures taken in a premeditated fashion by the Israeli
Government, in addition to the increasing successive
obstacles facing the efforts for resumption of negotiations,
whether on the Palestinian or Syrian and Lebanese tracks,
are a clear attempt by Israel to shirk its commitments.
The international community must therefore unanimously
hold Israel fully responsible for the grave repercussions
resulting from its violations.

 

Despite the positive efforts undertaken by the
international community, as well as by the two sponsors of
the peace process, especially the United States and the
European Union, to find an objective and pragmatic
solution to push the peace process forward on the basis of
international legitimacy, we regret to find that the Israeli
Government deliberately hampers all such efforts, flouting
all its legal, political and moral commitments, without
having to shoulder any responsibilities for the consequences
of such aggressive behaviour.

We therefore express the hope that these States will
continue to make further efforts by demanding that Israel
renounce these positions which do not respect its
commitments. We also call on the Security Council today
to condemn such Israeli violations. We call on the Security
Council to take a firm position, compelling the Israeli
Government to renounce its latest decision as well as all
previous colonialist settler measures. We call for the
immediate cessation of the building and expansion of Israeli
settlements and the dismantling of current settlements,
particularly in Jerusalem.

We believe that only this will open the way to
renewed efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Middle East as a whole. This alone will
guarantee the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
and its right to self-determination and to the establishment
of its independent State on its national territory in Palestine.
This would fulfil the aspirations of the peoples and the
States of the region for stability, security and peace.

