Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union, and would
like to make a few remarks in its national capacity.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2014/420) and his Special Representative
Jan Kubis and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) team for their dedication
and continued support for the people of Afghanistan in
fulfilling the tasks of the Mission.

First of all, Latvia acknowledges the remarkable
achievements Afghanistan has made in the past
decade, starting from very difficult circumstances. It
is imperative that the progress be sustained in order for
Afghanistan to emerge stronger after the transformation
decade.

Latvia supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace and reconciliation process. Inclusive and orderly
Afghan-led and Afghan-run elections, with a legitimate
process and outcome that are accepted by all, are
vital to consolidating democracy in Afghanistan and
tackling the country's political, economic and security
challenges. Substantial progress has already been made
by the Government, the electoral bodies, the Afghan
National Security Forces, and the electorate in the
preparations for the elections and during the elections.
Latvia particularly welcomes the measures taken to
ensure the higher participation of women and the results
achieved in this regard. Now, at this critical juncture
for Afghanistan, everybody should assume their
responsibilities for establishing a strong foundation for
national unity and stability, and avoid any tensions.

Regional cooperation is crucial to the long-term
stability and economic development of Afghanistan
and the region as a whole, including Central Asia.
Latvia welcomes regional initiatives, in particular
the Istanbul Process. The active and constructive
engagement of all participants ahead of and after the
Ministerial Conference in China in August is important
for sustained progress in developing cooperation and
building confidence between Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Latvia commends the support expressed
at the highest level by China, India, Iran and Pakistan
for a smooth political transition in Afghanistan and
for constructive regional cooperation. We believe
that infrastructure projects that strengthen regional
connectivity greatly contribute to regional cooperation
and economic development. Afghanistan has made
remarkable progress in this regard.

In order to contribute to those efforts, on 3 and 4 June
Latvia hosted a high-level conference on transport,
logistics and trade routes on the theme "Connecting
Asia with Europe", which this year gathered over 400
participants, including Government officials, foreign
policy experts and representatives of transport and
logistics companies from countries of the Far East,
South and Central Asia and Afghanistan, as well as
from partner countries in the China and Central and
Eastern European Cooperation Programme. Among
the high-level participants, we were also pleased to
welcome the Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation
of Afghanistan.

The participants agreed that the synchronization
of infrastructure projects was important for long-term
stability and growth and that infrastructure projects
at the national level must be compatible with regional
developments in transportation, logistics and trade.
During its presidency of the Council of the European
Union in 2015, Latvia will continue to promote closer
cooperation with the countries of Central Asia, the
Far East and South Asia. In order to further develop
our common vision, Latvia will host the next annual
high-level conference in April 2015. Latvia will also
continue to contribute to capacity-building for Afghan
railroad and aviation experts.

Continued international support and cooperation
with Afghanistan are important for achieving sustainable
long-term progress. Mutual commitments made at the
NATO Chicago Summit and the Tokyo Conference
are the basis for partnership between Afghanistan and
the international community, matching international
political, security and financial support with a clear
Afghan commitment to sustained reform. At the same
time, appropriate legal frameworks should be in place
to enable the international community to provide
support in the security sphere after 2014 as well. Latvia
has already pledged its support for the Afghan National
Security Forces as of 2015.

Sustained economic growth and a State-building
process that is founded on the principles of good
governance, the rule of law and human rights, especially
the rights of women and children, should be the basis for
a democratic, prosperous and stable Afghanistan. This
is a crucial moment and an opportunity for Afghanistan
and all its citizens to build on the progress made and
to ensure long-term peace, security and stability in the
country. We should build a true long-term partnership,
led by Afghanistan and based on mutual commitments
to ensuring progress and sustained momentum. Let me
reassure the Council of Latvia's ongoing involvement
in that regard.

