Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your work as
President of the Security Council.

Colombia has decided to speak in this open
debate in view of the importance of the issue for the
future of the United Nations and of the capacity of the
Security Council to handle threats to international
peace and security.

The maintenance of peace was the primary goal
of those who created the United Nations after facing
suffering and overcoming the hardships and challenges
of the Second World War. We must continue this
legacy, shouldering the responsibility of taking
productive, efficient and appropriate precautionary
measures to dispel serious threats to peace.

As an elected member of the Security Council in
2001 and 2002, Colombia viewed with concern the
failure of the Iraqi Government to comply with the
resolutions of the Council and its persistence in
developing and keeping weapons of mass destruction,
which represent a serious threat to international peace
and security.

Only the threat of the use of force and the
unanimous adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1441 (2002), which gave the Government of
Iraq its final opportunity to cooperate unconditionally,
immediately and actively with the inspectors in the
disarmament process, have made it possible for certain
headway to be made in this cooperation, which is still
far from being "unconditional, immediate and active".
For that reason, Colombia takes the view that the Iraqi
Government continues to be in non-compliance with
the international community and that it has provided
scope for the application of the "serious consequences"
heralded by resolution 1441 (2002).

The discussions that have taken place in the
Security Council over the past few months have
revealed a serious division in this fundamental body for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Colombia appeals for unity in the Council at this
particularly crucial time for the future of the institution
of the United Nations and of multilateralism.

We need to keep in mind that the Government of
Iraq has violated basic norms of international law in
attacking its neighbours and in using weapons of mass
destruction. The Iraqi people deserve a leadership that
will ensure national harmony and peaceful coexistence
with neighbouring countries and with the international
community.

We should make no mistake about the dilemma
facing the Security Council: to disarm the Government
of Iraq by the peaceful means of inspections, or to do
so through the use of force. Of course, all the members
of the Security Council and the Members of the United
Nations at large prefer peaceful means, which is what
is provided for in the Charter of the United Nations.

Colombia is a peace-loving country that has
historically chosen to resolve conflicts through
dialogue and mediation, with the use of force as a last
resort. However, the choice lies not with the Council
but with the Iraqi Government.

For that reason, we urge the members of this body
to make a final and resolute effort to maintain the unity
of the Council and to agree on a new draft resolution
that would establish a firm deadline and clear-cut
indicators, with a view to ensuring that the Government
of Iraq finally complies with its obligation to disarm.

However, we are facing a strong likelihood that
the use of force will be necessary in order to avert
greater evils. My country knows this because we have
experienced this in the context of our internal conflict.
At one time we believed that we could convince
irregular groups of the rightness of peaceful methods,
but we came to realize that this only allowed them to
buy time, to arm themselves to an even greater degree
and to increase their capacity to do harm. Their offers
of dialogue, peace, disarmament and peaceful
settlement of the conflict were mere rhetoric to
camouflage the worst of intentions.

Peace is a desideratum - something that has
value in and of itself. But on certain occasions, in order
to achieve it, we should not confuse it with
appeasement and with the illusion of the easy way out,
but we should work instead to overcome
misunderstandings and choose the difficult but correct
path.

