The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.

Brazil voted in favour of the resolution 1970
(2011). We are deeply disturbed by the dramatic
situation in Libya. The level of violence against the
civilian population is totally unacceptable. The
Government of Brazil has publicly and firmly
condemned the use of violence and called on the
authorities in Libya to uphold and protect the right of
free expression of the protesters, as well as to seek a
solution to the crisis through dialogue. The measures
we are adopting today are meant to halt violence,
ensure the protection of the civilian population and
promote respect for international law.

By adopting this resolution as a matter of
urgency, the Security Council has sent a clear signal of
its readiness to respond to the situation in Libya in a
manner consistent with its responsibilities. In our
deliberations today, Brazil paid due regard to the views
expressed by the League of Arab States and the African
Union, as well as to the requests made by the
Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations.
Brazil also had in mind the need to ensure the safety of
all foreign nationals, including those who are still on
the ground and wish to leave the country.

Brazil is a long-standing supporter of the
integrity and universality of the Rome Statute. We
oppose the exemption from jurisdiction of nationals of
those countries not parties to the Rome Statute. In the
face of the gravity of the situation in Libya and the
urgent need for the Council to send a strong, unified
message, my delegation supported this resolution.
However, we express our strong reservation concerning
paragraph 6. We reiterate our conviction that initiatives
aimed at establishing exemptions of certain categories
of individuals from the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court are not helpful to advancing the cause
of justice and accountability and will not contribute to
strengthening the role of the Court.

Brazil hopes that this resolution can contribute to
bringing an end to the violence in Libya, so that the
country can quickly find a solution to the crisis through
dialogue and reconciliation. Continued engagement on
the part of the international community will be
essential to ensuring that the bloodshed stops
definitively and that stability returns to Libya.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.

