The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.

We would like to thank the Special
Representative for his comprehensive and in-depth
assessment of the current situation in Afghanistan. We
once again wish to commend the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
bilateral donors and all others working with the
Government of Afghanistan to stabilize the country and
improve the well-being of its people. In that
connection, we welcome the steady progress made
towards economic revival and the development of
infrastructure, as well as the reform of key sectors such
as law enforcement, the judiciary, education, health
and local government. With determined leadership
committed to change coupled with sustained and well-
coordinated international support, the people of
Afghanistan will realize their democratic and cultural
aspirations in a modernized State.

At the same time, we acknowledge that they
currently face formidable challenges stemming from
weak institutions of governance and the pervading
violence and lawlessness resulting from the insurgency,
in particular in the southern and eastern parts of the
country. In that connection, the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2007/555) contains a number of concrete
recommendations that my delegation believes deserve
careful consideration. Although the support of the
international community is crucial, it is equally
essential that the leadership of Afghanistan makes
effective use of all available opportunities to
strengthen the rule of law, promote human rights and
alleviate the humanitarian crisis, thereby strengthening
the integrity of the State.

We agree that the Government must be resolute in
purging from the security, law enforcement and judiciary
services those elements whose activities tend to erode
public confidence in the Government. My delegation
regards as most worrying the finding that some law

enforcement agents, politicians and public officials are
colluding with narcotraffickers to obstruct justice, thereby
promoting impunity. Afghanistan is threatened by a
vicious circle in which the very State institutions
responsible for deterring and suppressing crime are
providing the enabling environment for crime to flourish.
If unchecked, that development could reverse the gains
that have been made by NATO and ISAF and hinder
progress in stabilizing the remaining parts of the country.

Additionally, the problematic security situation is
also contributing to widespread human rights abuses,
including violence against women in prisons, not to
mention the denial of humanitarian relief to needy
segments of the population. As is pointed out in the
report of the Secretary-General, the security sector
problem goes beyond capacity building and the
shortage of personnel; it is also a function of the
strength of the determination of the leadership to
confront those forces that thrive best in a climate of
violence and lawlessness.

In the light of the foregoing, the marked
improvement in relations between Afghanistan and its
immediate neighbours - especially India and
Pakistan- is a positive development that has the
potential to change the dynamics of the security
situation in the country, and indeed in the entire region,
for the better. We urge the Government of Afghanistan
to speed up the reform of the security sector so that it
can take full advantage of the new momentum for
cooperation with its neighbours.

While my delegation fully appreciates the
constraints facing the Government, we are concerned
nonetheless that the status quo has implications far
beyond the country. In those circumstances, we believe
that a conscious effort must be made in the next phase
of the Afghanistan National Development Strategy to
empower Afghan civil society to complement the
efforts of both the Government and the international
community. An enhanced role for UNAMA, coupled
with additional human and material resources, would
be a step in the right direction.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Afghanistan, on whom I now call.

