Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The situation in the Great
Lakes region is potentially explosive. It is a matter of
paramount importance that the arms embargo imposed by
the Security Council in resolutions 918 (1994), 997
(1995) and 1011 (1995) be effectively implemented.

We value the contribution of the International
Commission of Inquiry in the enforcement of these
resolutions. The findings and conclusions of the
Commission have had a profound impact in generating
international awareness about the obligation to comply
with the Security Council resolutions. It is significant that
the work of the International Commission has shown that
it is not only States or Governments that are concerned
about matters of peace and security. Individual citizens
and organizations also have a role to play and can
contribute meaningfully and effectively towards this goal.
In this respect we recognize the valiant efforts of
non-governmental organizations such as Human Rights
Watch and Amnesty International and the personnel of the
world news media for the work they have done in
documenting evidence on the sale and supply of arms to
former Rwandese government forces. There can be no
doubt that the lives of the personnel of these
organizations were in great danger as they went about
their work, which turned out to be of great benefit to the
investigations of the International Commission. They
demonstrated in concrete terms their solidarity with a
country whose people are still struggling to recover from
the devastating consequences of genocide, the perpetrators
of which are not remorseful - they are at present

 

rearming and retraining with a View to returning to the
country by force.
While the International Commission of Inquiry has
made tremendous progress in its investigations, it is clear
from paragraphs 19 and 20 of the report that some work
still remains to be done. We are gravely concerned about
reports that aircraft were continuing to land at Goma and
Bukavu and that some former Rwandese government forces
were engaging in fund-raising activities with the aim of
financing an armed return to Rwanda. The continued
investigations of the Commission are very important in that
they serve as a powerful deterrent to those who still
harbour the idea of armed incursions into Rwanda for the
purpose of changing the present order by force.

The Commission of Inquiry can succeed in its noble
but arduous task only if it enjoys the support and
cooperation of Member States, in particular, those of the
Great Lakes region of central Africa. The Government of
Seychelles has already contributed meaningfully to the work
of the Commission, and we call upon other States, in
accordance with operative paragraphs 8, 9, and 10 of the
draft resolution before us, to do likewise. The sale and flow
of arms demands a multifaceted approach. It is not enough
to carry out investigations after arms and related materiel
have been delivered. Priority should be given to stemming
the flow of such weapons. It would therefore be an
important step forward if the States neighbouring Rwanda
were to agree to the deployment of United Nations
observers, in line with operative paragraph 7 of the draft
resolution in front of us. In this connection, we look
forward to the outcome of the Secretary-General's
consultations and express the hope that they will be
crowned with success.

