Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to extend our thanks to Presidents
Meron and Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
valuable briefings. I would like to extend them a special
greeting given that this will be our last meeting during
Egypt's membership in the Security Council, which
will end in a few weeks.

We have carefully considered the content of the two
reports before us today, which contain comprehensive
information on the activities of the Tribunals. I would
like to express our full appreciation for the efforts
made by those working in the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), under the presidency
of Judge Agius, to complete the mandate within
the deadline.

We commend the close cooperation between
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and the ICTY to ensure the smooth
transition of the jurisdiction from ICTY to the Residual
Mechanism. We note with satisfaction the content of
the report on the activities of the Residual Mechanism,
which contains information on the handover process of
the archives of the ICTY, as required. We also stress the
need for an optimal use of the available financial and
administrative resources to facilitate the activities of
the Residual Mechanism.

The establishment of the two international
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda was
irrefutable proof of the concerted effort on the part of
the international community to take action against war
crimes and crimes against humanity, to ensure that their
perpetrators are held accountable and to strengthen
the principle of ending impunity at the international
level. The two tribunals played an invaluable role and
have made a genuine effort to carry out these tasks
as swiftly as possible. In this regard, we believe that
it is important to thoroughly study and document the
work of these two tribunals to draw lessons learned,
highlight strengths and identify any shortcomings in
order to build on the experience gleaned from these two
tribunals if necessary in the future. It is also important
to work on documenting and preserving the legacy of
the two tribunals, which will undoubtedly strengthen
international legal jurisprudence.

In conclusion, international criminal tribunals are
an important tool for the international community to
ensure justice and to punish those responsible for grave
violations of international humanitarian law.

It is therefore important to strive to maintain the
independence and impartiality of the international
criminal justice system and to provide conditions
favourable to the work of international criminal
tribunals. We must also make the best use of these
tribunals so that they can achieve their noble mission,
in accordance with the requirements of justice and
commitment to international law. We must avoid any
attempt to politicize this important judicial tool, as this
would undermine the credibility of and our trust in the
international criminal justice system.

