Mr. Nufiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

It is regrettable that the situation in the region,
particularly the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, is continuing without progress
being made. The region is still marked by instability
and insecurity. The situation in the Gaza Strip is
unsustainable. The blockade of the Strip - the
imposition by Israel of impediments and restrictions on
the freedom of movement and access to both persons
and goods, including humanitarian and medical
supplies - has made the recovery and reconstruction
of the area practically impossible, a situation that has
further affected the already precarious living standards
of the population.

The international community cannot remain
indifferent. All possible practical measures must be
taken to ensure that Israel ends those policies, which
are carried out deliberately and in violation of
international laws. Such policies only increase the
suffering and tensions of the Palestinian people. Cuba
11-21096
reiterates its demand that Israel immediately,
unconditionally and fully lift the cruel and illegal
blockade in Gaza and allow the free movement of
supplies to and from the Gaza Strip, as well as
permanent humanitarian access to it.

Cuba condemns the settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, which are continuing despite the calls by
the international community for an immediate halt to
them. Recently, the Government of Israel, in flagrant
violation of the norms of international law, destroyed
the historic Shepherd Hotel, located in the occupied
territory of East Jerusalem, to establish a new Israeli
settlement. Israel also announced that in 2012 it will
allocate $500 million for subsidies for settlement
activities.

At the end of 2009, more than 3,700 dwellings
were being built and more than 200 Palestinian
dwellings were demolished to make way for those
illegal activities. Cuba demands an immediate halt to
the demolition of Palestinian dwellings, the
construction of the wall and the eviction of Palestinian
families in East Jerusalem, as well as other acts of
provocation and illegal aggression perpetrated by the
extremist settlers against the Palestinian population and
the holy sites. These measures and policies perpetuated
by Israel are serious and flagrant violations of
international law, the United Nations Charter, many
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, and the Advisory Opinion of the International
Court of Justice of9 July 2004.

The Security Council cannot remain indifferent to
these facts. Its silence over the past two years on this
matter has been used by Israel to pursue its demolitions
and construction of settlements. Direct conversations
between Israel and Palestine, upon which the
international community pinned certain hopes, lasted
for less than a month, due to Israel's decision to
continue its settlement activities and to end the brief
moratorium thereon.

The widespread physical, economic and social
devastation caused by the illegal and destructive
practice of settlements has been the main obstacle to
achieving a peace agreement. In practical terms, the
settlement policy prevents the creation of a Palestinian
State on the basis of the existing 1967 borders, and
thus the possibility of resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in a just manner.
11-21096

Cuba reaffirms that any measure or action that
Israel has taken or will take to change the legal,
physical and demographic situation and institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, or to exercise
jurisdiction and administration in that territory is null
and void and has no legal effect. We also reaffirm that
all such measures and actions, including the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in the
Syrian Golan since 1967, are violations of international
law and agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations, including Security Council resolution
497 (1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
represent a defiance of the international community.
Cuba demands Israel's full withdraw from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967.

Israel cannot be allowed to continue to commit
serious and flagrant violations of international law with
impunity. The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security in the region and, in particular, for the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

The Palestinian people and its leaders have
agreed to and are working assiduously for a two-State
solution. However, Israel thus far has not proved to be
a serious interlocutor in the peace process. The
international community must assume its responsibility
for the Palestinian question and find a solution that
allows the Palestinian people to exercise its right to
self-determination. In this connection, it is imperative
that a peace agreement be achieved this year, pursuant
to relevant resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference
and the Arab Peace Initiative. The growing
international recognition of the Palestinian State that
we have seen in recent weeks in Latin America and the
Caribbean should give momentum towards achieving
this objective.

Cuba once again reiterates its position in favour
of a fair and lasting peace for all the peoples of the
Middle East that will put an end to the occupation of
all the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967
and guarantee the exercise of self-determination of the
Palestinian people by means of the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

