Mr. Saleh (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): First,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. I also congratulate your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Colombia, on his
presidency of the Council. I would further like to take
this opportunity to express to all my best wishes for the
new year and my hope that it will bring peace and
security to all peoples.

For several years, the Security Council has
devoted part of its work to the consideration in public
meetings of issues such as the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, children and armed conflict and other
questions. We welcome that trend in the Council,
which allows non-members of the Council to take part
in the discussions on such important issues. It enhances
transparency in the Council and makes the Council
more effective in dealing with international issues,
especially those that might threaten international peace
and security.

There are two major reasons for focusing
attention on children and emphasizing the need to
protect them in armed conflict. The first is that children
are part of civil society. Accordingly, they must be
protected as stipulated by the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War. The second reason
is that children are the most vulnerable sector of
society and are therefore the sector in greatest need of
protection and attention.

Since the beginning of the Council's debate on
children and armed conflict, in 1998, the Council has
adopted several resolutions and presidential statements
on the protection of children in armed conflict, such as
resolutions 1261 (1999), 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001).
The United Nations, through its various bodies and
activities, has helped to strengthen the way in which
certain international concerns on the issue of children
in armed conflict are addressed, notably by making
child protection a component of peacekeeping and
post-conflict peace-building missions. Despite all this,
we still need to try harder to ensure the effective
implementation of, and full compliance with,
resolutions and international instruments concerning
the protection of children.

In that connection, my country would like to
express the following concerns. First, when
considering humanitarian issues such as the impact of
armed conflict on children, we should try to be
objective and credible and should try to avoid using
double standards. It is absolutely necessary that the
Security Council deal with the status of Palestinian
children affected by the Israeli occupation of their
territories.
Secondly, it might be necessary during future
consideration of this item to invite competent bodies
such as the United Nations Children's Fund and the
International Labour Organization to take part in the
Council's deliberations in order to take advantage of
their practical experience in this area. In that context,
we welcome the participation of Ms. Carol Bellamy
and her important statement on the issue.

Thirdly, the Council should consider following up
the resolutions it adopts, especially those on the issue
now being considered, by adopting methods and means
acceptable to members of the Council.

Fourthly, it is also necessary to increase
coordination and cooperation among the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council. Such coordination would increase the
effectiveness of those organs when dealing with this
issue of common interest. Coordination among them
would prevent duplicating efforts and taking
contradictory measures. The Security Council can play
an essential role in the protection of children in armed
conflict, especially through its peacekeeping missions.
Likewise, the Economic and Social Council could play
a primary role in post-conflict peace-building. As for
the General Assembly, its principal role could be a
legislative one, especially through the relevant
international conventions and by making
recommendations, in particular at its special sessions
and other special events.

Finally, we express our hope that the
deliberations of the Security Council on children and
armed conflict will evolve into a concrete, practical
concern and that the Council resolutions will be
applied on the ground with objectivity and without
double standards. Recruitment of children, their sexual
exploitation, the violation of their rights and the impact
of foreign occupation on them are all considerations we
should take into account in order to help them and to
eliminate these phenomena. The Council plays an
important role in this regard.

