Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on Yemen.
We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, UNICEF Executive
Director Henrietta Fore and the Ambassador of
Peru, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution (2014), for their
briefings. My delegation would like to address three
points today - the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, the humanitarian situation and the impact
of the conflict in Yemen on women, and especially
on children.

South Africa reiterates the call for all parties to
implement the Hodeidah Agreement in a timely manner
and to resolve the current differences in interpreting the
text ofthe Agreement, especially with regard to the local
security force in and around the city of Al-Hudaydah.
We welcome the latest redeployment by the parties
from the three ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa. The decision to withdraw from Al-Hudaydah as a
first step in order to allow humanitarian assistance is
a positive one and should be commended. We call for
the finalization of the redeployment process and for a
nationwide cessation of hostilities. We also encourage
the parties to work with the International Committee of
the Red Cross in the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement in order to restore security and stability
in Yemen.

We also note with concern that many Yemeni
people are not receiving the aid that they so desperately
need, as it remains very difficult for aid organizations
and actors to get permission to provide humanitarian
assistance in some areas. South Africa calls for the full
implementation of resolution 2451 (2018), which deals
with the issue of ensuring that humanitarian supplies
and personnel flow unhindered into and across the
country, as well as with ensuring that all the parties
to the conflict comply with applicable international
law and fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including respecting and protecting
medical facilities and personnel and allowing and
facilitating humanitarian and medical personnel's safe,
rapid and unhindered access to all those in need.

South Africa calls on the international community
to pledge adequate funding for the United Nations
Yemen humanitarian response programme. We also
call for the pledges made in Geneva to be disbursed and
for humanitarian assistance to reach all those affected
by the conflict. We note from the reports ofthe Panel of
Experts that, regrettably, there have been attempts by
some parties to use social media to divert humanitarian
assistance. We strongly condemn this and call on those
engaging in such activities to desist therefrom.

The Panel of Experts also reported continued
violence directed at women, which South Africa strongly
condemns. South Africa calls on those committing such
atrocious violations against women and children to be
held accountable. The conflict is already taking an
enormous toll on women and children, as they continue
to pay the highest price. Furthermore, we call on all
parties to engage with the Special Representative ofthe
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict in
negotiating, signing and implementing an action plan to
end and prevent violations of children's rights.

In conclusion, South Africa also urges all countries
and groups involved in the conflict in Yemen to cease
hostilities. The conflict in that country cannot be
solved militarily and will only be further exacerbated
each day of this continued, avoidable war. The current
talks are hampered by the continued fighting, which is
not conducive to trust-building as the first step towards
creating a negotiated settlement. If the status quo
remains, the international community will have failed
the people of Yemen.

