Mr. Desta (Eritrea): It seems that I am nearly the
last speaker, and the statement I have prepared is very
brief. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I would also
like to thank you for organizing this open debate on the
situation in Somalia, an issue to which my delegation
attaches great importance, given its grave
consequences for the Somali people, the subregion and
far beyond.

Several pressing issues are involved in the
situation in Somalia, and that is why a comprehensive
strategy is critical to overall peace and stability in that
country. However, in order to respect the time allotted
to each speaker, I wish to limit my statement to the
political track of the situation in Somalia.

As my delegation sees it, a growing consensus is
emerging on how best to approach the crisis in
Somalia. Taking cognizance of the realities on the
ground, and having made realistic assessments of the
situation in Somalia, many Member of the United
Nations, including members of the Security Council,
are now calling for a Somali-led and owned inclusive
political process to bring peace and stability to
Somalia. My delegation realizes that such a positive
approach is meeting with some resistance, which is
only to be expected, from parties that want to cling to
policies and arrangements that have clearly failed to
lead to any tangible improvement. We also cannot but
notice that concerted efforts are being made to
maintain the status quo, even while the military
involvement of external actors continues unabated in
Somalia.

The emerging consensus on the imperative of an
inclusive Somali-led political process has been long in
coming and is the outcome of frank assessments of past
and current realities. Eritrea readily acknowledges that,
even with a new approach, there will be no easy and
quick solution to the Somali crisis. But everything else
has not worked, and we owe it to the Somali people to
provide them with the space and opportunity to resolve
their own problems and to protect the process from
negative and destructive interference.

Eritrea welcomes the emerging consensus on the
need for an inclusive Somali political process and
stands ready to make its own modest constructive
contribution. In this regard, let me stress that we are
prepared to actively cooperate with the good offices of
the Secretary-General and all Member States in the
search for peace and stability in Somalia.

