Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): Let me
join in welcoming you here today, Sir. On behalf of the
United States, I commend your lifelong commitment to
democracy and human rights. It is truly an honour to have
you with us here today. Your own personal journey is a
testament to those who have striven and continue to strive
for liberty and justice.

The United States is pleased to support the draft
resolution that we are discussing today regarding children
and armed conflict. We appreciate the work of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, and his commitment to protecting all children
affected by this terrible issue. He has eloquently described
the horrendous impact of present-day conflicts on children,
both in terms of their scale and their terrible lasting effects,
which can endure for years and even generations. His
impressive efforts have made great strides in protecting
children at risk around the world.

We wholeheartedly agree with the point, made by
Special Representative Otunnu in his last report, that when
children are used as pawns in warfare, whether they are
targets or perpetrators, a shadow is cast on their future and
on the future of their society. We lament the deterioration
in local value systems that has accompanied the increase in
protracted and brutal civil conflicts. As Special
Representative Otunnu has pointed out today and in the
past, many regions of the world are experiencing the
breakdown of traditional norms and social codes of
behaviour, the casting-aside of local injunctions and taboos,
and the undermining of the authority of local elders and
community structures. This disintegration of local value
systems results in an "ethical vacuum", as Mr. Otunnu has
termed it, in which civilians and combatants are Viewed
without distinction as enemy targets. Children, women and
the elderly - the types of people whom societies have
historically acted to protect from harm - have all become
fair game for the most horrendous of atrocities in the
valueless climate which prevails in far too many war zones.

In examining the plight of war-affected children, it
is important not only that we look at the symptoms of
their plight, but that we take aim at the causes as well.
The civil conflicts which put children in harm's way and
which deliver so much death, homelessness, hunger,
illness and suffering upon them must be resolved in order
for their suffering to be abated. We in the Security
Council must continue to do all we can to help maintain
and, when necessary, restore international peace and
security, so that fewer children and other civilians will
suffer the horrors of war.

As the number of civil wars increases, local value
systems and international standards and principles are
being swept aside. Civilian populations are often
deliberately targeted and children suffer disproportionately
as their families are killed or displaced. One of the most
heinous developments has been the increasing use of
young children in armed conflict, in blatant violation of
international law.

On 17 June, the International Labour Organization
unanimously adopted Convention Number 182, the
Convention concerning the Prohibition and Immediate
Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child
Labour. On that occasion, President Clinton stated
unequivocally: "We will not tolerate children being
forcibly recruited to serve in armed conflicts." He added
his strong support for universal ratification of the
Convention and has submitted the Convention to the
United States Senate for advice and consent to
ratification.

Unfortunately, the development of lighter, more
sophisticated weapons has made it easier to send both
boys and girls into combat. Because of their size, these
children are forced to work as scouts, spies, messengers
and decoys. They are often drugged and face other real
tragedies and human rights abuses. Many are wounded in
both mind and body. Even if they survive their ordeal,
they are often deprived of proper care and assistance,
both during and after the conflict. All have suffered a
severe disruption of their education and preparation for
their lives as adults.

We believe that it is time to exert pressure to
implement the many existing norms to prevent the further
abuse and brutalization of children. We should not let our
attention be distracted by debates on the margin of the
problem, but rather focus on where the real abuses are:
with children even younger than 15 whose lives are

 

totally distorted by their recruitment into armed conflict and
brutality, becoming both perpetrators and victims.

The United States places the highest priority on
assisting young children throughout the world who are
forced against their will, often kidnapped at gunpoint, to
take up arms in support of militias and paramilitary groups
engaged in hostilities. The United States is working closely
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) with respect to programmes to rehabilitate
children through counselling, reconciliation, education and
vocational training, in the hope that they will readjust and
be reintegrated into civilian society.

Since 1989, the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) has provided over $30 million in
support of activities - including demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration - that respond to the needs
of children, including child soldiers, affected by armed
conflict in such areas as Angola, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka.

In 1998, the United States contributed over $7 million
to activities for refugee children, including over $4 million
for UNHCR's programmes for children at risk, which
highlight those children affected by armed conflict,
including child soldiers, and over $2 million for the
Liberian Children's Initiative.

The Northern Uganda Initiative, announced by the
First Lady during a March 1998 visit to that country, is a
project to provide targeted assistance where it is most
needed. In this connection, we strongly condemn the
reprehensible acts of the Lord's Resistance Army.

In Sierra Leone, we have contributed to UNICEF for
assistance to war-affected children, including documentation
and tracing of unaccompanied children and reunification
with their families, demobilization, and community
reintegration of former child soldiers.

The United States strenuously condemns the use of
children in armed conflict in a manner that Violates
international law, many examples of which we have heard
about this morning. We must also condemn the brutal
practice of the amputation of limbs in Sierra Leone.
Victims include citizens of all ages, including a 2-year-old
girl I saw last month in Freetown. Such inhumanity
demands a strong international response.

Demobilizing children involved in armed conflicts
after peace is attained and reintegrating them into society
is a complex process. Many emerge knowing no way of
life beyond war. The United States works closely with
United Nations organizations, international and
non-governmental organizations, and others in support of
efforts to rehabilitate children in armed conflict.

Because of the particular vulnerability of refugee and
internally displaced children, the United States is working
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to better address the special protection and
assistance needs of refugee children. We endeavour to
strengthen the capacity of local organizations so that they
may continue working with children after the assistance
ends. For the most part, children who fought in conflicts
are not singled out to receive help, but are part of a larger
programme that assists children affected by war.

Approximately 5,000 children have received
assistance, either directly or indirectly, from programmes
that we have funded in Angola, Liberia, northern Uganda
and Sierra Leone. These programmes provide counselling
not only for the children to deal with their experiences,
but also for their families and communities to facilitate
the acceptance of their return home. In the event that
children who fought in armed conflicts cannot return to
their villages, alternative measures such as relocating
them to other villages or placing them in group homes or
with substitute families must be pursued. Educational and
vocational training are also a means of preparing children
affected by wars to lead constructive lives.

We place the highest priority on assisting children
throughout the world and will continue to work with
Governments, United Nations agencies, international and
non-governmental agencies and other partners who have
specific responsibility and expertise to address the
difficult and tragic problem of the exploitation of children
as soldiers. The necessity of improving the situation of all
children affected by armed conflict is of the utmost
importance to the United States, and that is why we hope
we will be able to adopt this draft resolution later today.
It is an important one that follows on the progress made
with the adoption of the ILO Convention concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of
the Worst Forms of Child Labour, and will provide
momentum for the continued work later this year on the
optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

 

Today's children are tomorrow's hope. We must all
work to ensure that hope is not extinguished by the blight
of armed conflict.

