Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to thank
Mr. Alain Le Roy for his very useful briefing this
morning. I am also grateful to Ambassador Tanin for
his statement affirming the very strong determination
of his Government to build a stable and democratic
Afghanistan.

I would also like to begin by welcoming the
appointment of the new Special Representative, Staffan
de Mistura, and to acknowledge the valuable
contributions of his predecessor, Mr. Eide. The
Security Council had a brief meeting with Mr. De
Mistura before his departure for his new assignment,
and we support his approach, which focuses on a few
areas of importance in the coming months, as the
political calendar is very heavy and filled with many
significant events.

Japan believes that those areas of focus should
be, first, stronger aid coordination; secondly,
advancing political dialogue; and thirdly, the upcoming
parliamentary elections.

With respect to coordination, the London
Conference reaffirmed that there is no other
international actor that can fulfil the role of the United
Nations in leading the coordination of international
support. That is especially true at this time, when
Afghanistan is in a critical period of transition towards
Afghanization, and we need to seek optimal use of
international assistance.

On aid coordination, we must be mindful of
maintaining a long-term perspective and of ensuring
that our efforts serve to promote the leadership and
capacity of the Afghan Government. The success of aid
coordination hinges upon the willingness of donors to
be coordinated. Through the efforts of Mr. Eide,
assistance priorities have been identified. The expertise
of the proposed senior advisers' group needs to be fully
utilized. International donors should make certain that
their efforts are consistent with the goals and priorities
set by the Afghan people. As is often repeated, they
should also make certain that words are translated into
deeds.

Regarding reconciliation and integration efforts,
we have to recognize that there is no substitute for
military operations in combating those who would
resort to violence and obstruct the democratic process.
No political dialogue can succeed from a position of
weakness, so we understand and pay tribute to the
efforts made by members and soldiers of the Afghan
security forces and the international forces. At the
same time, in order to achieve long-term stability, a
political solution must be sought even while military
operations are ongoing. We welcome President
Karzai's leadership and readiness to seek a dialogue
with those who are prepared to renounce violence and
respect the values enshrined in the Constitution, as
well as to organize a national Peace Jirga.

Japan provides assistance for the efforts of the
Afghan Government in its reintegration programme.
Japan is especially grateful to those countries, such as
Australia, Germany, Greece and Spain, that made
pledges at the London Conference to a trust fund to
finance this Afghan-led programme. The Afghan
authorities are now working on the programme's
details, and we very much look forward to the
presentation of the full programme in due time. We
also welcome the fact that the United Nations is
expected to play a role in the reintegration programme.
We hope that the Security Council will assign to the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) a proper role in this Afghan-led effort.

The third issue is elections. The ownership of the
Afghan authorities must be respected in the conduct of
the upcoming parliamentary elections. At the same
time, we recognize that the necessary electoral reforms
and improvements have to be carried out based on
lessons learned from last year's elections. We therefore
welcome President Karzai's commitment to ensuring
the integrity of this process.

Japan also appreciates the President's readiness to
work in close cooperation with the United Nations. The
Special Representative is expected to play the role of
indispensable interlocutor with the Afghan leadership
in conveying the voice and message of the
international community. We hope that the Afghan
leaders will consult closely with him and that

Afghanistan will continue to enjoy full partnership
with the international community following the
elections.

We agree that UNAMA has to be strengthened in
order to meet the high expectations placed upon it. I
reiterate that the highest priority must be placed on the
security of UNAMA and United Nations staff on the
ground. We understand that that an in-depth analysis of
United Nations security requirements is under way and
we are eagerly awaiting its outcome. We also
acknowledge the measures recently taken by the
Secretariat to accelerate the recruitment process to fill
vacancies. A mission of such high importance needs to
be operating at the highest and fullest possible
capacity.

I would like to conclude by expressing Japan's
appreciation for the work of men and women of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. We obviously support
the extension of UNAMA's mandate for another
12 months, with the modifications in the priority areas,
as recommended by the Secretary-General.

