I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin for his briefing. I also thank Mr. Daeic¢, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for his attendance and for his statement. I also listened carefully to the statement made by Mr. Konjufca. Resolution 1244 (1999) is an important legal basis for the settlement of the Kosovo issue. China has always maintained that the best way to resolve the Kosovo issue is for the parties concerned to reach a mutually acceptable solution through dialogue and consultation, in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions. We welcome the recent positive developments in this regard. China respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia. We understand its legitimate concerns with regard to the Kosovo issue and commend its efforts to find a political solution thereto. We hope that Kosovo will demonstrate the necessary political will, effectively lift its unilateral tariff measures and work towards the resumption of dialogue between the two parties. Reconciliation and harmonious coexistence among all ethnicities in Kosovo are in the fundamental interests of peoples from all communities. At this critical time, when the world is facing the extraordinary challenge of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, cooperation and solidarity are more imperative than ever. China hopes that all parties concerned will put the interests of the people first, refrain from any rhetoric or actions that could complicate or escalate the situation, and create conditions for the proper settlement of the Kosovo issue. Against that backdrop, it is important for the Security Council to remain seized of the Kosovo issue. China commends Special Representative of the Secretary- General Tanin and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their active efforts in bringing about a political solution to the Kosovo issue. We also appreciate the efforts of UNMIK to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. China firmly supports the Mission in the diligent implementation of its mandate and the playing of its important role. We call on the relevant parties to fully ensure the safety and security of United Nations personnel and to create conditions conducive to the implementation of their mandate within agreed parameters.
