Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Allow me, first of all, to
welcome you, Madam, to this important meeting and to
thank you for presiding over it.

I warmly welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General; we are grateful for his important remarks at
the beginning of the meeting and, in particular, for his
recent comprehensive report on Iraq (S/2003/715).
Furthermore, I should like to thank the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, for his briefing on his activities and for the
views he expressed about the way ahead in post-war
Iraq. I should also like to express my appreciation for
the tireless efforts already made by Mr. Vieira de
Mello, and by Mr. Ramiro Lopes da Silva as the
Humanitarian Coordinator, and all of their staff, for the
dedicated manner in which they are carrying out their
tasks in often difficult and sometimes dangerous
circumstances.

Finally, I should like to welcome the presence of
the representatives of the Governing Council. My
Government has already welcomed the creation of the
Governing Council as an important first step towards
the formation of an internationally recognized
representative Government established by the people of
Iraq.

We are pleased to note that Mr. Vieira de Mello
played an active role in the process of the creation of
the Governing Council and that his advice has been
favourably received by the Authority, as confirmed by
the Secretary-General. We also acknowledge that the
Governing Council is broadly based - composed of
many groups of the Iraqi people - and may provide
the international community with an Iraqi partner with
whom it can engage. It is in this sense that we
encourage the Governing Council to assume its
responsibilities and to lay the groundwork for the
convening of a constitutional conference. However, the

most important decision - whether the Governing
Council is accepted as the legitimate transitional
representation of the Iraqi people - will have to be

taken by the Iraqis themselves in the coming weeks and
months.

Germany welcomes the overall approach and
structure for the United Nations presence in Iraq as
proposed by the Secretary-General in his latest report.
We support the establishment of a United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq, with a comprehensive
scope of responsibilities. We note that the Secretary-
General puts a wide range of assistance measures at the
disposal of the Iraqi people upon their request, some of
which go beyond the tasks described resolution 1483
(2003). With regard to the current discussion about the
possibility of a new Security Council resolution on Iraq
expanding United Nations responsibilities, I should
like to point out that Germany would welcome and
support such an approach in order to enable those
States that wish to contribute to the reconstruction of
Iraq under the auspices of the United Nations to do so.
My delegation has always - in particular, during
negotiations on resolution 1483 (2003) - advocated a
strong United Nations role in the post-war scenario in
Iraq.
We fully concur with the Secretary-General's
assessment that the forthcoming constitutional and
electoral processes will be of fundamental importance
to the political transition envisaged in resolution 1483
(2003). We share his view that the United Nations, in
coordination with the Authority, can make significant
contributions in these sectors. United Nations
involvement can confer legitimacy on the process. It
can also put at the disposal of the Iraqi people the
wealth of experience and expertise accrued by the
United Nations in such fields over the years.

We see an urgent need to improve the security
situation as basis for progress in all other areas. We are
very concerned indeed about daily reports of loss of
life - among soldiers of the coalition and civilians
alike - and the overall deterioration of the security
situation in parts of Iraq. We understand that
establishing a sufficient security environment is a
challenging task, as remnants of the old brutal Saddam
regime try to undermine stabilization and
reconstruction efforts. We take it that the Authority is
living up to its responsibilities according to
international humanitarian law and as stated by
Security Council resolution 1483 (2003).

The Secretary-General confirmed once again that,
despite its oil wealth, Iraq will require considerable
external assistance for the reconstruction of its
economy. Germany stands ready to contribute its share.
We have already allocated over $50 million in
humanitarian assistance and Germany is the leading
contributor to the European assistance programme.
German companies stand ready to contribute to the
rehabilitation of the Iraqi economy and infrastructure if
their participation is welcome.

However, we believe that international support
will be forthcoming to the necessary extent only if full
transparency and international participation in the
decision-making process are assured. That is the reason
why we have been actively supporting the Secretariat
in its efforts to grant a strong mandate for the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board of the
Development Fund for Iraq (DFI). It is our
understanding from the negotiations of resolution 1483
(2003) that the Board will ensure that the funds of the
Development Fund for Iraq are disbursed in accordance
with paragraph 13 and for the purposes specified in
paragraph 14 of that resolution - that is, for the
benefit of the Iraqi people.

In this context, I should like to emphasize that
Germany would also welcome the establishment of an
adequate multilateral instrument through which the
international community could channel its bilateral
contributions. We believe that the creation of a separate
international fund could dispel some concerns
expressed by some members of the United Nations
with regard to the DFI. However, full transparency and
efficient coordination between these two funds will be
needed to solicit adequate contributions from donor
countries.

The Iraqi people was forced to live for decades
under a brutal regime with a complete disrespect for
even the most basic principles of human rights. The
almost daily new discovery of mass graves is only the
most apparent evidence of the atrocities committed by
the Saddam regime. Against this backdrop, it comes as
no surprise that the issue of transitional justice and
accountability for past crimes is a frequently cited
priority area. We believe that this issue has to be dealt
with under genuine Iraqi ownership in order to be
accepted as impartial by the people of Iraq. We
therefore see an urgent need to build up -with the help
of the United Nations - an Iraqi human rights
capacity. In this regard, we welcome the convening of
the first human rights conference in Baghdad three
weeks ago by the Special Representative.

The interests of the Iraqi people should be the
leading principle of all our activities. We should
honour the unanimous hope of the Iraqis, as expressed
during discussions with the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, that the aspirations of the Iraqi people
to govern themselves can be realized as soon as
possible. It is true - democracy cannot be imposed
from the outside; it has to come from within. Iraqis
themselves must conduct the constitutional process. We
are ready to effectively contribute to the establishment
of conditions allowing all Iraqis to live in freedom,
dignity and prosperity under a representative
Government that will be at peace with its neighbours
and an active member of the international community.
We concur with the Secretary-General that it is
important that Iraqis be able to see a clear timetable
leading to the full restoration of their sovereignty.
There is indeed a pressing need to set out a clear and
specific sequence of events leading to the end of
military occupation.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the creation
of a stable and democratic post-war Iraq and an early
transfer of power to a legitimate Iraqi Government are
our common objective. The success of political and
economic reconstruction in Iraq is the common interest
of the European Union - of which Germany is a
part - the United States and the States of the region.

