Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the organizers for this opportunity to
address the important topic of combating the financing
of terrorism.

The fight against terrorism, and in particular
its financing, as well as preventing the violent
extremism and radicalization conducive to terrorism,
are priorities for Switzerland. As a financial centre
of global importance, Switzerland has a particular
responsibility. Its commitment has been recognized
by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), to which
it has demonstrated the strength and effectiveness
of its anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism-
financing mechanisms. Switzerland is actively involved
in the development and implementation of international
standards in this area. I would like to highlight two
points and make an appeal.

First, in order to be effective at the global level,
combating the financing of terrorism requires a strong
commitment on the part of all States, particularly within
specialized multilateral forums such as the FATF and
FATF-affiliated regional entities. The key strength of
those bodies, which makes them undeniably effective,
is the system ofmutual assessment based on a common,
precise and transparent methodology of evaluation
and monitoring. In that regard, we must be careful so
as not to duplicate evaluation efforts, but rather make
them complementary, share results and ensure a follow-
up process in put in place.

Secondly, although laws against terrorism and
terrorist financing are critical, they do not address
the root causes of terrorism, including poverty, the
lack of governance, corruption, inequality, the lack
of education and a dearth of future prospects for
people. Efforts to combat terrorism must therefore be
deployed upstream and targeted at preventing violent
extremism and radicalization, which are conducive to
terrorism, as well as fostering economic development
and international cooperation.

The strengthening of standards in the fight against
the financing of terrorism in recent years, together
with the sanctions system, in some cases has led to
disengagement within the financial sector, particularly
among international banks. That has a considerable
impact on the capacities of humanitarian organizations
to fund their activities in line with international
humanitarian law, particularly in regions controlled
by listed terrorist groups. Switzerland recalls that
humanitarian activities that are neutral, impartial and
independent should never be considered as lending
support to terrorism.

However, disengagement on the part of the
financial sector not only affects people in need of
humanitarian aid but also legitimate international trade
in general and the fragile economies of developing
countries in particular. For those reasons, Switzerland
calls upon the international community, including the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies, to ensure
that counter-terrorism measures are as focused as
possible and in line with international law, particularly
international humanitarian law.

Switzerland regrets that today's resolution 2462
(2019) is not more explicit concerning those aspects.
It must therefore be ensured that the implementation
of the resolution is fully consistent with international
humanitarian law. In that regard, Switzerland calls on
Member States to take all the necessary precautions to
avoid any counter-productive or detrimental effects,
both on the essential work carried out by humanitarian
organizations and legitimate economic activities
that drive the development of the States concerned.
To that end, Switzerland encourages all States, the
financial sector, donors and humanitarian actors to
bolster dialogue on managing and sharing the risks and
responsibilities linked to the fight against the financing
of terrorism.

