Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their
important briefings.

My statement today will focus on three
key messages.

First, the presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) is essential to
stability in Abyei and along the border region between
the Sudan and South Sudan. The security situation in
Abyei remains volatile, characterized by increased
criminality and the sporadic presence of armed
elements, in contravention of resolution 1990 (2011).
We condemn all attacks against UNISFA peacekeepers.

However, no act of intercommunal violence
was recorded during the reporting period. That
speaks volumes about UNISFA's role in promoting
dialogue, confidence-building and local conflict
resolution among communities in Abyei. We attach
great importance to UNISFA's provision of capacity-
building to the community protection committees in
the absence of the Abyei police service and its support
to traditional justice mechanisms. My delegation also
acknowledges UNISFA's support to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM),
which is an indispensable tool for border-related issues
and deterrence against potential spoilers.

Secondly, we must continue encouraging the
Sudan and South Sudan to accelerate the discussion on
outstanding issues. Progress on the implementation of
the 20 June 2011 Agreement between the Government
of Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area, particularly the formation
ofj oint interim institutions, has been somewhat limited.

On the JBVMM. front, the Sudan and South
Sudan have not been able to achieve the benchmarks
set in resolution 2465 (2019), including the complete
withdrawal from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone.
Momentum for a decisive step forward is now growing,
building on the countries' renewed commitment to
promoting progress on border issues, including during
Prime Minister Hamdok's visit to Juba. My delegation
welcomes the breakthrough at the Joint Border
Commission meeting two days ago. The Security
Council should support the Sudan and South Sudan
in making the best use of that momentum to make
further progress, as well as support the work of regional
initiatives, including the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel.

Thirdly, we need to proceed cautiously with
the reconfiguration of UNISFA. It must take into
consideration domestic political challenges in the
Sudan and South Sudan and build on positive bilateral
relations between the two countries. UNISFA's
reconfiguration must be geared towards enabling the
Mission to effectively respond to the challenges on the
ground and match them with appropriate personnel and
capability support. We concur that there is a need to
maintain the Mission's capacity at this stage in order
to guard against potential spoilers and urge the two
countries to provide full support to UNISFA in the
deployment of personnel. My delegation sees merit
in the Secretary-General's proposal to reconfigure
UNISFA with the aim of reinvigorating the political
process through the deployment of civilian capacity.
If UNISFA's reconfiguration is to be effective, it is
important to secure the support of both the Sudan and
South Sudan while also taking into account the views
of troop- and police-contributing countries.

I would like to close by commending Ethiopia
for its valuable contribution to UNISFA. Indonesia is
heartened to see positive relations between the Sudan
and South Sudan, whereby both countries actively
support each other's peace process. My delegation
reaffirms its long-standing support for the Sudan and
South Sudan in finding a peaceful solution to their
outstanding issues.

