Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
too extend our gratitude to Mr. Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing on developments in the way HIV/AIDS issues
are addressed in peacekeeping operations. We also
thank Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
for presenting a very informative progress report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1308
(2000).

We are encouraged by the progress that has been
made since the adoption of that resolution and
commend the work done by the United Nations in that
respect. However, we should not be complacent. The
threat and incidence of HIV/AIDS have not abated, and
in some regions and situations - as in Africa the
threat is on the increase, although the opportunities and
prospects for reducing and containing it are improving.
We welcome the recommendations provided in the
UNAIDS report, which warrant our full attention; we
need to encourage more Member States to report on
their implementation.

The HIV/AIDS pandemic, as noted by the
Secretary General in his report on progress made in the
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS (A/59/765), is an exceptional problem
which demands an exceptional response. The
HIV/AIDS pandemic is a crosscutting issue that has an
impact on all sectors, and, as such, it needs to be
tackled in a coordinated manner by all United Nations
organs within their respective mandates. The Security
Council, by adopting resolution 1308 (2000),
highlighted the potential threat the epidemic poses for
national, regional and international security,
particularly in conflict and peacekeeping settings. It is
now five years since resolution 1308 (2000) was
adopted. We therefore need to take stock of what we
have achieved so that we can sustain those
achievements and identify what still needs to be done.

Resolution 1308 (2000) was a trailblazing
initiative in generating international awareness and in
promoting international action to combat HIV/AIDS
beyond international peacekeeping personnel. It
followed the path of the defining leadership and roles
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. It elevated the debate and action on
HIV/AIDS to a new level in the international
community. The resolution recognized the enormity of
the problem, which continues to claim more than 2
million lives globally every year, more than half of
them in Africa. It further recognized the implications
of the pandemic for international peace and security,

 
which implied a role for the Security Council beyond
the traditional confines of military-related threats to
international peace and security.

The devastating impact of HIV/AIDS on youthful
and adult populations alike is undercutting economic
productivity and disrupting essential social services in
many developing countries. Countries are obliged to
increase expenditure on health many times over as a
matter of equal priority to fighting poverty, hunger,
child mortality, malaria and tuberculosis. At the same
time, countries have to allocate resources to provide
for safe drinking water, universal education and
maternal health. It is therefore logical that combating
HIV/AIDS is one of the Millennium Development
Goals to be addressed simultaneously with the other
Goals.

If a nation's state of health is a barometer of its
vitality and stability, then the HIV/AIDS pandemic is
not only a moral and ethical challenge to humanity, but
could also contribute to chronic weakness and
instability in nation-States and societies. As resolution
1308 (2000) recognizes, the impact of HIV/AIDS on
military establishments can be devastating. The
emphasis on combating the spread of HIV/AIDS
among peacekeepers is well placed and needs to be
constantly followed up.

In Tanzania, the military service has recognized
the threat of HIV/AIDS in the uniformed military
services. The Tanzania People's Defence Force now
conducts awareness campaigns for all its personnel,
especially new recruits. However, despite the
awareness of HIV/AIDS, the challenge faced is to
make the behavioural changes that will enable one to
protect oneself all the time. For example, although
there is awareness of the benefits of preventive
strategies, the proper and consistent use of such
strategies ought to be mainstreamed in educational
systems and public campaigns. There is thus a need to
devise more innovative ways of creating awareness
that will also contribute to enduring changes in
behaviour.

As we tackle the HIV/AIDS pandemic in
peacekeeping operations, let us not forget the plight of
women and children, either as combatants or as victims
of sexual exploitation by parties in conflicts. Here, we
would like again to recall that there must be zero
tolerance of sexual exploitation in peacekeeping
missions. We thus urge the collaboration of UNAIDS
with the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, the Division for the Advancement of Women
and the system's child protection bodies to ensure that
measures taken to combat HIV/AIDS take into account
the gender dimension as well the vulnerabilities and
interests of children.

Funding for HIV/AIDS programmes has
increased, but it is still inadequate. We note with
concern that uniformed civilian and military services
are often not included in bilateral support and thus
have to rely on national budgets, which may not be in a
position to provide adequate funding. There is thus,
first, a need for increased resources to fight HIV/AIDS
in funds such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Malaria and Tuberculosis; such funds need also to
allow for the funding of programmes in uniformed
civilian and military services.

The international response to the HIV/AIDS
pandemic has now to go beyond generating awareness
with regard to changing behaviour to include
community-based testing and treatment with
antiretroviral drugs. As such drugs are beyond the
reach of ordinary people and as treatment also requires
a nutrition-based support infrastructure, the response
has to be multidimensional and backed by a collective
political response in order to mobilize the needed
resources. Research in that area must also continue in
order to find a cure and/or a vaccine for this
devastating pestilence of our modern time.

Finally, the Security Council should continue to
focus on the international security dimension of the
challenge, including with respect to peacekeeping
operations, while the rest of the United Nations system
and the international community should focus on
multisectoral preventive and curative responses. The
combination should constitute a total response strategy
in partnership with Governments, civil society and the
corporate world, especially the pharmaceutical
industry, which should exercise corporate
responsibility through enlightened consideration of the
price of drugs.

