Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lamberto Zannier for his briefing today and for his
continuing strong leadership of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
would also like to welcome Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, the
Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and Mr. Vuk Jeremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to the Council
Chamber today.

The past three months have proven to be an
important time for Kosovo in consolidating its progress
as an independent State. We have witnessed significant
political uncertainties since the most recent Security
Council debate (see S/PV. 6483), as a new Government
was formed. Kosovo's institutions rose to the challenge
and set a precedent for responsible, inclusive and
democratic Government.

The new Government and the new President have
already started work on the issues of key importance to
Kosovo's future, namely, European Union (EU)
integration, economic reform and regional cooperation,
including the EU-facilitated dialogue with Serbia. We
welcome the focus on delivering further positive
development for all communities living in Kosovo.

The EU-facilitated dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade is clearly vital to the future of both countries
and to peace and prosperity in the region. With
political will on both sides, the dialogue should deliver
practical benefits aimed at improving trade, people-to-
people contact and the quality of life of the citizens of
Kosovo and Serbia. It will also support the progress of
both countries towards EU accession.

The United Kingdom welcomes the pragmatic
approach taken by both Belgrade and Pristina during
their first three meetings. It is important that they build
on that momentum and that both countries continue to
engage in a constructive and flexible manner.

Looking at wider developments in Kosovo, we
welcome the assessment in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2011/281) that the security situation in
Kosovo, including in the north, has remained calm. We
also welcome the reporting of clear and decisive action
having been taken against organized crime and
corruption from the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), working in partnership
with the Government of Kosovo.

Serious challenges remain. It is essential that the
Government of Kosovo continue to actively address
priority areas for reform. In particular, I would
highlight the rule of law, an area in which Pristina must
continue to work closely with EULEX, as well as the
legal and regulatory obstacles to foreign investment. I
welcome Foreign Minister Hoxhaj's assurance today
that Kosovo remains committed to its relationship with
EULEX and continues to seek a trustworthy and
dynamic partner in its efforts to reform the rule of law
sector.

EULEX is playing an increasingly important role
as it takes forward the investigation into Senator
Marty's allegations of inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. While we
note the concerns of some Security Council members,
the paper from the Republic of Serbia and the
comments of Foreign Minister Jeremie today, we are
confident that EULEX fully meets the criteria set out
by the Secretary-General when he called for a
thorough, impartial and independent investigation into
the allegations, with a strong witness-protection
programme and the full cooperation of all stakeholders.

Having assumed rule-of-law responsibilities from
UNMIK since 2008, EULEX has the authority and
jurisdiction to investigate those serious allegations. It
is both impartial and independent in carrying out its
executive mandate, as evidenced by its work to date on
sensitive issues, such as war crimes and missing
persons. EULEX has the capability to carry out a
thorough investigation, including witness-protection
capability. The Mission's Witness Security Unit meets
EU standards and can be upscaled, as necessary, to
meet the demands of that investigation. It also has a
proven track record of international legal cooperation
with third States, both inside and outside the region.
Finally, EULEX has the cooperation of the key
stakeholders, having received assurances of full
support and cooperation from Tirana and Pristina, and
having already engaged closely with Senator Marty.

The United Nations has continued to play a
crucial role in supporting reconciliation and
cooperation. That has been highlighted in its work in
support of missing persons and religious and cultural
heritage. I would also like to underline the United
Nations support, including through the United Nations
Office for Project Services, for the census in northern
Kosovo. An accurate census conducted throughout
Kosovo is key to providing public services, now and in
the future, to all communities living there. It is the
citizens in the north who will suffer the most if the
census there is not completed. The data needed to
provide social, economic and health services will be
lacking. The United Kingdom hopes that the census
will proceed there this month, in accordance with the
revised operational plan.
Finally, let me reiterate again the United
Kingdom's commitment to work with all parties in
support of a stable, prosperous and democratic Kosovo
that enjoys genuine cooperation with all countries in
the Western Balkans as they all move towards the EU.

