The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/l996/319, which contains the text of a letter dated
24 April 1996 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1996/300,
letter dated 19 April 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/ 1996/306 letter dated 19 April 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council; and S/1996/339,
letter dated 8 May 1996 from the Charge d'Affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its profound
concern at recent instances of failure to cooperate with
the International Tribunal established pursuant to
resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May 1993, and in
particular the failure of cooperation by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia described in the letter of
24 April 1996 from the President of the Tribunal to
the President of the Council (S/1996/319).

"The Security Council recalls its decision in
resolution 827 (1993) that all States shall cooperate
fully with the International Tribunal and its organs
in accordance with that resolution and the Statute of
the Tribunal and that consequently all States shall
take any measures necessary under their domestic
law to implement the provisions of the resolution
and the Statute, including the obligation of States to
comply with requests for assistance or orders issued
by Trial Chamber under Article 29 of the Statute.
The Council underlines the importance of these
obligations, as well as the obligations undertaken by
the parties to the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes
thereto (the Peace Agreement, S/ 1995/999, annex) to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal.

"The Security Council deplores the failure to
date of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
execute the arrest warrants issued by the Tribunal
against the three individuals referred to in the letter
of 24 April 1996, and calls for the execution of
those arrest warrants without delay.

"The Security Council calls upon all States and
others concerned to comply fully with their
obligations with respect to cooperation with the
Tribunal, and in particular their obligation to execute
arrest warrants transmitted to them by the Tribunal.
It recalls the provisions of its resolution 1022 (1995)
of 22 November 1995 which notes inter alia that
compliance with the requests and orders of the
Tribunal constitutes an essential aspect of
implementing the Peace Agreement. The Council
calls upon all States which have not already done so
to make provision in their domestic law enabling
them to comply fully with their obligations with
respect to cooperation with the Tribunal.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/23.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6 pm.
