Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Eliasson for his briefing and his thoughts,
as well as each and everyjournalist present here today.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
topic to which the international community attaches
great importance. It is therefore legitimate and
necessary for the Security Council to address it in
an ongoing manner. I should like to thank the United
States presidency for raising the issue of the protection
ofjournalists. This is the first time it has been discussed
in the Security Council since 2006 (see S/PV.5613),
when the Council adopted resolution 1738 (2006). My
country was a member of the Security Council at that
time, too. I thank the presidency for the concept note
it has provided for this debate (S/2013/393, annex) and
express our appreciation for the statements made by the
journalists today.

According to the Secretary-General's 2012 report
(S/2012/376), the state of protection of civilians
remains terrible. Among violations of international
humanitarian law, it describes ongoing attacks by
combattants on non-combattants; disproportionate
attacks; displacements within and across borders;
violence against women and children, including sexual
violence; air strikes, including with unregistered
aircraft; and other actions that prevent or hinder the
provision of humanitarian assistance, such as deliberate
assaults on hospitals, schools and humanitarian
operations. In many situations on the ground,journalists
are principal victims of such violations of international
humanitarian law.

We know that journalism is a critical tool in the
exercise of the freedom of information and the press.
It is also an important instrument in post-conflict
and conflicts situations when civil society does not
not necessarily have the resources to expose serious
human rights violations or breaches of international
humanitarian law. The reports of the Secretary-General
and of the Director-General of UNESCO and other
sources all reflect the frequency and gravity of attacks
on journalists. The presidential statement adopted this
year on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/PRST/2013/2) also reflects the Council's concern
over such attacks.

In order to guarantee the protection of civilians and
especially of journalists, we must duly consider two
elements: respect for international humanitarian law
in terms of attacks on journalists, and accountability.
The Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection ofVictims
of International Armed Conflicts, to which Argentina
is a party, notes in article79 that "[j]ournalists engaged
in dangerous professional missions in areas of armed
conflict shall be considered as civilians". This norm set
out in Protocol I simply confirms a rule of international
customary law, which holds that journalists enjoy
civilian status under international humanitarian law.
In accordance with common article 3 of the Geneva
Conventions on non-international conflicts, journalists
and associater personnel are non-combattants and must
be protected as such, along with their support staff.

The 2012 UNESCO report indicates, as other
colleagues have said, that in the biennium 2010-2011,
127 journalists and media workers were assassinated.
This figure represents an increase over the previous
biennium. The report concludes that there is a growth
trend in the number of deaths among journalists. It
therefore proposed the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
which was also adopted in 2012 by the United Nations
Chief Executives Board for Coordination. We hope that
the Plan of Action, the second inter-agency meeting on
which took place in late 2012, will help to strengthen
measures to protect journalists in conflict and post-
conflict situations, and ensure accountability.

The two issues of respect for international
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity were
also reflected in resolution 21/12 of the Human Rights
Council, adopted in October 2012. The resolution,
which was sponsored by more than 50 countries,
including Argentina, energetically condemns all
violence againstjournalists and expresses concern that
attacks on journalists very often go unpunished.

I should like to address one aspect of this issue that
I believe strongly promotes the lack of safety endured
by men and women of the press. It is often said that the
first victim of war is truth. It would appear that what we
are saying today is that its second victims are those who
are responsible for telling the truth. A 2003 report of
the International Labour Organization notes that there
was a moment in the war in Afghanistan when attacks
on reporters were more numerous than attacks on the
military.

Who is responsible for the safety ofjournalists in
a context where the dangers faced by members of the
press in conflict situations are growing year by year?
Economic and technological changes in the journalism
industry create even more pressure on media workers
to produce more news at greater risk and less cost.
Some communication organizations, in their zeal to
save on costs, use freelance professionals and part-
time local correspondents, to the detriment of full-time
staff and highly-skilled personnel. Although there is
great variation as to how such independent workers are
defined and treated by companies, at times some lack
insurance as part of their compensation and may not
have available ready cash that could help get them out
of emergencies and foreseeable risks.

An environment of increasing informality in all
areas of the labour market, combined with the precarious
employment situation of war journalists, compounds
the risks to which men and women are exposed during
their work. A few days ago, journalist Francesca Borri
wrote in the Columbia Journalism Review how routine
it was for her to sacrifice her personal security in her
work in Aleppo in order to be able to compete with the
scarce resources offered by companies:

"[w]hether you're writing from Aleppo or Gaza
or Rome, the editors see no difference. You are paid
the same: $70 per piece. Even in places like Syria,
where prices triple because of rampant speculation.
So, for example, sleeping in this rebel base, under
mortar fire, on a mattress on the ground, with yellow
water that gave me typhoid, costs $50 per night; a
car costs $250 per day. Not only can you not afford
insurance - it's almost $1,000 a month - but you
cannot afford a fixer or a translator."

Another urgent and crucial matter is putting an end
to impunity for grave violations against civilians, as part
of the civilian population. Sixty per cent of the cases
involving the 995 journalists who have been murdered
in armed conflict since 1992 have gone unpunished.

In conclusion, it is clear to everyone that, even
properly implementing all the necessary precautions,
war reporters practice a risky profession in which their
lives are endangered. Nevertheless, many of the attacks
against reporters and many of the deaths catalogued in
the past decade are neither necessary a condition of the
profession nor an automatic effect of war. Rather, they
are the outcome of specific working conditions that
have been transformed through technological changes,
new military strategies with regard to the press and
transformations that directly affect the working
conditions of journalists in general, thereby placing
those who work in armed conflict in particularly
vulnerable situations.

Argentina endorses two recommendations that we
have heard from numerous journalist non-governmental
organizations, namely, recognizing the special
vulnerability of journalists in conflict situations and
incorporating that perspective in the mandates of all
peacekeeping missions established by the Council.

I thank the President for organizing this debate. For
this commitment to become a reality, we must focus
our attention not only on conflict situations, in which
journalists work every day, but also on the professional,
economic and structural conditions that underpin their
work, with a view to ensuring freedom of the press,
information and expression.

I thank Ms. Kathleen Carroll, Mr. Mustafa Haji
Abdinur, Mr. Richard Engel and Mr. Ghaith Abdul-
Ahad. I also thank Mr. Robert Cox, a journalist with
the Buenos Aires Herald, who in 1977 was illegally
detained and kidnapped under State terrorism in my
country for having been the first to publish, for the
benefit of the international community, that my country
had been systematically violating human rights by way
of kidnappings, torture, disappearences and murder.
Not only was he detained and kidnapped, but he had to
quit Argentina in 1979. I again take this opportunity to
say, never again!

