Ireland congratulates Indonesia on its presidency of the Security Council and would like to thank Minister Marsudi for presiding over today's timely debate. Ireland aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 27) and wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and Under- Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, Head of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, for their contributions to today's debate. Clearly, we cannot yield in our efforts to tackle terrorism and organized crime. Ireland has highlighted its concerns about the recent rise in malicious cyberactivity and cybercrime. Terrorist and hate groups are engaged in the spread of disinformation and propaganda, sowing distrust and division. At the same time, the economic impacts of the pandemic are making more people susceptible to terrorist narratives and criminal activity, while States struggle to maintain the resources necessary to challenge crime and terrorism. Action is now required to prevent a rise in terrorism post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Like the virus, terrorism and criminality are global challenges that cannot be tackled by States acting alone. Now more than ever, the global response to terrorism and organized crime requires multilateral cooperation and vision, with the United Nations at its core. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides a strong framework to facilitate cooperation between Member States and international/ regional organizations and to promote engagement with non-governmental stakeholders. Economic and social inequalities can contribute to fuelling criminality and terrorism; Ireland welcomes the ongoing engagement by the United Nations to support sustainable development in communities worldwide. The socioeconomic impact of the pandemic is being particularly felt by the young, and the United Nations and its Member States must now work decisively to counter the lure of criminality, violent extremism and terrorism. Partnerships with civil society can play a critical role in that regard. We know from our own national experience that an effective counter-terrorism strategy is one that respects human rights, fundamental freedoms, international humanitarian law and the rule of law, as highlighted in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and reaffirmed by the Security Council. Human rights abuses contribute to and sustain terrorism and criminality. Ireland looks forward to engaging in future high-level conferences on human rights and counter-terrorism as soon as the current pandemic context allows. Last year, Ireland was pleased to co-sponsor resolution 2482 (2019), which calls upon Member States to enhance the coordination of efforts at all levels in order to strengthen a global response to linkages between international terrorism and organized crime. To that end, Ireland continues to work closely with partners to counter terrorism and criminality, including through the recent adoption of European Union (EU) Council conclusions on preventing and countering terrorism and violent extremism, which will strengthen global intelligence-gathering and information- sharing networks and promote the EU's dialogues and strategic engagement with third countries. Those who commit terrorist acts rely on funding sourced from whatever avenues are open to them, including through criminal activity, and while this is replicated across jurisdictions, the extent of the relationship and the factors which influence it vary widely. Enhanced dialogue at the United Nations and more research and information-sharing, including on evolving terrorist threats and trends, and how criminal activity finances and sustains terrorism, are necessary. This includes a continued concerted global approach to preventing money laundering and illicit financing, which sustain terrorism. We must not take for granted the important role played by civil society in this dialogue and rise to the challenge of ensuring that COVID-19 does not limit civil society participation in the development of counter- terrorism measures. Ireland is playing its part. Our response brings together a range of Government departments and agencies, including the Central Bank of Ireland, the Irish Police and Defence Forces, our Criminal Assets Bureau and Revenue Commissioners. The Security Council must also continue to address this issue. Resolution 2462 (2019) sets out a comprehensive approach to combat the financing of terrorism. The challenge as ever is moving from rhetoric to implementation. Ireland remains committed to supporting the United Nations and to working with partners to counter terrorism and organized crime and prevent the incalculable damage inflicted on citizens, communities and States.
