Mr. Bonser (Canada): The Government of Canada
is deeply concerned by the increasing number of acts
of violence committed against journalists and other
media professionals in situations of armed conflict. We
support the initiative brought forward by Lithuania to
bring attention to this issue.

It is increasingly clear that media professionals are
being deliberately targeted, in violation of international
humanitarian law. Canada would like to focus particular
attention on increasing accountability for perpetrators
of crimes against journalists in situations of armed
conflict and on ensuring the safety and protection of
journalists in conflict zones, including areas controlled
by terrorist groups.

Before speaking to that point, Canada would like
to stress how important it is that the Security Council
and all Member States continue to give sustained and
comprehensive attention to the harm done to civilian
populations writ large. We are very alarmed by the
extent of civilian suffering and displacement caused
by armed conflicts. This reflects a diminishing respect
for international humanitarian law, which is a situation
that must absolutely be remedied. We can do more,
starting by seizing these opportunities to address
serious concern about the protection of civilians,
and committing to reducing this growing problem of
unnecessary civilian suffering.

(spoke in French)

Accurate, impartial media reports conveyed
from conflict zones serve a fundamental public
interest. Images and news have an impact on
how we confront and respond to armed conflicts.
Journalists - and increasingly, citizen and
social-media-based journalists - who report from
conflict zones face many dangers. Most disturbingly,
the specific targeting ofjournalists by armed groups is
alarmingly frequent. The past three years have in fact
been the deadliest for journalists since the Committee
for the Protection of Journalists organization began
keeping track more than two decades ago.
Existing international humanitarian law provides
the appropriate protections. Pursuant to the provisions
of international humanitarian law, media professionals
who work in conflict zones are considered civilians and
are therefore to be protected so long as they retain their
civilian status. The most serious challenge is not a lack
of rules to protectjournalists, but a failure to implement
existing rules and to systematically investigate,
prosecute and punish violations of international
humanitarian law.

(spoke in English)

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has been
connected to some of the more horrifying and high
profile killings of journalists, namely the abductions
and beheadings of American and Japanese freelancers
James Foley, Steven Sotloff and Kenji Goto. Most
often, though, local journalists and media workers
are the targets of threats and attacks, as we have seen
across conflict zones including Syria, Iraq, Ukraine
and Somalia. As tensions escalate in Burundi, Canada
is concerned by reports that media are being forced out
of the country.

All Member States need to ensure a safe and
enabling environment for journalists to perform their
work independently and without fear of violence or
arbitrary detention. For journalists, as for all civilians,
the harm and suffering deliberately inflicted upon them
must end, and perpetrators of such acts must be held
to account. The international community must not be
silent on this issue. We urge fellow Member States to
maintain our attention and resolve on the protection of
civilians agenda.

