Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the Council today, together with
His Excellency President Buyoya, Permanent Secretary
Sidikou and Deputy Secretary-General Serrano, with
whom we enjoy a strong and fruitful partnership.
It is a pleasure for me to update the Council on the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and the international
support provided to it, including by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). I shall also identify the challenges
encountered to date and list the measures that we
believe are necessary for the success of the Force, in
accordance with resolution 2391 (2017).

The security situation in the Sahel remains
extremely concerning and the recent trends detailed
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1006) are
worrying. The increase in terrorist attacks against
civilians, Government officials and security and
defence forces, particularly in north-eastern Burkina
Faso and the Niger, shows that the terrorist threat in the
Sahel is spreading. As always, civilians are paying the
highest price. Schools are closed, basic social services
are no longer delivered, potential investments are being
abandoned due to the climate of terror and fear that
is taking hold there. This situation robs young people
who are without prospects for a better future and real
opportunities of hope, thereby creating a fertile ground
for terrorism to thrive. If we do not take forceful and
coordinated measures forthwith to prevent terrorism,
that scourge will spread even faster and further, and it
will become even more difficult to address.

In this hostile environment, the operationalization
of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel has not been easy.
Over the past six months, it has faced serious obstacles,
but has also overcome significant challenges. The
attack on its headquarters in Sevare on 29 June was
a striking reminder of how well informed, prepared
and determined terrorist groups operating in the Sahel
region are. The attack destroyed critical infrastructure
and communications equipment, resulting in the
temporary suspension of Joint Force operations.
However, G-5 Sahel member States and Joint Force
leaders have persevered in the face of what could have
been a fatal blow to this important initiative.

I take this opportunity to thank the outgoing
Commander of the Joint Force, Brigadier General
Dacko, for his service and to congratulate the new
Force Commander, Brigadier General Hanena, on
his appointment. I commend his leadership and the
swift actions he has taken to ensure that efforts to
operationalize the Joint Force are actively pursued. The
decision taken by the G-5 Sahel Defence and Security
Committee on 25 October in Niamey to relocate the
Joint Force headquarters to Bamako should help to
restore the momentum of the Joint Force.

It is now essential that the Joint Force resume its
operations without delay. I therefore urge the leaders
of the Joint Force to spare no effort to finalize the
planning efforts and launch its next operations as
soon as possible. That will send a strong signal to
terrorist groups seeking to undermine State authority
and destabilize the region, and will strengthen the
confidence of the G-S's international partners. We also
call on the G-5 Sahel to step up its efforts to coordinate
the forces sent under G-5 framework and to further
clarify the concept of operations of the Joint Force. The
cross-border operations of the Joint Force, as part ofthe
first phase of the concept of operations, are important
and should be continued. But in the long term, only an
operation with a regional mandate and more clearly
defined roles and responsibilities among the Joint
Force, national armies and international forces will
be effective in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime in the Sahel. We therefore encourage
G-5 Sahel member States to agree on a common vision
of the final status of the Joint Force.

(spoke in English)

Now more than ever, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
depends on the support of the international community.
Remarkable progress has been in made in the area of
force generation. The G-5 Sahel member States have
deployed more than 80 per cent of their troops, manned
all sector headquarters and completed the transfer
of authority for all command posts. That is no small
feat just over 12 months after the Joint Force reached
initial operational capacity. However, much remains
to be done. The Joint Force has still not attained full
operational capacity. Major equipment shortfalls,
capability gaps, insufficient infrastructure and a lack
of secured operational bases continue to delay its
full operationalization.

We extend our deepest gratitude to the European
Union, which has done an outstanding job in matching
the Joint Force's needs with corresponding donor
pledges and has also been an important donor to the
Joint Force since its inception. Contributions by
all the donors, which came swiftly forward, were
instrumental in the start-up phase of the Joint Force.
However, to date almost 50 per cent of pledges made
have not been earmarked, let alone disbursed. We
therefore urge donors to deliver on their commitments
and to provide the financial support the Joint Force so
urgently requires.

MINUSMA continues to face a funding gap of
almost$30milliontoprovidethesupportitwasmandated
to provide to the Joint Force pursuant to resolution
2391 (2017). While the Mission responded immediately
and favourably to all of the Joint Force's requests for
life-support consumables and transportation, it has
lacked the funding to provide engineering support
for the enhancement and fortification of the Joint
Force's camp, which remains the biggest obstacle to its
operationalization. Indeed, the Mission has undertaken
all required assessments, presented scopes of work
for four camps on Malian territory, and stands ready
to begin engineering support as soon as the required
resources become available. However, in the absence of
funding there is not much the Mission can do.

That points to the shortcomings of the current
support model for the Joint Force, despite the best
intentions of all actors involved. The Secretary-General
has stated repeatedly that the Joint Force requires a
different support mechanism, namely, a dedicated
support office funded through assessed contributions.
That would allow for more predictable and sustainable
planning of support measures to permit the extension
of support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force beyond Malian
territory and enable MINUSMA to focus exclusively
on mandate implementation. I also echo the calls of the
Secretary-General and the Heads of States of the G-5
Sahel a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations for the Joint Force.

We are encouraged by progress made by the Joint
Force in the operationalization of the police component
and the establishment of its compliance framework.
Investigations into the two incidents in Boulekessi, and
the transparency and cooperation demonstrated by both
Malian authorities and the Joint Force's leadership are
commendable. Respect for human rights is integral to
achieving the operational aims of the Joint Force and a
prerequisite for the overall success of that initiative. In
fact, it will stand a chance only ifthe people of the Sahel
are confident in the actions of their defence and security
forces. We therefore call on the Force leadership to take
advantage of the technical support provided by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and to consolidate the achievements that
have already been made on important dimensions of its
compliance framework.

Finally, any security initiative in the Sahel can be
successful only if it is part of a larger, more holistic
strategy for the region that addresses the underlying
causes of instability while seeking political solutions
to prioritize inclusive socioeconomic development.
The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
in conjunction with the G-5 Sahel's priority investment
plan, provide the framework in which the Joint Force
must be embedded. We welcome the signature of a
partnership agreement between the G-5 Sahel secretariat
and the Sahel Alliance in Niamey on 30 October, which
was an important step to enhance coordination and
cooperation in the Sahel.
Furthermore, we echo the Secretary-General's
calls on the G-5 Sahel member States to urgently create
the Joint Force's support group to provide a forum for
member States, donors and partners of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. The African Union has a key role to play
in that regard. Under its chairmanship, the support
group could ensure linkages with other regional and
political initiatives. We call on G-S Sahel countries to
continue to address the critical governance shortfalls
in the region that provide a fertile breeding ground for
terrorism. The Malian peace process remains critical
in that regard as a cornerstone of political efforts to
address long-standing grievances.

It is our shared and collective responsibility
to ensure that the Joint Force succeeds. As such, I
call on each and every one of us to do our part. The
United Nations remains deeply committed to this
important initiative.

