Mr. Kalamverzos (Greece): Allow me, at the
outset, to stress that Greece aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union, which highlighted the unwavering support for
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

I would like to express my appreciation for the
timely discussion initiated by the Bolivian presidency,
in particular you, Ambassador Llorentty Soliz,
which allows us to take stock of what we have so far
achieved and to discuss how we will navigate in future
in keeping with resolution 2325 (2016), which was
the result of the 2016 comprehensive review of the
resolution 1540 (2004), a pillar of the international
non-proliferation architecture.

I would also like to thank Ms. Nakamitsu and
Mr. Ballard for their excellent briefings.

In brief, Greece maintains the View that, at the dawn
of the twenty-first century, the world finds itself in a
situation of constant change and has been confronted
with multiple challenges. All ofthat is happening within
a volatile global security environment and in a fragile
and unstable political and socioeconomic landscape in
strategically important regions.

The proliferation of the threat of weapons of mass
destruction that we are discussing today is a very
complex challenge. Volatility, instability and regional
crises and conflicts, as well as a galloping rate of
technological advances in science and global commerce,
render more alarming the risk that non-State actors,
namely, terrorist groups, may seek to acquire weapons
of mass destruction.

Specific resolutions to address that threat do
not exist, and might not be the answer. With that in
mind, we stand, first and foremost, for reducing the
root causes of instability, strengthening multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation treaties, supporting
relevant multilateral institutions, mainstreaming
non-proliferation into broad policies and fully
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). We also stand for
vigilance and inclusivity at the national, regional and
international levels in coping with that challenge so as
to enable us to embark upon more coherent and holistic
ways to combat it further on.

