Mr. Valle (Brazil): Brazil will participate in the
consensus regarding the adoption of the draft
resolution concerning the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Our vote reflects the view that the
agreed text is yet another step within a broader
political process, as it addresses interim measures that
should be supplemented by further decisions in line
with Haiti's needs in the months to come. We express
appreciation to all delegations for their efforts to arrive
at a consensual text, and we encourage them to
continue working towards a long-term solution for
Haiti.

We believe that security remains key for the
achievement of stability in the country. Nonetheless, a
sustainable solution for Haiti's many difficulties
clearly goes beyond the security dimension. Given the
interconnection between security and other main
aspects of the Haitian crisis, it seems essential, in our
view, that progress with regard to the needs for
political reconciliation, economic reconstruction efforts
and social amelioration needs to occur in parallel with
the efforts being made in the field of security.

Brazil believes that, as we move forward, a
mandate for MINUSTAH that is more specific and
concrete than the one endorsed in resolution 1542
(2004) will be required to provide an adequate
framework for dealing with the present threats in Haiti
and to allow for the implementation of concrete
measures so as to achieve a prompt improvement in the
living conditions of the Haitian people.

In the absence of a number of measures -
including those aimed at job creation - growing
difficulties will probably arise for the maintenance of
public order in the country. More precise language
could have been included, for example, in operative
paragraph 2, concerning the political reconciliation
process; in operative paragraph 4, regarding economic
development measures; and in the corresponding
second, third and fourth preambular paragraphs. With
regard to the duration of MINUSTAH's mandate, as
provided for in operative paragraph 1, we trust that the
intention to renew the mandate for further periods will
be confirmed.

With a view to creating stable conditions for
meaningful, free elections at the end of 2005, we
support the view that the Council should issue stronger
messages concerning the international community's
long-term commitment to Haiti. That could have been
done through the adoption of a broader
multidisciplinary mandate for MINUSTAH. As we see
it, the international community and the financial
institutions should make further efforts to assist in
managing concrete development projects and help to
remedy any gaps or shortfalls.

Although some countries and institutions have
already commenced initiatives in the financial field,
the scale of those efforts should be rapidly increased.
We believe that, from a security perspective, the
conditions for stepping up those efforts are already
present. Donors should therefore be encouraged to
accelerate the rate of disbursement of the funds
pledged at the Washington Donors Conference,
consistent with the priorities identified by the Haitian
Transitional Government's interim cooperation
framework.

It is well known that, for the first time, many
Latin American countries have joined efforts in the
context of the Security Council aimed at helping to
reach a permanent solution to a conflict in the region.
That is an initiative that should be encouraged.
Presently, approximately 70 per cent of the troops on
the ground are from those countries. I should add that
Brazil also highly values the support being given to
MINUSTAH by non-Latin American countries.

I wish to stress the efforts being made by the
region with regard to the stabilization of Haiti. Those
significant efforts should be reinforced by a stronger
commitment by the international community to the
resolution of essential issues in Haiti that go beyond
security.

