Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I would first like to
congratulate the British presidency of the Security
Council for convening this open debate on a vital subject
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security and a topic that has not been debated in the
Security Council since 2009 (see S/PV.6108), despite its
contemporary relevance and the growing complexity of
conflicts around the world.

Sri Lanka welcomes the participation of His
Excellency Lord Ahmad, Minister of State for the
Commonwealth and United Nations of the United
Kingdom, in today's debate. We also thank the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Secretary-General and
the representative of civil society for their valuable
briefings this morning.

We also join other delegations in saluting the
memory of the late former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his notable contribution to the cause of
peace and development and the promotion of the
humanitarian agenda, which will remain his true legacy
to this Organization.

Mediation has been established over time as one of
the more effective methods for preventing, managing
and resolving conflicts. It is appropriate to recall here
that Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations
states that any dispute that is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security should
first be addressed through negotiation, mediation or
other peaceful means, and also encourages the Council
to call on the parties to use such means to settle disputes.
However, the pacific settlement of disputes cannot be
forced. The parties to a conflict must be persuaded
by the merits of mediation and well-supported peace
processes. Indeed, mediation, if it is to lead to lasting
peace, must take place within normative and legal
frameworks constituted by the rules of international
law and humanitarian law and within the framework
of the Charter and the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. The recurring General
Assembly resolution entitled "Strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution" recognizes the
increased use of mediation and reflects on the current
challenges facing the international community in
such mediation efforts, while calling on key actors
to develop their mediation capacities. In that context,
we particularly welcome the initiative taken by the
Secretary-General to establish the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation.

When we focus on the resolution of disputes by
peaceful means and in conformity with the principles
of international law and respect for human rights,
it is important to reiterate that all United Nations
bodies must uphold their commitment to the sovereign
equality of States and respect their territorial integrity
and political independence. It is the duty of all Member
States to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force in a manner inconsistent with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. As a country that in the course of a 30-year
conflict welcomed and engaged in reconciliation and
mediation efforts between 2001 and 2006 by an external
actor who was invited by both parties to the conflict,
Sri Lanka is well aware of both the advantages and
pitfalls of such efforts, however sincere, if not carefully
calibrated, monitored and managed. In that regard,
the coherence, coordination and complementarity
of mediation efforts, backed by reconciliation and
peacebuilding, are all essential and challenging, as a
number of delegations have stressed today. Mediation
actors at various levels - the international community,
including the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations, international entities, civil society and
national and local actors - must all be on board with
regard to such efforts. Given civil society's immense
importance in mediation efforts, Sri Lanka is pleased
that a representative of civil society was included as a
briefer in this debate.

The implementation of peace agreements may
often depend at the beginning on a degree of substantial
external support, including from donors. It can help to
incentivize the people to support political efforts as
they begin to enjoy the dividends of peace in terms
of development and real economic benefits. While
disputes and conflicts are unique and require specific
approaches, good practices should inform all mediation
efforts. We have to continue to adapt our approaches
and capacities to meet the changing nature of conflict,
particularly in the context of intra-State conflicts that
threaten international and regional peace and security.

There are well-established best practices for
mediation, the most important of which is the
preparedness that is vital to responsible and credible
mediation efforts, as are a cohesive team of specialists
and the necessary political, financial and administrative
support from the mediating entity. Perceptions are
vital, and in that regard, impartiality becomes the
bedrock of successful mediation. The process must
never allow the possibility that it could perceived
as biased towards one party. Nor can we forget that
mediation is a voluntary process that requires the
consent of the conflicting parties to be effective and
lead to a lasting peace. Another important factor is
a sense of inclusivity, so that the views and needs of
the parties to a conflict and other stakeholders are not
only represented, but also heard and integrated into
the process and outcomes of a mediation effort. Above
all, national ownership and leadership are needed if
the parties to a conflict, and society as a whole, are to
work towards sustaining peace, since the responsibility
must be broadly shared by the Government and national
stakeholders. There is undoubtedly an inextricable link
between gender inequality and international peace and
security, as expressed in resolution 1325 (2000). The
active participation of women at all levels is necessary,
if national ownership is to be meaningful, as has been
stressed throughout today's debate. Effective mediation
will therefore require gender equality and women's
empowerment, human security, human rights and
development to mesh together.

