Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenea and High Commissioner
Grandi for their briefings.

This weekend the United Kingdom's Foreign
Secretary, Boris Johnson, visit Cox's Bazar, where he
met some of the almost 1 million Rohingya refugees
enduring the difficult living conditions that we have
heard about today. Visiting northern Rakhine, he saw
with his own eyes the horror of what has happened
there. When he met Daw Aung San Suu Kyi on Sunday,
the Foreign Secretary said that there needed to be the
right conditions created in Rakhine that made it safe
for Rohingya refugees to return home free from fear
and in the knowledge that their basic rights would be
protected and upheld.

The Council stated last November that the Rohingya
refugees must be allowed to return to their homes
safely, voluntarily and in conditions of human dignity.
The United Kingdom believes that the Council has a
duty to ensure that those words are matched by action.

We should be clear on three things. We should be
clear on why refugees fled Rakhine in the first place,
indeed why they continue to do so; we should be clear
that the conditions in Rakhine today are not yet suitable
for informed, safe, voluntary and dignified returns; and
we should be clear about what needs to be done now.

The Rohingya refugees fleeing Rakhine have
suffered the most appalling violence: rape, murder,
the burning of their villages. In December, Special
Representative Pramila Patten briefed us on the horrific
sexual atrocities allegedly committed by the Burmese
security forces (see S/PV.8133). More details emerged
last week of specific atrocities allegedly committed
by Burmese security forces at Gu Dar Pyin and Inn
Din villages. Even now Rohingyas still flee forced
starvation and continued human rights violations. As
many of us have said, this is ethnic cleansing.

We welcome the Burmese Government's
willingness to enter into agreements in Bangladesh
and the initial preparations that it has made for returns.
Much of this is in response to the Council's focus on
the crisis. But the United Kingdom believes that the
conditions in Rakhine do not yet allow for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of refugees.

We must be Clear on the way forward. Last
November's presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22)
remains the guiding frame set by the Security Council
for the actions that need to be taken. I want to highlight
four in particular.

First, both Myanmar and Bangladesh must
cooperate fully with the United Nations. We welcome
Bangladesh's initial engagement with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), which now needs to be fully involved in the
returns process, ideally through a tripartite agreement.
Only UNHCR has the expertise to handle returns on the
scale and give confidence to refugees. It is also essential
that Myanmar allow the United Nations agencies to
provide humanitarian support for all its peoples.

Secondly, the parties should take concrete steps
to ensure that refugees will be able to return home
on a voluntary basis and with access to accurate
information. Refugees should not be sent to internment
camps, and Myanmar must set out how its restitution
of property and livelihoods will occur. Women and
girls have suffered sexual and gender-based violence
and face specific risks. They must be represented in
any decision-making process and their views given
special consideration.

Dismantling the camps for internally displaced
persons that have existed in central Rakhine since 2012
and supporting their inhabitants in returning home
would be a positive confidence-building measure.
Again, we believe that UNHCR is the only agency with
the necessary expertise and moral authority.

Thirdly, Myanmar must ensure the safety of all
communities in Rakhine. This means an immediate
halt to violence and human rights violations and steps
to reduce intercommunal tensions. It also means giving
refugees confidence that those who have committed
crimes will be brought to justice through an open and
transparent accountability process.

Instead, we have seen the arrest of two Reuters
journalists who reported on the Inn Din massacre and
the denial of access to United Nations-mandated human
rights bodies. The United Kingdom calls for the release
of the Reuters journalist and calls for the Burmese
Government's full cooperation with the United Nations
fact-finding mission, the Special Rapporteur and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Fourthly, Myanmar must demonstrate progress in
implementing the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State recommendations. These recommendations
continue to provide a blueprint for a more peaceful
and prosperous future for all communities in Rakhine.
Crucially, they address civil and political rights,
including pathways for the Rohingya to receive
full Burmese citizenship as well as addressing
socioeconomic development. Genuine progress in
implementation would demonstrate that the Burmese
Government is sincere about offering Rohingya
refugees a viable future to return to.

Before I conclude, I want to once more pay tribute
to Bangladesh for hosting the Rohingya community as
they fled in panic for their lives. But while they remain,
Bangladesh, supported by all of us in the international
community, must protect refugees and provide for their
needs. This includes getting children to school, helping
men and women earn livelihoods, and providing
support to victims of sexual violence. The humanitarian
agencies need to deliver services and prepare camps for
the monsoon season.

The United Kingdom stands with Bangladesh.
We have contributed £59 million in assistance. We
urge the international community to do more to
support Bangladesh as it helps these refugees and the
communities that host them.

The world watched in horror as the violence in
Rakhine forced the Rohingya to flee. The Council has
played a vital role in shining a spotlight on the situation
and encouraging action by the authorities on the
ground. We must not turn away or become distracted.
We ourselves should stand ready to visit, and we must
be ready to take further action.

