Mr. Valle (Brazil): We have been witnessing various
positive steps in the peace process in Angola in recent
months. The Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation legalized UNITA as a political party,
nominated provincial governors from UNITA and began the
process of appointing Ambassadors from UNITA. The
special status of Mr. Savimbi as the leader of the largest
opposition party was promulgated by President Jose
Eduardo Dos Santos. The demilitarization of the civilian
population was intensified by the Government. Radio
Vorgan ceased its transmissions.

The mission to Angola and the region of the Chairman
of the Sanctions Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 864 (1993), Ambassador Mahugu of
Kenya - which was supported by resolution 1157
(1998) - had positive effects. My delegation wishes to
express particular appreciation and praise to Ambassador
Mahugu for his successful mission. The efforts of the
Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, and of the
troika of observer States are again to be commended.

In spite of the accomplishments, important issues are
yet to be resolved. The extension of State administration
has not yet reached about 65 localities, including Andulo
and Bailundo. Mr. Savimbi, as well as other UNITA
leaders, has not moved to Luanda. Some sources continue
to indicate that UNITA still has a consistent military
capacity.

In the terms of the draft resolution before us, which
we support, the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA) is renewed for two months,
until 30 June. In View of the prevailing situation, this is the
most sensible decision that could be taken. After 10 years
of United Nations presence in Angola, we are approaching
the time when MONUA will definitely leave the country.
The prospect of finalizing the tasks envisaged in the Lusaka
Protocol gives us the sense that soon the international
community can redirect its form of involvement in Angola.
It is interesting to note that this sense is captured in the
report of the Secretary-General on Africa. In the section on
peacekeeping, under lessons learned, Angola is mentioned
as a success story.

At the end of June, the Security Council will revisit
the question of the future of MONUA, or the future
presence of the United Nations in Angola. Let us hope
that peace can be consolidated and that Angolans can
finally move on to the long-awaited situation of stability
and prosperity.
