Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me at the outset
welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign
Minister of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj, Foreign Minister of Kosovo. Many thanks also
go to Assistant Secretary-General Edmond Mulet for
his comprehensive briefing and Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for joining us by video link.

We continue to view the situation in northern
Kosovo with great concern. The tense political
situation as clearly and negatively impacted the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. Once again, we particularly deplore the
reactions following the deployment of Kosovo customs
and border police officers last year, especially the
reinforcement of roadblocks at some gates and the
erection of additional roadblocks along other routes.
We firmly condemn any act of violence against the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union (EU)
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), such as the
attacks against KFOR personnel in late November
2011.

Let me recall that, throughout these recent
tensions, both KFOR and EULEX have acted and
continued to act, in accordance with their mandate, in a
status-neutral way that aims to ensure and maintain a
safe and secure environment, including freedom of
movement, and to establish the rule of law. Germany
appreciates the contribution of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
towards restoring freedom of movement for the
international presences throughout northern Kosovo.

The last weeks have seen slight improvements.
That momentum should be maintained, and parties
should build upon it. In that context, we welcome
efforts undertaken by UNMIK to improve coordination
and cooperation among KFOR, EULEX, the

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and Kosovar and Serbian leaders, and we encourage
further action to reduce misunderstandings and
miscommunication. We commend the call by President
Tadie for the dismantling of roadblocks. That call came
belatedly, but it should be welcomed, nevertheless.
Further steps are required to enable both KFOR and,
above all, EULEX to carry out their respective
mandates unhindered.

Dialogue has been proven to be the most effective
means to contribute to sustainable peace and stability
in the region. It is of utmost importance to provide the
region with a clear European perspective and to ensure
transparent communication among the parties. The
European Union is a strong partner and is committed to
supporting the region in finding long-lasting solutions
and building a European future.

As Foreign Minister Westerwelle emphasized
after his recent meeting with His Excellency Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, it is
positive that Kosovo and Serbia have resumed their
dialogue and that the dialogue has brought about first,
tangible results. It is crucial that both sides continue to
show credible commitment and achieve further progress
in moving forward with the implementation in good
faith of the agreements reached in the EU-facilitated
dialogue. That includes implementation of the
2 December agreement on the integrated management
of crossing points. Reaching agreement on inclusive
regional cooperation will also be a crucial contribution
to peace and stability in the region as a whole.

We welcome the progress made on mutually
accepted university diplomas, including the agreement
to introduce certification by a committee of European
academic experts. Those measures are important,
tangible steps that will have a direct, positive impact
for the people in Kosovo.
Against that background, it is even more
regrettable that no date has yet been set for a new
dialogue meeting. We urge both parties to agree on that
as soon as possible.

Now, a few remarks on rule of law and security.
Germany is pleased to note that in 2011 the overall
number of common crimes decreased, compared to the
previous year. We also congratulate the Kosovo police
on its successful operations against organized crime
and its perseverance in the fight against human and
drug trafficking. We encourage Kosovo and Serbia to
continue to reinforce cooperation between their
respective ministries of justice.

Regarding the allegations raised in the so-called
Marty report, let me once again stress that Germany
takes them very seriously. A thorough investigation of
all alleged crimes is required, including abductions,
detentions, mistreatment and killings during the period
in question. We thus fully support the work of the
Special Investigative Task Force established by
EULEX, under the leadership of Ambassador Clint
Williamson. We welcome the update provided in the
current report on UNMIK (S/2012/72) and look
forward to continued reporting to the Council on the
work of that Task Force.

Let me reiterate that we have no doubt that the
Task Force has the capacities, competence and the
jurisdiction to carry out those investigations. Much has
been achieved. Nineteen of the authorized 25 staff
members have commenced their work, including
prosecutors, investigators, analysts and support staff.
The Special Investigative Task Force is analyzing the
information collected, including that provided by
UNMIK as part of its transition process. Ambassador
Williamson has had numerous constructive meetings
with Heads of States and Government, as well as
relevant authorities in Kosovo, Serbia and Albania.

We are thus particularly pleased to see that not
only Pristina, but also Belgrade and Tirana have
reconfirmed, at the highest political level, their full
cooperation with the Task Force and its investigators.
The Serbian Prosecutor for War Crimes, Mr. Vladimir
Vukeevie, met with Ambassador Williamson and,
according to local media on 19 January, described his
approach as "very serious and highly professional".
Most recently, the Albanian Government and
authorities reiterated their commitment to full
cooperation with the Special Investigative Task Force,
following the visit of Ambassador Williamson to
Tirana. This was again reiterated in the letter sent to
the Council yesterday by the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Albania.

Against that background, we are confident that all
Governments will continue to respond favourably to a
possible call for assistance. That will ensure that the
Task Force can conduct investigations in Kosovo and
beyond.

Let me conclude by reiterating our appreciation
for the contributions made by UNMIK and by
commending the dedication and service of its staff.
Germany will continue to pay great attention to the
developments in Kosovo. We will also continue to
promote Serbia's and Kosovo's joint and shared
European future.

