Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): First,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative in
organizing this debate on a multidimensional approach
to United Nations peacekeeping. The debate, held in the
presence oer. Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Jalil Abbas Jilani,
Foreign Secretary ofPakistan, underscores his country's
image as an important troop-contributing country that
is faithful in its commitment to international peace.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries by the representative of Egypt.

The landmark figure of 60 peacekeeping operations
launched by the United Nations since 1948 is more than
symbolic; it represents a new phase in the ability of the
United Nations to undertake the central activity that is
its raison d'etre. Peacekeeping has grown and evolved
in an unprecedented manner, due to increasingly grave
internal and regional crises that threaten international
peace and security.

The growth and diversification of the areas of
peacekeeping intervention have brought profound
changes in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
which now cover a wide range of activities, from
security and support for political processes to
disarmament and demobilization 4 all tasks that
combine peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Morocco
also welcomes the proactive nature of United Nations
action and its capacity to mobilize human and financial
resources in response to the appeals and aspirations of
the concerned States and their populations in terms of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

Experience has amply demonstrated the close
interlinkage between restoring and building peace,
which needs to be organized and structured as soon as
a multidimensional peacekeeping operation has been
established, and must evolve as the mission proceeds.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations require the
complex interoperability of multiple components - in
particular military, police and civilian - interacting
together or in cooperation with other stakeholders
to implement the critical goals of peacebuilding via
their integrated mandates, thereby contributing to the
foundations of sustainable peace and development in
the aftermath of conflict.

At the same time, it must be recalled that while
support for the political process, national reconciliation,
economic revitalization and the establishment of the
rule of law are crucial factors, security remains the
key element in determining, in large part, the success
of the others. Nothing will succeed without security
and everything becomes possible when security is
ensured throughout the entire country. In that respect,
early mobilization of adequate resources for capacity-
building and the financing of such related activities as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration remains
key to the success of any security sector reform.

However, while establishing and building security
is an absolute priority for the vast majority of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, accomplishing
other complementary tasks varies from one situation
to another, based on the challenges, capacities and
progress made in each country. The nature of a conflict,
its origins, the regional environment, and available
capacities and resources are among the factors that
will determine the interaction of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping.

It is also clear that such linkage will require
coherent strategies and coordination among the various
multinational and bilateral stakeholders, including
the United Nations system, international financial
institutions, regional or subregional organizations,
and bilateral partners. Internal and inter-agency
coordination are sine qua non to avoid duplication and
ensure the optimal use of available resources, and hence
effective United Nations action.

The basis for the success of any peacekeeping
operation, whatever its scope, lies in such interdependent
factors as whether the mandate established by the
Council is realistic; triangular cooperation among
the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries and the
administration in the planning and implementation
stages of the mandates; and genuine exit strategies
containing measures to ensure sustainable development.

Needless to say, all such activities and strategies
must continue to adhere to the fundamental principles
that define United Nations peacekeeping: consent of
the parties; impartiality and the non-use of force except
in cases of self-defence; respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned;
and non-interference in their internal affairs.
Those principles are and must remain the essential
condition of all collective peacekeeping activities
and the identification of responsibilities and national
peacebuilding priorities.

In relation to the principle of national ownership,
the participation of all elements of a State is an
essential condition for peacebuilding. It is the
primary responsibility of the Government concerned
to demonstrate the political will to assume its
responsibilities and to define its priorities and strategies
for peacebuilding in the aftermath of a conflict. The
success of such strategies depends on establishing
balanced and sustainable partnerships and results-
based mutual responsibility, while bearing in mind the
three main pillars of peacekeeping: defining needs,
sustainable support and coordinating long-term action
for actors on the ground.

Ensuring the success of any peacekeeping
operation, whatever its scope, is the task of men and
women who are committed to serving the objectives
of the Organization. The effectiveness of their
commitment depends on their interaction with local
populations. In that regard, I can only join my French
colleague in his appeal for multilingualism. I would
like to be a little more optimistic in the hope that
there will at last be some follow-up on that clearly
obvious and logical request because it is a question of
the effectiveness of the troops on the ground and the
necessary interaction with populations and troops, in
particular for civilian protection. It also depends on the
United Nations security measures implemented on the
ground to improve the safety and security of all troops,
military police and observers and unarmed personnel.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our firm condemnation of the attacks on the staff
of peacekeeping operations. We pay tribute to all
contributing countries for their commitment. Morocco,
whose Royal Armed Forces have participated for a half
century in multilateral forces in order to secure and
build peace and international security, will continue,
in partnership with the United Nations, to serve the
principles and objectives of the Organization.

