Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): My
delegation joins previous speakers in welcoming Ms.
Carolyn McAskie and in thanking her for the
comprehensive and lucid briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well the useful document that has been given to us.
We are distressed at the continued precarious
security situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the potential of that situation to further
undermine the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and Security Council resolution 1291
(2000). The national armies and numerous armed
groups that are involved in the war between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda,
Rwanda and Burundi have virtually devastated the
country.

The entire socio-economic fabric of the country
has been ruined. Infrastructure is non-existent, and
areas that used to produce surplus food are no longer
producing. Extreme poverty, which existed even prior
to the current situation, has now reached catastrophic
levels. The economic and political interests of all those
present in the sovereign territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have led to the effective
partitioning of the country, the exploitation of its
wealth and enormous ecological damage.

The saddest part of it all is that the Congolese
people are aware of this situation but are helpless to
prevent it. The worsening humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly the
increased insecurity in war zones, make access to the
vulnerable populations very dangerous and difficult for
the humanitarian aid workers. My delegation believes
that it is critical for the parties to respect their ceasefire
agreements and ensure the safe and unhindered access
of humanitarian agencies to all areas of the country.

Many areas in the country remain inaccessible to
humanitarian personnel due to the prevailing untenable
security conditions. All parties to the conflict have an
obligation to ensure the safety, security and freedom of
movement of humanitarian personnel and unhindered
access to all affected populations.

We have heard in the briefing of Ms. McAskie
just now that there are about 2 million internally
displaced persons in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, many of whom are languishing without any
assistance. The vast majority of these internally
displaced persons are from the occupied territories in
the eastern part of the country, principally as a result of
clashes between Rwandan and Ugandan troops in
Kisangani, the intensified hostilities in the Kivus and
the current fighting in the northern Equateur province.
The increasing number of Congolese refugees has
serious ramifications, not only for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but also for the neighbouring
countries, with some 300,000 people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo now refugees in the Republic of
the Congo, Zambia, the Central African Republic and
Tanzania, as stated by Ms. McAskie just now.

My delegation is cognizant of the difficulties and
complexities that must be overcome in order to achieve
durable peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Nevertheless, no matter how complex and
difficult it might appear to find solutions, the suffering
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
compels us to make our best efforts to put an end to
their misery. We agree that it is vital to create the
conditions for lasting peace based on the full
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
The elements of such a peace must necessarily include
the questions of security of the borders of the States
concerned, their sovereignty and territorial integrity
and their full use of their natural resources. In this
regard, we support the call for the immediate cessation
of hostilities and reaffirm support for the unity,
stability, independence and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the same time, the withdrawal of all foreign
forces from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must take place in accordance with the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and as called for in resolution
1304 (2000). It is indeed regrettable that the parties
continue to ignore the pronouncements of the Security
Council and the international community.

It is for this reason that Malaysia believes that the
timely deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
essential to the resolution of the conflict. Having
listened carefully to the views of our colleagues here
today, particularly those from the African continent,
the Council should accelerate its deployment of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and implement
faithfully and speedily resolution 1291 (2000). This is
crucial in the current circumstances and will be a
critical test of the Council's political will and
determination. We believe that we must go forward
from here, determined to make a difference in
promoting peace and security for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, we wish to pay tribute to and encourage
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme and the non-governmental humanitarian
organizations involved in caring for and facilitating the
repatriation of refugees to continue their noble work
despite the difficulties encountered.

