Mr. Singh (India): First of all, I would like to
join others in placing on record our appreciation to the
Nigerian delegation for organizing this meeting on an
issue that is becoming a major threat to maritime
navigation, trade and economic activities in the Gulf of
Guinea. I also would like to thank the Secretary-
General and the representatives of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission for their comprehensive briefings.
Their participation in the meeting today is important,
for the problem of piracy and maritime robbery is
regional and can be addressed only through the
cooperation of regional stakeholders.

Piracy off both of the coasts of Africa has become
a serious obstacle to the development aspirations of the
region. The increasing attacks on shipping vessels off
the western coast of Africa, particularly in the Gulf of
Guinea, are affecting the oil industry in the region -
which includes Nigeria, Angola and Equatorial Guinea,
the largest oil producers in sub-Saharan Africa. That
compounds the problems in the region, which already
faces others such as the illegal narcotics trade and the
proliferation of small arms.

India has been at the forefront of efforts to
highlight the menace of piracy off the coast of
Somalia, stressing the urgent need for the international
community to work towards a comprehensive counter-
piracy strategy. India is also concerned about the new
surge in piracy and maritime robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea. While the two situations are different in
proportion at this stage, it is quite possible that the
failure of the international community to act decisively
against piracy off the coast of Somalia could have
spawned a new surge in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

A number of unemployed youth have become
attracted to the business of piracy and maritime
robbery, which they find involves low cost and risk,
but yields high returns. The problem in the countries of
West Africa, therefore, is fast assuming the proportions
of an organized cartel. Societal issues of poverty,
unemployment, political instability, the lack of
appropriate naval infrastructure and weak prosecution
systems have not helped counter-piracy efforts.

While incidents of piracy and maritime robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea are considered underreported by
many, they have already escalated from low-level
armed robberies to hijackings, cargo thefts and large-
scale robberies. Pirates have also shown a propensity to
employ torture and other forms of physical violence
and abuse against sailors and crew members.

In view of the increasing incidents, there is a
need to pay special attention to the safety, security and
well-being of the seafarers taken as hostage and to
ensuring their speedy release by appropriate means.
Also, given the large investments made by countries in
the region's oil industry and the increasing oil exports
from the region, there is an urgent need to act now
before the problem assumes an even greater intensity
and proportion.

It is therefore time to focus proper attention on
the problem. We are happy to note that countries in the
region, clearly aware of the problem, have launched
efforts to collectively address the issue. India would
like to commend Nigeria for taking a lead in that
initiative, along with other affected countries in the
region.

We are also glad that the Security Council has
been seized of the matter and that its deliberations and
press releases in the past few months have helped to
increase awareness. Concrete action needs to be taken
now. In that connection, it is important that countries in
the region work together on joint counter-piracy
efforts, including sharing information and capacity-
building related to their naval forces. In addition,
strengthened legal systems to ensure effective and
expeditious prosecution are also critical. We welcome
the decision to convene a special meeting in Equatorial
Guinea of the members of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission to discuss this issue.

The international community, led by the United
Nations, should help those regional efforts by
providing resources for capacity-building of coast
guards and naval forces. That would greatly help in
effectively patrolling the seas and carrying out
surveillance along the coast.

United Nations agencies in the region,
particularly the United Nations Office for West Africa,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization, have an important
role to play in regional counter-piracy efforts, as well
as in addressing the related problems of terrorism,
illicit trafficking in drugs and the proliferation of small
arms, as all those issues conspire together to
destabilize the region. To that end, we welcome the
upcoming visit of the United Nations assessment
mission to examine the situation and explore
modalities for United Nations support.

In conclusion, India stands ready to contribute to
international efforts aimed at increasing effective
cooperation among States to tackle the threat of piracy
and armed robbery at sea and at ensuring the safety and
release of hostages taken by pirates.

