The President: I thank Ms. Bellal for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.

First, let me thank Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares,
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and Ms. Annyssa Bellal of the Geneva Academy of
International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights for
their informative briefings.

Yesterday we celebrated the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions. As they are ratified
and acceded to by almost every State of the world,
the principles and legal norms enshrined in the
Conventions are also recognized as customary
international humanitarian law and are universally
applicable. That is a rare quality for any multilateral
treaty. The four Conventions have been supplemented
by three Protocols Additional. Together they constitute
a significant body of law that has played a vital role in
limiting the brutality of armed conflicts.

From the first few days of Poland's membership of
the Security Council, we have pursued the priority of
strengthening international law. It has always been an
issue of particular importance for Poland because of
our difficult history, which was painfully affected by
consequences of the failure of other States to comply
with international agreements and by reason ofour sense
of responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. If we want to protect the victims
of wars, we must ensure respect for the principles and
rules of humanitarian law, which have been codified in
the Geneva Conventions since 1949. Consequently, we
have been confronted with difficult questions. How is
it possible that so many people suffer from the brutality
of warfare? What is even worse, how is it possible if
its conduct is regulated by the most widely accepted
and universally applicable treaties in international
relations? An eagerness to find the answers led us to
the following observations.

First, the greatest challenge to protecting human
life in modern conflict is the observance of and respect
for the existing rules by armed forces and non-State
armed groups. Violations of humanitarian law occur
in a number of circumstances - the brutal conduct
of warfare, the willingness to intimidate opponents
and the perpetrators' feeling of impunity. If existing
rules were followed, much of the human suffering in
contemporary armed conflicts would not occur.

Secondly, we face new developments in present
armed conflict that demand appropriate practices and
policies consistent with international humanitarian
law. Non-State actors play a major role in modern
armed conflicts. The actual fighting is conducted
in densely populated urban areas, with frequently
appalling consequences for civilians. Actors often still
try to find soft targets, first and foremost civilians.
Artificial intelligence and autonomous weapons
systems, such as military robots and cyberweapons,
reduce the role and control of human factors during
wartime. Many existing weapon systems are likely to
cause indiscriminate harm to civilians. Two principles
of international humanitarian law in particular deserve
our attention: first, the obligation to protect civilians,
prisoners of war, the wounded and shipwrecked, and,
secondly, limitations to the rights ofparties to an armed
conflict on how they conduct operations and on their
choice of weapons.

This new reality of modern conflict, the increasing
role of non-State actors and the legal loopholes of
international humanitarian law hinder the application
of international humanitarian law in many ways. The
complexity of new challenges impedes the process of
classifying conflict situations and makes it difficult
to determine the exact rules that may be applied. For
example, only a small part ofinternational humanitarian
law may be applied to non-State actors. It also raises
the question of whether the emergence of non-State
actors and new means of combat require a revision of
international humanitarian law, or whether the existing
rules are sufficiently adaptable to frame those new
challenges. Poland takes the view that international
humanitarian law needs to be protected by way of its
implementation. However, its further development and
adjustment to the new challenges need to be pursued.

Finally, there is a problem of insufficient, or even
lack of, accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law. It is a systemic weakness that is not
new. A great Polish lawyer and creator of the legal term
"genocide", who made significant input to international
humanitarian law, Raphael Lemkin, put it very bluntly:
why is the killing of 1 million a lesser crime than
the killing of an individual? It is the international
community's role to ensure that impunity be removed
and remedies for the victims of violations be provided.
Impunity can be eradicated only by prosecuting
alleged perpetrators. This is a responsibility that lies
first and foremost with States, but it is helped by mutual
legal assistance through judicial cooperation and
collaboration with the International Criminal Court. It
should be our goal to create the reality where no State
and no perpetrator can be above the law and no person
is outside the protection of the law in situations of
armed conflict.

In today's discussion we will address many
questions with regard to the applicability and future
of international humanitarian law. I believe that the
present and future members of the Security Council
will continue the effort to find solutions to challenges
to international humanitarian law.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I call on the Federal Minister for Foreign affairs
of Germany.

