Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I too should
like to join my colleagues in extending a warm
welcome to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Spirie. I also take this opportunity to congratulate the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina on its election
to membership of the Security Council next year. We
wish it every success in its contributions to the work of
the Council.

I should like also to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
comprehensive briefing, and I commend his dedicated
efforts since assuming that important responsibility in
March.

Japan extends its full support to the policy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina towards Euro-Atlantic
integration. As a major contributor to the Peace
Implementation Council, we hope it can achieve the
five objectives and two conditions soon, so that the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the European Union Special Representative will be
realized at the earliest possible date. We also hope that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to advance on its
way forward to accession to the European Union by
accelerating constitutional reform. We welcome
high-level political discussions through the Butmir
process initiated in October by the United States and
the European Union. It is a fresh attempt to enable the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to approach their
major goals. I would like to confirm Japan's support
for the process.

At the same time we are concerned about the
attacks against State institutions and the challenges to
the authority of the High Representative. Those moves
go against constitutional order and the implementation
of the five objectives and two conditions - the 5+2
process. We urge all political leaders to refrain from
increasing nationalistic rhetoric challenging the
constitutional order. They should heed the voice of the
international community and cooperate with one
another to tackle the remaining challenges of 5-1-2 and
constitutional reform. To that end, it is essential for the
international community to continue to pay close
attention to political developments in the country. The
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina rests with the
determination of its people themselves.

The consolidation of peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a cornerstone of peace and prosperity in
the entire Western Balkan region. Based on this belief,
Japan has been actively contributing to the
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina through its
official development assistance programme, amounting
to $450 million in three major areas, peacebuilding,
economic development and intraregional cooperation.
We have supported projects of community
reconciliation through poverty reduction, through the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, and in
October Japan committed to a grass-roots grant aid
project for support of demining in Gracanica and
extended loans amounting to ¥126 million for
assistance in the environmental area.

The political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
still remains delicate. We believe that the role played
by the High Representative continues to be of vital
importance. We reiterate our full support for High
Representative Inzko. We also recognize the key role
played by the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina for a safe and secure
environment.

I would like to conclude by expressing Japan's
strong hope that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will work together through internal dialogue to
stabilize the situation and achieve early integration into
the Euro-Atlantic community.

