In my previous briefing to the Security Council (S/2020/845, annex 1), I stated that the Government of Iraq is operating in the eye of multiple storms at once. From the outset, I would like to emphasize that this very much remains the case. Concerning the pandemic and its impact, several distinct, yet interlinked and mutually reinforcing, crises - on the political, security, economic, financial, social and, of course, sanitary fronts - continue to force the hand of the Government, pressing it into a reactive, crisis-management mode. And, while all of us hope for the beginning of a global recovery from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, it is clear that its devastating effects can unfortunately be expected to last. The financial and economic situation in Iraq remains troubling, to say the least. The economy is projected to contract by nearly 10 per cent this year. The impact of the pandemic has wreaked further havoc on already extremely weak private sector activity, and oil prices continue their extended slump, exerting downward pressure on the gross domestic product and domestic revenue. In mid-October, a long-awaited economic white paper was released. That important document provides a very useful overview of the structural imbalances that characterize the Iraqi economy. It also describes a variety of much-needed reform measures and acknowledges numerous opportunities that have been squandered since 2003. But while very few would dispute the urgency of steering Iraq towards economic recovery and resilience, we are left wanting on how and when that may be achieved. To put it a bit more bluntly, we are left wanting on the political game plan. One thing is clear: without broad political consensus to transform the white paper into reality, it risks remaining just words on a page. But let me emphasize that serious, resolute measures to address the ongoing financial and economic crisis cannot wait, not for a day. The Government, Parliament, political parties and others will have to step up to the plate collectively. With elections looming, I can only hope that urgently needed reforms, including some very painful ones, will not be swept under the carpet. That would only worsen Iraq's situation, and thereby sooner or later fuel social unrest. In other words, I very much hope that political leaders will resist the temptation to use the electoral calendar as a reason not to deliver. In the meantime, the Iraqi Government has seen it necessary to resort to borrowing in order to meet its obligations for the remainder of 2020, including for the payment of public-sector salaries. The original borrowing law, as proposed by the Minister of Finance, had a clear objective, which was to create fiscal space to implement reforms - the reforms needed to diversify Iraq's economy and reduce its dependence on oil; the reforms needed to boost economic opportunities while advancing sustainable development; and the reforms needed to meet the aspirations of the many Iraqis who took to the streets. However, the law, as actually amended and adopted by Parliament, significantly limits the Government's room for manoeuvre. One therefore must ask whether the ends justify the means. In addition, we must constantly be reminded of the fundamental importance of fighting corruption, while preserving fundamental rights in the process. In other words, any effort to reform Iraq's economy must be accompanied by improved governance and transparency. The prevalence of muhassassa, patronage and clientelism also continues to hinder progress in Iraq. That too must urgently be tackled. Otherwise public resources - indeed the hopes and aspirations of the people of Iraq - will continue to be looted. Moreover, the fight against the scourge of corruption and the quest for more sustainable, inclusive forms of economic development and growth and for dignified employment are not just economic necessities. As I have said before, they are ultimately the best devices in any peace and security toolkit, as they provide lasting solutions to unrest and conflict, building domestic resilience to replace constant crisis management. At the end of the day, domestic resilience is the best defence against any form of external interference. Iraqis recently marked the one-year anniversary of the protests that began in October 2019, which were a powerful expression of solidarity and patriotism by Iraqis who demand justice and wish to build a more stable, prosperous homeland and a moment to remember the brave souls lost. I truly hope that their shared determination to achieve a better future continues to inspire and guide Iraq's leaders. As I have done many times before, I also wish to emphasize that the right to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly must be defended at every turn throughout Iraq. The current drastically reduced levels of violence are indeed encouraging, but Iraq's reality remains harsh, with enforced disappearances and assassinations continuing to play a part in that reality. In this context, I would like to underline once again the pressing need for justice and accountability. A fact-finding committee has now been activated. However, it has not yet resulted in a swift end to perceived impunity. With regard to the June 2021 elections, I would like to recall the wise words of Grand Ayatollah Al-Sistani. In my meeting with him in mid-September, His Eminence made it clear that the early elections, if properly conducted, could provide a peaceful path out of the ongoing suffering of the country. His Eminence emphasized the importance of voting freely, without any pressure, and underlined the need for integrity, transparency and observation. I am pleased to report that Parliament recently finalized necessary electoral legislation, and, in line with mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAM1]), we are now ramping up our technical assistance. Iraq's electoral institutional capacity can and must be strengthened. We therefore ask and expect the relevant authorities to step up and think in terms of solutions instead of obstacles. Late last week, the Iraqi Government sent a letter to the Security Council with a request "to obtain more support, technical assistance and electoral observation within the framework of UNAMI support to Iraq". In a press conference, the Minister for Foreign Affairs explained the request and emphasized the need to rebuild public trust and to promote participation. I wish to underline yet once again that under all circumstances the elections will be Iraqi-owned and Iraqi-led. Indeed, the responsibility for credible elections lies not only with the Iraqi authorities, but with all Iraqi electoral stakeholders, all political actors and all Iraqi citizens, who are called upon to play a greater role in the public sphere. Animated by a patriotic desire to better their country, the people of Iraq, in particular women and the youth, can seize this opportunity to make their voices heard, as voters or as candidates. Let me also use today's briefing to reaffirm in the clearest of terms that electoral preparations must remain free from political interference at all stages. With regard to domestic and external armed groups and spoilers, while we welcome the decrease in attacks on diplomatic missions in recent weeks, the deplorable rocket attacks on 17 November are another stark reminder of the fact that much work remains to be done, including the hard work of broad, meaningful dialogue. For a variety of reasons, the coming months will be a delicate and crucial period. It should be understood that any form of misinformation - all kinds of conspiracies and/or a perceived lack of transparency or commitment - could lead to regrettable and most counterproductive miscalculations. Meanwhile, Iraq's leadership continues to assert its independence and sovereignty, seeking to maintain all channels of communication open, as it builds a foreign policy that serves Iraq's national interests. The centrality of Iraq in building regional stability is a fact. It also bears repeating that Iraq must be shielded from foreign power rivalries and that Iraqis must be given room to focus on their strength at home. With regard to the relations between Baghdad and Erbil, all of us will agree that a positive and constructive relationship between federal Iraq and the Kurdistan region is key to the stability of the whole country. However, the recent vote in Parliament on the borrowing law has shown us once again how brittle the relationship is. Let us be reminded that it takes two to tango. We expect both parties to keep their side of the bargain. We expect both parties to demonstrate transparency - be it on revenue management or on countless other contentious issues. It should be clear, however, that a Kurdish region public servant is not only a Kurdish region public servant, but also an Iraqi citizen. The payment of public civil servants should be shielded from political disputes. They cannot and should not be collectively victimized. A solution is urgent, and political will to find a way out will once again prove essential. As I emphasized during my most recent briefing, constructive negotiations between Baghdad and Erbil are hampered by unclear constitutional guidance, and unfortunately that ambiguity is taking a daily toll on the numerous outstanding issues. In the past 15 years, many opportunities to arrive at a clear set of principles, rules and guidelines have been wasted, but agreement must now urgently be found on how to enhance the federal system. It is true that, with many other pressing issues on their plate, Iraq's leaders and politicians may be tempted to ignore that issue, which would be the easy way out. However, the bitter truth is that, as long as no lasting solutions are found, the relationship will not get any better. The opposite will be the case. The desire of the Iraqi Government to rapidly resolve internal displacement is both understandable and justified. However, in the absence of sufficient durable solutions, serious concerns around the planning and implementation of camp closures and consolidation have come to the fore in recent weeks. While we fully understand that the Iraqi authorities are working under tremendous time pressure, it must be clear that camp closures should not lead to another crisis - for instance, in the form of secondary displacement, which is already occurring. In coordination with the Iraqi authorities, we continue our work on a joint durable solutions plan, while at the same time extending life-saving services to internally displaced persons, who are unable to find safe and affordable accommodation. With regard to Sinjar, a hard-won agreement was signed between Baghdad and Erbil in early October. It is an important agreement, as it could pave the way for a new chapter for Sinjar and all Sinjaris. It represents a chapter in which the interests of the Sinjari people will come first, reconstruction will be accelerated, public service delivery will be improved and displaced Sinjaris will be able to return home. Admittedly, signing off on such an agreement is just a very first step. As I emphasized to all stakeholders and Sinjari representatives during a joint meeting in Mosul last week, swift, decisive and well-coordinated implementation will now prove essential. Stable security structures are the number-one priority, followed by a unified administration. I will now turn to the issue of missing Kuwaiti, third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. Despite the difficult circumstances imposed by the pandemic, I am pleased to report that, under the aegis of the International Committee of the Red Cross with the assistance of UNAMI, on 16 September the Government of Iraq handed over to Kuwait the remains of 20 persons exhumed from a mass grave site in southern Iraq last January. That step marks Iraq's continuous commitment to bring the humanitarian file to a close. Another important development took place two days ago. The Kuwaiti authorities publicly confirmed the identification of the human remains of seven persons as Kuwaiti missing nationals, thereby hopefully bringing some closure to their families. In conclusion, I would like to call for continued solidarity with the people of Iraq. Of course, with the ongoing global pandemic, the many challenges faced by all nations are well understood, and it may be easy to lose sight of Iraqis' hopes and dreams at this critical juncture in their modern history. But if the pandemic has taught us anything, it is that local problems hardly ever remain local, and that domestic trouble rapidly translates into trouble abroad. In other words, the continued support of the Council is vital and much appreciated.
