I followed with great attention the coordinated and complementary briefings by Mrs. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mr. Mark Lowcock. I would like to take this moment to pay tribute to peacekeeping forces and the various United Nations agencies for their remarkable efforts to mitigate the spread of the virus, and to contribute to the protection of vulnerable communities, as our briefers mentioned. In these times of pandemic, violence has a female face, as Ms. DiCarlo so aptly put it. As has been mentioned many times, the adoption of a resolution is never an end in itself. In fact, the adoption of a resolution on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which echoes the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, calls for a sustained follow-up in more ways than one, because the political, economic and, above all, security repercussions will continue to manifest themselves in the years to come. In the Sahel, a region where climate change, armed conflicts and fragile health systems are having an impact on populations, the pandemic has added a new layer to an already disastrous situation and has made populations particularly vulnerable to disease outbreaks and hunger. The campaign of disinformation and stigmatization carried out by these same terrorist groups does not facilitate the efforts of our States to fight, as has been rightly pointed out. While it is commendable that the mortality rate associated with COVID-19 may be lower in fragile countries than initially feared, the pandemic is seriously affecting the economies of African countries in general, and the Sahel in particular. The recession resulting from the pandemic's confinement measures, which is one of the worst in recent decades, will undoubtedly exacerbate inequalities, especially for already vulnerable populations, such as refugees. I thank Mr. Lowcock for his eloquent words and for making mention of that. Above all, the electoral processes under way in our region must receive greater support in order to avoid pre- and post-electoral crises, which can result from the erosion of confidence due to the protective approach of Governments in dealing with the crisis. It is fortunate, as Mr. Lacroix noted, that this impact is limited to the extent possible. We have also had to ensure that the pandemic does not overshadow a number of conflicts that were at the forefront of our agenda prior to the onset of the humanitarian crisis. To this end, updates from the Secretary-General to the Security Council on United Nations efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic in countries in armed conflict or affected by humanitarian crises, as well as on the impact of COVID-19 on the ability of peacekeeping operations and special political missions to carry out the priority tasks assigned to them, will be necessary. I thank Mr. Lacroix for the efforts made within peace missions to protect their contingents and populations. Finally, I would like to take this moment to emphasize the unique opportunity that this resolution offers us to reaffirm not only the importance of international cooperation and multilateralism, but also the role of subregional, regional and global organizations, such as the World Health Organization, which we support, in the fight against this pandemic. The cacophony and blame games that prevailed early in the pandemic must give way to an awareness that we are all potential victims unless we work collectively to find a vaccine against this dangerous virus. In this regard, I agree with the words of Ms. DiCarlo in her briefing this morning. We hope that once a cure is found, it will be accessible to the weakest and the less fortunate. I thank China for its renewed commitment to that goal.
