The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

I shall confine myself to making four brief
remarks. First of all, this meeting of the Security
Council was necessary and is taking place at the right
time. In the course of this month of June, the Council
has been able to address in some depth the situations in
Kosovo and in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has also
heard the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991, thereby demonstrating
its commitment to international justice.

It is good that the Security Council now has an
overall vision for the future of the Balkan region, the
very subject of the consistently clear and precise
statement made by Mr. Bildt, for which we thank him
once again.

My second point is that this meeting of the
Security Council is an unprecedented one. For the first
time, and I welcome this wholeheartedly, the Secretary-
General of the Council and High Representative for the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy,
Mr. Solana, as well as the Presidency of the European
Union, spoke in this Chamber. This reflects the
institutional evolution of the European Union being
brought into the work of this Council. France about to
take over from Portugal at the head of the European
Union, is pleased that an agreement was able to emerge
so that Mr. Solana could speak today, in accordance
with our wishes.

My third point is that these statements were
particularly important and necessary, in that the
European Union is very strongly involved in the
Balkans in restoring what has been destroyed, in
bandaging the wounds that are still open and, above all,
in giving a vision of the future to the States of the
region.

My last point is that in this spirit, France has
proposed the holding of a summit between the
European Union and the countries of the western
Balkans, which, although they are at different stages,
are the furthest along in their democratic evolution.
The European Council, meeting on 19 and 20 June in
Santa Maria da Fera welcomed this idea. The Council
of Europe recognized that such a summit would
provide an opportunity for the countries of the region
to receive further assurances ofthe solidarity of Europe
and would provide an opportunity to study with them
ways of speeding up the process of democratic and
economic reform. The meeting could be held in Zagreb
and would provide the European Union with an
opportunity to bring even more influence to bear in
encouraging the recent democratic developments. This
would also help create new momentum.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Johansen. I welcome him and I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

