Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I join
my colleagues in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, to the Security Council. My delegation also
thanks Special Representative Jean Arnault for his
informative and much needed briefing.

Kazakhstan welcomes the unanimous extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to 25 September 2019. We commend the
Mission's continued hard work on the ground and
reiterate our full support for its work in securing the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace and ensuring lasting peace
and reconciliation in Colombia.

We welcome the commitment of the Government
of Colombia to implementing the peace deal in order
to bring stability and security to the country. The
nomination by President Ivan Duque of top Colombian
officials to revitalize the Government's participation in
the tripartite commission that monitors the country's
peace process with the demobilized guerrillas of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ej ercito
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) demonstrates the Government's
sincere intentions to implement the peace agreement.
In that context, we particularly commend the adoption
on 23 August of a broad-based seven-point national
pact for life and for the protection of social leaders and
human rights defenders.

Nevertheless, we acknowledge that no peace
process is an easy task to implement at once. To
succeed, the firm commitment and participation of all
stakeholders are required. Obviously, the Colombian
peace process is no exception or any different. We are
aware of the obstacles caused by the threat of dissident
and paramilitary groups that intend to take control of
former FARC-EP territories.

We are also deeply concerned about the
continued violence committed against social leaders,
community activists and human rights defenders. In
addition, the current vulnerable security situation
and socioeconomic reintegration of former FARC-EP
combatants and their family members could very well
jeopardize their reincorporation into society. However,
it is our strong belief that, despite existing setbacks
and impediments, the continued commitment of
Colombia's new Administration to fighting corruption
and guaranteeing the more effective socioeconomic and
political reintegration of former FARC-EP rebels into
society will bring about positive results.

Furthermore, harnessing innovative approaches
and strategies, utilizing confidence-building measures,
building trust, engaging in practical disarmament and
non-proliferation, addressing the scourge of terrorism,
promoting the rule of law, creating the potential for
interlinkages between security and development,
including at the regional level, supporting crop-
substitution policies and rural reform, as well as
providing security guarantees to vulnerable groups,
will secure the gains achieved thus far. We are confident
that it will definitely be conducive to the success of the
peace process. We therefore call on all parties involved
to comply with their obligations and work in the interest
of security and stability. We urge the international
community to stand ready to support Colombia in
its priority goal to bring about peace and accord to
all Colombians. We also look forward to a definitive
bilateral ceasefire with the National Liberation Army,
which would end decades of armed conflict for good.

Lastly, Kazakhstan pledges to do its best in the
context of multilateral efforts to bring about peace and
progress in Colombia.

