Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation for Egypt's
initiative in holding an open debate on this important
topic. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Permanent Observer of
the African Union (AU), the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the African Union and the
Permanent Representative of Kenya in his capacity as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for their
comprehensive briefings.

Today I would like to talk about ownership and
partnership. I would like to highlight the importance of
African ownership supported by effective partnership
through United Nations-African Union peace and
security cooperation.
The African Peace and Security Architecture
(APSA) is the central framework for the consolidation
of peace in Africa. APSA embodies the vision of
African solutions for African problems - in other
words, ownership. Since its creation, APSA has had to
adapt and adjust to complex developments in the field
of peace and security in Africa. Accordingly, the areas
of cooperation and coordination between the AU and
the United Nations have both grown and diversified.
In order to make APSA more effective under today's
challenging circumstances, it is important to fully utilize
the cooperative strengths, expertise and knowledge of
the United Nations to promote these African solutions.

In this regard, the United Nations Office to the AU
(UNOAU) plays a critical role in the United Nations-
African Union partnership by providing crucial
technical advice to the African Union Commission
(AUC) on matters of capacity-building and operational
support. United Nations-African Union joint planning
and management, supported by the UNOAU's capacity-
building efforts, have brought positive impacts to the
transitions from AU-led peace operations to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, such as from African-
led International Support Mission to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and from the African-led International Support
Mission to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Japan believes that further efforts by the
UNOAU to build institutional capacity in APSA are
crucial to bringing coherence to the consolidation of
peace in Africa.

That said, partnership with the UNOAU cannot
substitute for ownership on the part of the AU. The
African Union Mission in Somalia, authorized by
resolution 1744 (2007) pursuant to Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, is a good example of
such ownership.

The leading instruments of APSA are the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms
for conflict prevention, management and resolution.
These building-blocks of APSA are in a position to
best understand the particular context behind any
conflict within its scope. This is why, for example,
the role played by the Economic Community of West
African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau has been
pivotal in maintaining security in that country. These
examples show the unique strengths and proficiencies
that regional and subregional organizations can bring
to conflict resolution in Africa, and which neither
individual countries nor the United Nations can provide.

The United Nations-African Union partnership
has the potential to provide even greater impacts on
the ground in the areas of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. Japan believes that the impact of the
AU Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
Framework and the African Solidarity Initiative can be
enhanced by coordinating the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission with the African Union as elaborated in
resolution 2282 (2016), on the review ofUnited Nations
peacebuilding architecture. The UNOAU can also help
enhance coordination between the AU Commission and
the Peacebuilding Support Office.

When we celebrated the Golden Jubilee of the
Organization of African Unity/African Union in
2013, Japan reaffirmed that African ownership is the
unshakable foundation of development in Africa.
The year 2013 was also the twentieth anniversary
of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process. Ownership, as I have
highlighted today, is one of the underlying principles of
TICAD. It is Africa that knows Africa's problems best
and Africans who are the keenest for a solution, and it is
Africa that will ultimately find the way forward. Japan
has full confidence in Africa's capacities.

Africa is high on Japan's diplomatic agenda this
year. In July, during our Council presidency, Japan
will hold an open debate on peacebuilding in Africa.
In August of this year, Japan, together with the AU
Commission, the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank, will
co-organize the TICAD VI Summit, which will be
hosted by Kenya, making it the first time in its 23-year
history that a TICAD summit is held on the African
continent. We will fully utilize today's discussion in
our preparations for these events.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan's
strong commitment to ensuring peace and security
in Africa.

