The President: I thank Mr. Amano for his briefing.

Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Amano have illustrated
the extent to which the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has contributed to peace
and security since its entry into force. They have also
highlighted the efforts that are needed to add more
chapters to the success story of the NPT.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.

There is a saying that one never really misses
something until it is gone. But there are some things that
we cannot afford to lose. One such item is the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Let us imagine for a minute that the NPT had never
existed. Far more States would have nuclear weapons.
There would have been nothing to put the brakes on
the nuclear programmes still running after the Cold
War. Mutual distrust would be much higher. In short,
our world would be far less safe. The NPT is a good
example that illustrates what Finnish diplomat Martti
Koskenniemi means when he describes international
law as the gentle civilizer of nations.

Another such civilizer is the International Atomic
Energy Agency. Let us just think what the world would
be like without the Agency. We would not have such
high universal safeguarding standards. We would
not have civilian reactor technology, which, in most
countries, runs without highly enriched uranium.
Three hundred safeguards agreements reached, 1,500
cameras installed, 3,000 on-site inspections conducted
and more than 1 million documents evaluated - none
of that would have happened.

The International Atomic Energy Agency also
plays an indispensable role in the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which is a
milestone in non-proliferation diplomacy. That is why
we have to do everything possible to ensure that the
Agency can continue its work in an independent and
neutral manner. That applies to the case of North
Korea, for instance, where we need the International
Atomic Energy Agency's verification capabilities. It
is simply unacceptable for North Korea to become the
first country to establish itself as a nuclear Power by
openly violating the NPT. The proliferation risk would
be immense, it would add fuel to the fire of rearmament
and, finally, it would reward the bad behaviour of a
country that has repeatedly ignored Security Council
resolutions. North Korea needs to embark on a credible
process of denuclearization; that is what we expect, not
least as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).

If we want to maintain the NPT and its universality,
we need to preserve the balance at its heart - the
balance among nuclear non-proliferation, the peaceful
use of nuclear technology and the nuclear disarmament
imperative. In concrete terms, the 2020 NPT review
conference needs to make it clear that article VI of the
Treaty still applies. The recognized nuclear-weapon
States need to disarm too; that is their duty, and we
expect them to fulfil it. Also, it is high time to ensure the
appointment of the President of the review conference
in order to make progress. We need a road map that will
get us back on track with nuclear disarmament. I would
like to outline three specific elements here.

First, we need to take tangible steps towards strategic
risk reduction. We need more transparency on nuclear
arsenals, crisis-proof channels of communication and a
revived dialogue among the permanent five members
of the Security Council, which carry particular
nuclear responsibility.

Secondly, we have to lay the technical groundwork
for a world free of nuclear weapons. Perhaps the most
important part of that is credible verification. For
instance, how can non-nuclear-weapon States verify
the proper dismantling of a nuclear warhead without
gaining access to its blueprints? Seeking answers to
that question, Germany and France will jointly host
a disarmament verification exercise in September, to
which members of the Council are all invited.
Thirdly, we must strengthen and develop the
architecture of nuclear arms control. We have been
biding our time for far too long. Let us start negotiations
on a fissile material cut-off treaty. Different views on
certain aspects should be clarified during negotiations;
they should not hinder the start of negotiations. And
let us finally get the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty into force. Nuclear tests should be a thing of
the past.

Whether in Europe, Asia or anywhere else,
we cannot afford any more shocks to our security
and stability. We must also preserve crucial and
effective treaties like the New START Treaty, which
not only contributes to security between the United
States and Russia, but is also a pillar of security in
Europe and of the global nuclear order, and fulfils an
obligation that arises directly out of the NPT. I firmly
believe that further reductions are possible - without
any loss of security. The United States and Russia could
and should continue to cut the number of warheads and
delivery systems.

Especially in times of increasingly divergent
positions, we must preserve our achievements. The
NPT is a universal achievement and a gentle civilizer
of nations, and we must safeguard its future in 2020.
That job will require energy and commitment from all
of us. Our shared security and peace around the world
are surely worth it.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the other Council members who
wish to make statements.

I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.

