Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open debate
on peacekeeping operations, the United Nations and
regional partnership and its evolution, and for your
wise stewardship of the affairs of the Council.

We also express our appreciation to Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations;
the Deputy Secretary General of the European
External Action Service; and the Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations for
their participation in this meeting and for their
comprehensive briefings on the efforts made in the
context of peacekeeping operations.

Jordan, like other countries working under the
auspices of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, is deploying efforts
in that respect in various regions in the world, so as
to contribute to efforts to secure peace, stability and
security. That falls within the framework of the work of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We are one of the main countries
involved in this noble United Nations mission, as we
contribute 2,729 personnel to peacekeeping forces,
which is a main task in context of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The United Nations continues to coordinate efforts
to de-escalate tensions and to mobilize support to end
long-term conflicts. Undoubtedly, the field experience
gained by the United Nations over half a century is
an indispensable tool in that respect. Peacekeeping
operations are one of the most effective tools available
to assist countries ravaged by conflict in creating
conditions conducive to the establishment of sustainable
peace.

However, we would like to stress the importance of
focusing efforts on dealing with root causes and taking
into consideration the political and peace processes in
the host countries, so that peacekeeping operations do
not become an alternative to finding a solution to such
conflicts.

Peacekeeping operations that lack resources,
mobilization and effective and adequate participation
cannot contain the armed conflicts that come in the
wake of civil wars; this also undermines the safety of
peacekeepers. Hence peacekeeping operations, once
they have undertaken their functions, are in many
cases subject to risks that could threaten them with
failure. The United Nations should therefore strengthen
the legal protection for peacekeepers in a manner that
ensures the smooth functioning of their operations,
especially in the light of cooperation with regional
organizations.

It is also important to launch a constructive dialogue
on the legal aspects ofpeacekeeping operations, as some
of them are under Chapter VI, some under Chapter VII
and some in conjunction with Chapter VIII, within the
framework of regional arrangements.

This calls for further discussion and for a
revitalization ofthe Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34), as well as for a dialogue between
the C-34, the Fifth and Sixth Committees, the
Security Council and other international and regional
organizations.

Peacekeeping activities have been expanded, which
leads to difficulties with respect to coordination with
the relevant stakeholders and vagueness in the mandates
of such missions. This poses additional practical
challenges for such activities. The United Nations has
been establishing entities that enable a rapid response
and make it possible to exert greater efforts with fewer
resources.

However, Jordan would like here to express its
concern at the concept of cooperation between missions
and the transfer of peacekeepers from one mission to
the other, because such utilization for long periods of
time has negative repercussions on the performance of
the missions and creates an imbalance.

The experiences of troop-contributing countries
are important to the revitalization and development
of peacekeeping operations. Such experiences give
countries the ability to take part in all phases ofplanning
for peacekeeping operations. Hence Jordan supports
consultation and dialogue between the Secretariat, the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries,
and we reiterate the importance of benefiting from the
experience of countries that have overcome conflict and
post-conflict stages through South-South cooperation
and triangular cooperation.

We would also like to refer, with regard to
international peace and security, to the importance
of cooperation arrangements between the United
Nations and the relevant regional and international

organizations with regard to joint peacekeeping
operations, in the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, in the enhancement of collective
efforts, particularly given that the United Nations is not
capable of undertaking such tasks on its own.
There are many reasons for this, primarily the
increase in the number of conflicts as well as other
financial burdens. Hence it is important to coordinate
with regional organizations, as they have political,
military and financial resources at their disposal.

In that regard, we would like to highlight the
importance of harmonization between the United
Nations and regional organizations injoint missions, in
particular with regard to the disclosure of information
to any relevant party. In this regard, we would like
to reiterate the importance of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, particularly in early-warning-system
enhancement. That would contribute to predicting
conflict before it erupts and promote a quick response
thereto.

Here we would refer to the pivotal role of the
United Nations and its agencies. The role of regional
organizations, which is certainly important, should
not, however, serve as a substitute for the role played
by the United Nations, which it should complement and
support.

In that regard, it is important to enhance
coordination between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, within the United Nations, and its partners,
so that there can be an exchange of experience and avert
any duplication of effort.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community to support peacekeeping operations and
to enhance the preparedness of the United Nations
to overcome obstacles to the safety and security of
peacekeepers through the provision of political support
and sound strategies for peacebuilding.

My delegation believes in a true partnership between
stakeholders with a View to enhancing peacekeeping
and will continue to mobilize support to that end.

