Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me start by conveying
to the representative of Colombia the condolences of
the German Government and people for the injured and
the families of those killed. There is no justification for
this heinous attack on innocent people.

Of course, we all understand that the Colombian
Government has said that enough is enough, but at the
same time it must not fall into the trap of any kind of
escalation. We believe that there is no alternative to a
political process, and in that context I would issue a plea
to the National Liberation Army (ELN) to take the first
step by releasing all kidnapped persons and detainees.

I would also like to do to thank Mr. Jean Arnault
for his work, as well as the United Nations team on the
ground, and to welcome the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Columbia, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, who despite only two weeks on the
job has produced a very good and very well received
briefing, which is to be expected from a former member
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.

Allow me also to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia,
and the High Counsellor for Post-Conflict, Mr. Emilio
Jose Archila, whose visit to New York demonstrates
their commitment to the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and to
the unity of the Security Council - an important unity
that has been preserved as reflected in the statements
made in the Council today.

I also congratulate them on the second anniversary
of the peace agreement. Germany welcomes the
clear commitment of President Duque Marquez to
the peace agreement, the peace process and national
reconciliation. The task that faces Colombia now is the
consolidation of the peace process, in relation to which
I would like to make three points to reiterate what has
already been said.

First, regarding the security situation, the Special
Representative has reported the number of human rights
defenders, social leaders, women leaders, women's
rights defenders and indigenous leaders who have
been victims of attacks because of their support for the
peace agreement or its implementation, in particular
land restitution. The protection of people against such
attacks, although a difficult task, must be a top priority.

Secondly, regarding transitional justice, a very
important subject, for which the Special Representative
reported the number of cases that have been dealt
with, the legal uncertainty of combatants and former
combatants is an issue which, if allowed to persist, will
be detrimental to the consolidation ofthe peace process.
I would therefore encourage Colombia to increase the
capacity of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,

Thirdly, regarding the reintegration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Eje'rcito del Pueblo, progress has been made
but more needs to be done. I would like to underline and
confirm Germany's support for traditional justice as a
key element of building an inclusive society, which is
why we highly appreciate the active engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Fund in
this area, and we would like to encourage Colombia to
persevere in social and economic integration.

In that context, I would like to join the position
of France stated earlier with regard to the victims
of crimes, a large number of whom are women. I
urge Colombia to focus on support women's issues,
in particular the reintegration of female former
combatants and the provision of day care for children,
as well as the inclusion of youth, which is a critical
element for the future without violence that the country
is determined to achieve. We know that Colombia faces
many challenges, including the implementation of the
peace agreement, the hosting of more than 1 million
refugees from Venezuela and the illegal trafficking of
drugs. We wish to assure Colombia that it can count
on the support of the international community and the
Security Council.

