Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I think it is worth
reminding ourselves regularly that the Security
Council's primary responsibility is to act on behalf of
the Members of the United Nations - all Members - to
maintain international peace and security. In meeting
that responsibility, the Council cannot and should not
work in isolation.

As this month's programme has demonstrated,
the Council's effectiveness in discharging its
responsibilities depends on a network of partnerships
with other bodies and actors. We are grateful to the
Argentine presidency for convening this session
today and providing an opportunity to reflect on the
performance of the Council in working with its partners
over the past month.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General's
considerable efforts in the past month to exercise his
good offices in the interest of international peace
and security, perhaps the most crucial partnership
for the Council is with the Secretary-General. He has
engaged extensively with parties to conflicts, including
through visits in the past month to Libya, Israel and the
Palestinian territories, Somalia and the Horn of Africa,
and issued numerous statements encouraging those
actors to choose the path of peace and de-escalation.
Those actions improved the Council's own efforts.
Briefings by the Secretary-General, as at the Middle
East open debate held on 21 October (see S/PV.7281),
are always of benefit.

The Council's partnerships with the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General are also
crucial. The Council relies heavily on the Special
Representatives to implement the mandates that we
establish and to report regularly on progress. Reports
this month from Special Representatives and Special
Advisers responsible for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Lebanon, Somalia, South Sudan, Syria
and Yemen were central in shaping our thinking
here in the Council and, importantly of course, our
decision-making. Greater interactivity in consultations
ensured that we derived the most from those meetings.
We should continue that interactive practice. Likewise,
greater interaction with the Department of Political
Affairs is increasingly of serious value to the Council
and is being seen as such.

The trust central to the Council's partnerships
with a wide range of United Nations agencies was
also evident in October. Briefings by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on Somalia
and Syria enhanced our understanding of those serious
crises and will help guide our decisions. Strong
presentations by UN-Women Executive Director
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka (see S/PV.7289) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, (see S/PV.7282)
also added value to our deliberations.

The peacekeeping partnership between the
Security Council, troop contributors and the
Secretariat is also fundamental to the Council's work.
In circumstances where United Nations peacekeeping
is under unprecedented historic strain, the Council
must be particularly attuned and responsive to the
challenges faced by each peacekeeping operation. The
annual briefing by the heads of military components
held this month (see S/PV.7275) was a very effective
demonstration of the peacekeeping partnership. The
Council can learn a great deal from regular briefings by
Force Commanders. We hope to have a similar briefing
by the heads of police components in peacekeeping
operations in November.

The Council's partnership with the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and its country-specific
configurations is also important. The role of the PBC
in assisting States emerging from conflict in order
to prevent relapse is central to the Council's conflict
prevention role. We welcome the fact that briefings
by PBC country-specific configuration chairs are
becoming standard Council practice.

Effective cooperation between the Council and
regional organizations is an imperative. The joint
communique between members of the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council (S/2014/400, annex), which we adopted in June
2014, stressed the fundamental importance of a close
organic partnership between the two institutions. That
was again highlighted in our work during October. In
discussions on Somalia, Council members recognized
the achievements of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). The recent security gains
demonstrated that the Council's decision to increase
AMISOM'S troop ceiling a year ago was the right
one. At the subregional level, the mediation role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development on South
Sudan and the efforts by the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region to bring stability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region are crucial. Despite all of this, however, we need
to do more to ensure an optimal level of cooperation
with the African Union.

The importance of the Council's partnership
with key international judicial institutions was also
on display, with a useful briefing yesterday (see S/PV.7290) by the President of the International Court
of Justice on the Court's dispute resolution work. That
should make us reflect on how the Council might
engage with the Court's dispute resolution functions.
Discussion during the working methods debate this
month (see S/PV.7285), a significant agenda item under
Argentina's leadership, has highlighted once again how
necessary it is to strengthen the current relationship
between the Council and the International Criminal
Court. The Council must work harder at that.

Civil society is another essential partner for the
Council. Humanitarian organizations look to the
Council to support their work and to demand access and
protection on their behalf. Human rights organizations
provide crucial information that requires attention.
Reports by groups such as Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International on violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in the Central African
Republic, Iraq, South Sudan and Syria have been not
just extremely valuable, but at times instrumental,
sometimes bringing information to the attention of the
Council and at other times sharpening our appreciation
of what is happening on the ground. Analytical work
by groups such as the International Crisis Group also
assists. Argentina's initiative in inviting Ms. Suaad
Allami, founder and director of the Sadr City Women's
Centre and Legal Clinic, to brief the Council on women
and peace and security (see S/PV.7289) was a very
good example of bringing civil society voices into the
Council. We need more of that.

In conclusion, I want to refer to one other important,
and indeed critical, partnership: the partnership
between the presidency and all other Council members.
I congratulate you, Madam President, for the serious
and empathetic manner in which you, Mario and all your
team have managed that partnership so successfully in
October. We hope to follow your example in November.
I thank those members who have spoken today with very
hopeful references to our own presidency. Fortunately,
that is still 31 hours and 40 minutes away, so I want to
reaffirm my delegation's continuing strong support to
Argentina's presidency.

