I would like to thank the presidency of the Dominican Republic for convening this video-teleconference on the subject of youth, peace and security. Amid the challenging circumstances caused by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the important anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda should not be overlooked. Five years ago, in adopting resolution 2250 (2015), the Security Council recognized the essential role of young women and men in preventing and resolving conflicts and in sustaining peace. The landmark anniversary is an important opportunity to reflect on the progress of Member States and to scale up the efforts of the international community in promoting the meaningful participation of young people in advancing peace, justice, dialogue and reconciliation and in bringing the youth perspective to better respond to the multiple challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The first-ever report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167), released in March, depicts numerous challenges that young people face, including the violation of their human rights, exclusion, inequality, deficiencies of education, unemployment and the shrinking civil space. It highlights the importance of the meaningful participation of young people in public and political life at all levels and the need to create an enabling environment for young people in which they are seen and respected as equal citizens with equal rights and equal voices. I commend the efforts of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, to advocate active youth engagement across all pillars of the Organization. The Government of Armenia places considerable priority on the promotion of the inclusive participation of young people in political and public life, most importantly, at the decision-making levels. The young people in Armenia represent a very vibrant and active part of our society. Young men and women played a key role in the democratic transformation in Armenia throughout the peaceful velvet revolution in May 2018 by fully exercising their rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly in a non-violent manner. Remarkable progress has been achieved in terms of empowering young leaders, as reflected in the current composition of the Government, the Parliament as well as the regional authorities in Armenia. Young people are important agents of change and social transformation. Attempts to restrict the fundamental freedoms of expression and movement of young people or to impede their dialogue and interaction, in particular in conflict situations, result in deepening the dividing lines and can further lead to the most serious manifestations of intolerance, such as hate crimes and atrocities on ethnic and religious grounds. Young people are especially prone to radicalization, in particular in an environment of a State-led policy of the promotion of hatred. Employing divisive narratives and ethnic profiling at educational institutions and the glorification of perpetrators of hate crimes as models for young people should be resolutely condemned by the international community. By contrast, education policies that aim to promote human rights, dialogue and inclusion represent an important tool for the prevention of the radicalization of young people, fostering an understanding of cultural diversity and tolerance towards different religions and cultures. We firmly believe that young people can play a key role at all stages of conflict resolution, particularly in promoting dialogue and confidence-building across the dividing lines. The young generation of the Armenians in Artsakh - Nagorno Karabakh - who have been raised free from outside oppression and foreign domination, are direct contributors to a conducive environment for the realization of their fundamental human rights and meaningful participation in public and political life, including through the exercise of the right to vote and to take part in the Government. The recently held free, competitive and democratic parliamentary and presidential elections are illustrative in that regard. We acknowledge the important work of civil society and youth organizations in empowering young people to raise their voice for peace, non-violence and reconciliation. The inclusive and meaningful engagement of young people, in particular those residing in conflict areas, in peacebuilding initiatives, the promotion of dialogue, confidence and trust as well as the building youth partnerships are key to sustainable peace. Armenia is committed to advancing the youth, peace and security agenda, harnessing the untapped potential of young people and amplifying their voices and aspirations in building a safer world.
