Ms. Lisson (Australia): Australia wishes to
record its appreciation and strong support for the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the 1267
Committee and the 1540 Committee to bring practical
effect to the United Nations counter-terrorism
framework and the unanimously endorsed United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288).

Australia encourages those Committees to further

their efforts to improve cooperation with the General

Assembly through close engagement with the Counter-

Terrorism Implementation Task Force. This is essential

for ensuring appropriate coordination in United

Nations counter-terrorism efforts, avoiding duplication

and encouraging the effective implementation by

Member States of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Mike Smith
as Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED). As Australia's counter-
terrorism ambassador, Mr. Smith has gained a wealth
of experience and knowledge in counter-terrorism
strategies and policies through his extensive
engagement with various Member States and regional
bodies.

Australia strongly supports the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the CTED,
which have a crucial role to play in advancing the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) and the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. By
extension, these bodies are central to the international
community's response to the threat of international
terrorism and are a key component of the United
Nations architecture constructed to help Member States
to deal with that challenge.

Constructive relations with Member States,
particularly donor and recipient countries, are critical
to the success of the CTC's work. Australia encourages
the Committee in its efforts to improve needs
assessments for Member States requiring technical
assistance and coordination mechanisms with donor
countries. We note that the focus of much of this
assistance is moving from ratification support to
legislative implementation and support for national
counter-terrorism capacity-building for criminal justice
systems. That demonstrates the advances we have
made in our counter-terrorism work.

We welcome the CTED's outreach in the Pacific
region to increase understanding of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture and to make assistance
available to countries through various United Nations
bodies. We encourage a deepening of that dialogue so
that the specific needs of countries in that region are
better understood and so that assistance is coordinated
and tailored to meet them.

Australia remains ready to work with the CTC
and its Executive Directorate to further its objectives
and improve its engagement with the United Nations
membership.

Australia recognizes the vital work of the 1267
Committee in United Nations counter-terrorism efforts
and is committed to ensuring full compliance with
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1390 (2002) and successor
resolutions. We welcome the Committee's efforts to
engage more closely with Member States and regional
bodies. We also encourage Member States to designate
terrorists domestically, including by implementing
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001) to freeze the
assets of individuals and entities that commit and
support terrorist acts, in order to supplement the
important work of the 1267 Committee.

The effectiveness of the 1267 Committee is
directly related to the relevance and currency of the
consolidated list, and we encourage further efforts by
the Committee in its outreach to and dialogue with
Member States to this end.

Australia welcomes the 1540 Committee's efforts
in pursuing the universal and effective implementation
of the goals of resolution 1540 (2004). It is
commendable that the Committee has sought to
promote and develop greater regional coordination and
cooperation on the implementation of that resolution,
including on assistance. We encourage the Committee's
continued engagement with regional bodies, such as
the Regional Forum of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), ASEAN and the Pacific
Islands Forum. The Committee might also like to
consider expanding its dialogue and cooperation with
other relevant bodies, such as the export control
regimes, on furthering non-proliferation.

Australia has been directing particular efforts to
the improvement of regional capacity and expertise in
terms of the implementation and enforcement of
resolution 1540 (2004). In our bilateral and multilateral
engagement with other countries, we have taken every
appropriate opportunity to inform countries of the
goals and obligations of resolution 1540 (2004) and
have made offers to further assist where we can.

The Chair and the Committee, through their own
outreach efforts, their establishment of databases and
their analysis of national reports, have completed an
impressive amount of work in a short time. Of
particular note are their endeavours aimed at matching
offers of assistance with requests, including through
the development of a 1540 assistance request template.
The Committee's matrix format of measures that
countries have taken to implement their requirements
under resolution 1540 (2004) is also most welcome.
Australia would support making those country matrices
publicly available through the Committee's website.

The more countries that publicize their
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004), the stronger
the signal to terrorists and their supporters that there
are fewer places available to them to use in obtaining
or transferring the materials and technology necessary
for weapons of mass destruction. Such a signal would
contribute significantly to realizing the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004).

In closing, Australia would like to reaffirm its
active and ongoing support for the Council's counter-
terrorism bodies and its commitment to assisting, as
appropriate, all efforts to advance their work.

