Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abstained in the voting on resolution
2317 (2016), for we believe that the part referring to
Eritrea, as presented to us, is unfair. As Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, we have been
working closely on that issue for almost two years. This
is the last time that we will be participating in a vote
on this text. We are obliged to say that what is taking
place in the Committee is another clear example of how
sanctions seem, for some permanent members, to be an
end in themselves rather than mechanisms to resolve
political problems that arise.

Sanctions ought to be a political instrument that
achieve a specific objective. They should not become
a mechanism used for the collective punishment of a
country. In the case of Eritrea, sanctions should have
a clear road map towards a conclusion. By maintaining
prolonged sanctions, as we are currently doing, there
is no political purpose beyond serving the national
interests of members of the Council or of regional
situations that, as bilateral issues between countries,
cannot be addressed as a multilateral issue to which we
apply sanctions with a specific objective in mind.

We are concerned that in most cases, the Sanctions
Committee uses the opinions and observations of the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea at their whim.
In some cases, when the Group says that something
warrants sanctions, even without objective evidence,
the Sanctions Committee immediately accepts the
Group's opinion as valid, rather than one they need to
consider more closely before taking action. We think
it is the opposite. The Group submits a professional
opinion - and I take this opportunity to acknowledge
and express appreciation for the Monitoring
Group - indicating that we ought to lift sanctions
against Eritrea. However, neither the penholder nor
some of the members of the Sanctions Committee
wish to heed the recommendations coming from the
Monitoring Group because they believe that they are
insufficient. There seems to a be double standard with
which we deal with the opinions of the Monitoring
Group. Sometimes we accept its opinions when it suits
the penholder countries to maintain sanctions against a
country, yet whenever it presents an opinion contrary to
the interest of those countries, as in the case of Eritrea,
suddenly that opinion is insufficient.

In the final report of the Monitoring Group, it
was very clear in the case of Eritrea that for the third
consecutive year there was no evidence whatsoever
that Eritrea was collaborating with or lending any
support to Al-Shabaab. It was clearly stated that there
was no evidence. The Committee has always received
information related to groups in various countries of
the region, but it does not take such information into
account. That is the first, very important element of the
Monitoring Group. I do not know what else we want to
receive from the Monitoring Group, but it seems clear
that there is no cooperation between Al-Shabaab and
Eritrea, which was the original cause of the sanctions.

Furthermore, in our final report we recognized the
cooperation of the State of Qatar. Here we wish to thank
the Permanent Representative of Qatar, Ambassador
Al-Thani, for his efforts to mediate between Djibouti and
Eritrea, both to resolve the issue of the border dispute,
which is in a signed agreement between the countries,
as well as to obtain the release of prisoners of war,
which we welcome. That was a positive development
in the Committee. The Ambassador of Qatar promised
that Qatar would continue to mediate effectively and
directly in an ongoing manner with those countries. In
any normal situation, those elements would have been
enough, not to lift the sanctions because it would need
a road map but to at least establish a mechanism that
would eventually lead to the lifting of the sanctions
following an assessment.

We have been very concerned and have always
expressed those concerns in debates about the
Monitoring Group's methodology and transparency.
What is the road map that ensures that a country can
have a sanctions regime against it lifted? Here we only
seek to come up with a mechanism. The delegation
of China offered a very significant proposal that laid
out a time frame during which we could work towards
lifting sanctions against Eritrea. We believe that we
should lift sanctions against Eritrea ifwe can draw up a
road map. The proposal of China garnered the support
of five countries, which is a sign important number.
The penholder seems to believe that the proposal is not
appropriate and that there is not sufficient reason to do
so, and therefore the adoption of that balanced proposal
did not take place.

Even though the draft was not adopted, it was at
least the beginning of steps in the right direction. That
is why we decided to abstain in the voting on resolution
2317 (2016). Until there is something new to give us
reason to believe that we can extricate ourselves from
the situation we cannot offer our support. We lament
the situation and do not see how the issues at hand can
be resolved within the framework of the mandate of
the Sanctions Committee. We have always said that the
Sanctions Committees have had to have an immediate
political aim. They cannot always be used way of
delivering collective punishment.

It does not seem to matter much in the decision
on the resolution or in the Committee what Eritrea
does regarding its positive steps forward or the
report of the Monitoring Group. It does not make
sense - the meetings, the initiatives and so on and
so forth. Eventually, the decision comes down to one
or a few permanent members. That is something we
need to review.

With respect to the issue of Somalia and Eritrea, we
support elements of resolution 2317 (2016) because we
believe that Somalia continues to need all the support
of the Sanctions Committee in order to take on its
upcoming challenges. In the case of Eritrea, it seems
to us that the Sanctions Committee and the Security
Council must demonstrate sufficient flexibility and
political capacity to understand that the situation in the
Horn of Africa is changing rapidly and that there are
huge dangers facing the entire region. The fundamental
danger in that area is the threat ofexpansion ofterrorism.
That is not just a threat to the Horn of Africa. It is also a
threat to the global North and the Middle East. We call
on the Council to constructively set about resolving that
type of issue and to ensure that the reports or the work
of the Sanctions Committees do not become mere red
tape. At the end of the day, only one or two permanent
members will have their way. It signals defeat because
it means that the penholder could not achieve consensus
on the subject. We did not vote against the resolution
because a regional situation exists that must resolved.
In addition, there was only one minor mention - albeit
important - about the issue of evaluating the lifting
of sanctions.

I would also like to remember here Ambassador
Girma Asmerom Tesfay - a good friend and an
Ambassador who represented his country's interests
well - who regrettably died without seeing his country
freed from an issue that caused him so much concern.
Once again, I would like to extend our condolences
to the delegation of Eritrea and make an appeal in
the interest of all the countries of Africa so that the
continent can have greater tangible support from the
Security Council to resolve its problems. Seventy per
cent of the sanctions committees are against African
countries and, in the majority of cases, the former
colonial Powers are heading those sanctions committees
against Africa. We should think about that. We in Latin
and South America will continue working in line with
our capacities to achieve political solutions to all of the
terrible conflicts that affect our brother countries.

