Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and for the
comprehensive presentations by the briefers, who, from
their specific perspectives, described for us a situation
that calls urgently for the support of the international
community and Security Council action.

Peru notes with deep concern the worsening levels
ofviolence and suffering in various areas ofAfghanistan
that have led to recent fatalities among civilians, many
of whom are women and children. We condemn in
the strongest terms the attack on a vehicle from the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which killed a member of its personnel and
wounded five others. We hope that this cowardly act
will be subject to exhaustive investigations leading to
the identification and appropriate punishment of those
responsible. We deplore the observed increase in the
number of fatalities and injuries among the civilian
population from July to September, the highest number
since UNAMA began keeping records.

The fragile situation compels us to emphasize
the urgent need to establish a minimal framework of
understanding that could help reverse the negative
trends on the ground and lead to the establishment
of direct negotiations between the Taliban and
Government representatives within the framework of
the intra-Afghan dialogue. To that end, we stress the
importance for those countries with the most influence
on the parties to exert the political pressure necessary
to set aside confrontational rhetoric and mutual
recriminations and address all differences through
diplomatic channels.

We also believe that such an undertaking must
necessarily be supported by the firm response of the
Council through the various means at its disposal. The
persistence of violence is unacceptable and requires
this organ to assume greater responsibility. To that end,
we believe that it is critical to allay the uncertainty
and unease spawned by the delay in reporting the
results of the presidential election held at the end of
September. We look forward to a timely solution to
the technical difficulties so that we can at least receive
preliminary results, in line with the proposal made by
the Afghan electoral institutions in mid-November.
We believe that it is imperative that this be followed
up by moderate, responsible and cautious action by the
relevant stakeholders that encourages the restoration of
a stable environment.
Achieving sustainable peace will require a broad
consensus based on a shared vision for the future. It
is therefore necessary that all segments of the Afghan
population be adequately represented, including
through the meaningful participation of women and
young people in political processes. We welcome the
initiatives of UNAMA under way, aimed at making
progress in that key area. We also believe that it is
vital for the international community to step up its
contributions to stabilizing and stimulating the local
economy, and to set up infrastructure and programmes
to create jobs and offer hope and opportunity to the
youngest members of the population.

In conclusion, I affirm Peru's full support for
the renewal of the mandate of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, which assists the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), and underscore the important work it is doing.
We also thank Special Representative Yamamoto and
his team for their commendable efforts and wish them
every success in continuing their work with resolve in
seeking peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

