Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We too would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2018/539) on the situation in Afghanistan
and the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We appreciate the
briefings of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto, Vladimir Voronkov of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Yury Fedotov of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

Afghanistan still faces multiple and complex
challenges to its security, stability and development.
The people continue to pay a heavy price because of
the instability and violence affecting the country, and,
as the report of the Secretary-General makes evident, it
is civilians, particularly women and children, who are
the most vulnerable and face the bulk of the challenges.

According to the Secretary-General's report, the
security situation has remained highly unstable in
Afghanistan, with several mass-casualty incidents in
urban areas. Suicide attacks have become the leading
cause of civilian casualties. Once again, we take this
opportunity to express our sympathy to and solidarity
with the people and Government of Afghanistan for
the loss of innocent lives, including those of women
and children. We welcome the statement issued by
the Security Council (SC/13386) condemning in the
strongest terms the two heinous and cowardly terrorist
attacks that took place in Nangarhar on 16 and 17 June,
which resulted in at least 43 deaths and 45 injuries.
Those acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation.
We appreciate the proposal of President Ghani
for direct negotiations with the Taliban, which has
received broad and strong support from Afghans
and the international community. We also note that
the Afghan Government offered another temporary
ceasefire during the holiday of Eid al-Fitr and called
for an extension to the ceasefire, with no response from
the Taliban.

The long-term security and stability of Afghanistan
can be ensured only through a comprehensive and
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
and political process. In that regard, the renewed call
of the Afghan Government for unconditional peace
talks with the Taliban and the outlining of a framework
for peace that was presented at the Kabul process
conference are encouraging and need meaningful
support from all stakeholders, including UNAMA. We
hope that the Taliban will respond positively to that call
and engage in direct talks with the Government with a
view to achieving a political settlement and restoring
lasting peace and security in Afghanistan.

The support of regional and international
stakeholders will be key to the success of the peace
process, and we welcome the declaration adopted on
28 February reiterating the support of the international
community for the Kabul process for an Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process, and
reaffirming its commitment to the necessary fight
against terrorism in order to bring lasting peace,
security, stability and prosperity to Afghanistan.

With regard to the political situation in the
country, we take note of the peaceful settlement of the
tension between the Presidential Palace and Jam'iyat-i
Islami. We hope that the parties will redirect their
efforts towards addressing the multiple challenges
facing Afghanistan.

The holding of peaceful and democratic
parliamentary and district council elections within
the set time frame is indeed very important, and we
note some of the progress made in preparation for
the elections. Accelerating those efforts and building
the confidence of the Afghan people in the electoral
process through the involvement and participation of
all the relevant stakeholders will be key to ensuring the
timely and successful holding of the elections. As the
Secretary-General's report notes, ensuring an inclusive
and credible electoral process while a significant
percentage of the population lives in parts of the
country that are insecure, with limited State authority,
remains a fundamental challenge. The peaceful conduct
of elections at all stages is critical to enabling people
to exercise their right to vote without fear or threat of
insecurity. In that regard, we duly share the Secretary-
General's concern about ongoing attempts to disrupt
the electoral process through violent means, including
tactics such as intimidation and the harassment of
registered voters.

Without sustained and inclusive economic growth
and development, the peace and security challenges
faced by Afghanistan cannot be effectively addressed.
That is why the National Unity Government needs
the coordinated and comprehensive support of the
international community to push forward its political
reform and national development priorities, as envisaged
in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. It is vital that the international community
sustain its engagement and deliver on its various
commitments in that regard.

Therefore, we further note the steps taken
towards closer regional economic cooperation by
the Afghanistan Government, including the Afghan
segment of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-
India natural gas pipeline inauguration on 23 February,
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, held in Istanbul on
19 April, and the Afghanistan and Pakistan finalization
of an agreement on the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action
Plan for Peace and Solidarity, among others.

In all of those initiatives, the efforts of UNAMA
in promoting and supporting peace talk initiatives
and reconciliation, dialogue and support for social
and economic development, with full respect for the
country's sovereignty, as well as its leadership, remains
very important. We therefore commend the active
engagement of UNAMA with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan, in line with its mandate.

