Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We too thank you,
Sir, for organizing this ministerial meeting on the
situation in the Middle East. We warmly welcome the
Secretary of State of the United States, the Foreign
Minister of the Russian Federation, the Foreign
Secretary of the United Kingdom and the Vice Minister
of Foreign Affairs of China who have joined us today.
We also wish to express our thanks to the United
States of America and the Russian Federation for
presenting the draft resolution before us today. It is
worth noting that, if the draft resolution is adopted, it
will be the first time in nearly five years that the
Council has substantively pronounced itself on the
Middle East.

The draft resolution recalls two important
decisions. The first dates back to 7 May 2003, when
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan sent a letter to
the Security Council transmitting a text of the Quartet
entitled "A performance-based road map to a
permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict". The Road Map stated:

"A settlement, negotiated between the
parties, will result in the emergence of an
independent, democratic, and viable Palestinian
State living side by side in peace and security
with Israel and its other neighbours. The
settlement will resolve the Israel-Palestinian
conflict, and end the occupation that began in
1967, based on the foundations of the Madrid
Conference [and] the principle of land for peace"
(5/2003/529, annex, p. 2).

The Road Map continued:

"This initiative is a vital element of international
efforts to promote a comprehensive peace on all
tracks, including the Syrian-Israeli and Lebanese-
Israeli tracks." (Ibid.)

The second decision before us today was taken at
a meeting held on 27 November 2007 in Annapolis,
Maryland. United States President George W. Bush
summed up the outcome in a joint understanding
between the parties that stated:

"We express our determination to bring an
end to bloodshed, suffering and decades of
conflict between our peoples; to usher in a new
era of peace, based on freedom, security, justice,
dignity, respect and mutual recognition; to
propagate a culture of peace and non-violence; to
confront terrorism and incitement, whether
committed by Palestinians or Israelis. In
furtherance of the goal of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security, we agree to immediately launch good-
faith bilateral negotiations in order to conclude a
peace treaty, resolving all outstanding issues,
including all core issues without exception, as
specified in previous agreements."

Our concern is that, since the Quartet declaration
five years ago, the situation in the Middle East,

particularly in Palestine, has not improved. Instead, the
illegal occupation of Palestine that began in 1967 has
intensified. Palestinians continue to face hardships
compounded by the financial embargo, the expansion
of Israeli settlements and the building of the illegal
separation wall, as well as by restrictions on movement
and access, which are interrupted by more than 600
roadblocks. Twelve months after the Annapolis
meeting, political negotiations have not produced any
tangible results.

The draft resolution before us is not perfect,
because it ignores many significant issues that the
Council must address. These include the continuing
illegal settlement activity in the Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. In Hebron, Israeli settlers have
attacked Palestinian homes and farms. Violence against
Palestinian and Israeli civilians has not ended. Yet, my
delegation will support this draft resolution, because it
recommits the parties to the obligations to which they
have previously agreed. We continue to encourage both
Israelis and Palestinians to persist with negotiations to
achieve the goal of a viable Palestinian State with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

If adopted, this draft resolution will face two
crucial tests. The first will be whether the parties will
implement its provisions, and the second will be
whether the Council will ensure that its resolutions are
implemented. If this draft resolution were to be
ignored, that would further erode the credibility of the
Council.

We also hope that the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative,
whose importance is noted in the draft resolution, will
be taken as a serious contribution to bringing about
peace in the Middle East. The Arab Initiative spells out
even clearer and more specific affirmations expected of
both Israel and the Arab countries.

The Arab Initiative calls upon Israel to affirm the
following: a full Israeli withdrawal from all the
territories occupied since 1967, including the Syrian
Golan Heights, to the lines of 4 June 1967, as well as
from the remaining occupied Lebanese territories in the
South of Lebanon; the achievement of a just solution to
the Palestinian refugee problem, to be agreed upon in
accordance with General Assembly resolution
194 (III); and acceptance of the establishment of a
sovereign independent Palestinian State on the
Palestinian territories occupied since 4 June 1967 in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. Consequently, the Arab countries affirm that
they will consider the Arab-Israeli conflict ended, enter
into a peace agreement with Israel and provide security
for all States in the region, and establish normal
relations with Israel in the context of a comprehensive
peace.

The Palestinian people have now been homeless
for 60 years. Generation upon generation of Palestinian
children have never had a home other than the ghettos
and camps that they have occupied throughout the
world. Those Palestinians who stayed behind have had
to endure 40 years of illegal occupation with its untold
miseries. In the Gaza Strip, hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians live under a complete blockade, with bare
essentials that keep them alive for yet another day.

For the past few months, my delegation has
recommended that the Council invite Mr. Tony Blair,
Quartet Representative and former Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom, to brief the Security Council
about his efforts in the occupied areas. Although we
will soon leave the Council, we hope that Mr. Blair
will still accept its invitation and come early in the new
year. It is important that the Council hear first-hand
about the suffering of the Palestinian people. Perhaps
that will inspire the Council to adopt a comprehensive
draft resolution next time. For now, the draft resolution
before us will have to suffice.

