Mr. Wittig (Germany): We are grateful to you,
Sir, for having convened this very timely meeting. Let
me also thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. The information that he gave us is deeply
worrying. The Council must urgently discuss the
situation in Syria. The scale of the violence and
brutality used for internal repression is deeply
disturbing. What is more, the situation has obvious
regional and international implications, given Syria's
critical importance to peace and security in the Middle
East, including being host to a United Nations
peacekeeping mission.

The briefing that we heard and the facts on the
ground have shown that the Syrian authorities are
using violence against peaceful demonstrators. We are
deeply shocked by the deaths of civilians who were
killed because they tried to exercise their fundamental
rights. The systematic use of force by deploying tanks
and using live ammunition comes from the Syrian
authorities. The demonstrators do not have tanks. They
do not arrest people arbitrarily. They do not curtail
journalists in their reporting.

The continued violence against peaceful
protesters is completely unacceptable. It has to stop
immediately. All announcements of reforms are
undermined by the ongoing violence. The reports we
have received from Dar'a are deeply disturbing. Tanks
and artillery have been deployed. There have been
many casualties. It is impossible to access the area. We
demand access for international observers. Those
responsible for the killings should be held accountable.

In this connection, we strongly support the
Secretary-General's call for an independent,
transparent and effective investigation into the killings.
The Syrian authorities must respect human rights,
including the right to peaceful assembly, as well as
freedom of opinion and of the press. We also call on
the Syrian authorities to respect the obligation to
safeguard the integrity and dignity of all detainees and
their right to a fair legal process.

The Syrian Government now has a choice to end
the violence and initiate the tangible and meaningful
reforms that are needed, or to continue with ever more
violent repression. Choosing the latter would be a very
short-sighted approach and would require us to react
with the appropriate measures. Ongoing repression is
not a solution.

Germany has so far taken up a number of
diplomatic and political initiatives. We have strongly
supported a special session on Syria at the Human
Rights Council, and welcome the fact that it will take
place this Friday. Together with our partners, we will
consider action at the level of the European Union
before the end of the week. This might include
sanctions.

