Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): I am pleased to
interact with the Security Council this afternoon
from Bamako. I thank the Secretary-General for this
opportunity to introduce his report (S/2017/811) and to
take stock of recent developments in the situation in
Mali, including the implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which emanated
from the Algiers process.

I am delighted to welcome among us His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali.

The report before us covers the period from
mid-June to mid-September 2017. This period was
characterized by the following major developments
in the political and security areas: a debate on the
draft revision of the Constitution, and armed clashes
between the Platform coalition of armed groups and
the Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad (CMA),
which are the two signatories to the Agreement. These
two events almost called into question the entire
process of the implementation of the Agreement. The
combined efforts of the main Malian actors, including
the leaders of the signatory movements, in addition
to those of the international community, made it
possible to resolve the two crises, which are the main
reason for the ongoing delays in the implementation of
the Agreement.

With respect to the debate on the draft constitutional
reVision, the decision of President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita to postpone the referendum has eased social
tensions and put an end to the protests. As for the clashes
between the CMA and the Platform, after signing
renewable truces on 23 August and 6 September, the
two coalitions were able on 20 September to sign a
text they are calling a commitment, enshrining a total
and final cessation of hostilities. The implementation
of the provisions of this undertaking continues apace.
In witness to that, this morning the CMA freed nine
Platform prisoners in Kidal.

It was in this atmosphere of successful outcomes
that the Government of Mali and the United Nations
convened a high-level meeting on the implementation
of the Agreement on 20 September in New York. The
high-level meeting, co-chaired by the President of Mali
and the Secretary-General, was attended, for the first
time, by CMA and Platform officials. The many high-
ranking participants stressed the need to accelerate
the implementation of the Agreement, including
the creation of a second chamber of Parliament and
the operationalization of regional associations; the
launching of the cantonment and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; the
drafting of a security sector reform road map; and
the gradual redeployment of the reconstituted Malian
defence and security forces.

The Governor ofKidal took office on 19 September,
symbolizing the return of the State. In that regard, I
would stress that this new impetus must be capitalized
on to ensure that the return of the Governmor to Kidal
will be more than merely symbolic.

Despite these positive developments, we must keep

in mind that the 2018 deadlines are fast approaching
and that the challenges ahead are enormous. All parties
will have to redouble their efforts to restore trust
between them and, despite the aforementioned delays
in the implementation of the Agreement, commit to the
necessary reforms and provide the peace dividends so
long awaited by the people of Mali.

I recall that the human rights situation remains
a matter of concern owing, inter alia, to the volatile
security environment in the country. The rise of violent
extremism perpetrated by armed elements, which has
impeded the enjoyment of fundamental rights and
freedoms inthe central regions in particular, has become
very worrisome. The absence of State authorities in
certain areas and the conduct of anti-terrorist operations
in which human rights violations have been reported
are the main causes contributing to the resurgence of
these phenomena.

With respect to the fight against impunity, it is
worth noting the progress made by the Government, in
particular in the handling of cases stemming from the
2012 crisis. The start of the trial of Aliou Mahamane
Toure and the verdict sentencing him to 10 years of
incarceration has aroused a glimmer of hope for the
many victims of abuse and serious violations of human
rights committed since the beginning of the crisis. In
this regard, I would stress that what is being sought is
that all perpetrators of such violations and abuses be
held accountable for their actions, whatever the context
or circumstances of their occurrence. The ultimate
objective of the support the United Nations is giving
the Government of Mali is to fight impunity, ensure
access to justice for all and preserve the rule of law
and democracy. Further, intensified redeployment of
security and judicial authorities and the strengthening
of transitional justice mechanisms to prevent impunity
from promoting a culture of do-it-yourself pseudo-
justice is essential.

In addition, the Security Council sanctions
regime that was recently set up under resolution 2374
(2017) rightly represents an important turning point
in the fight against impunity and in guaranteeing
respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by all parties to the
conflict. The sanctions regime is an important lever
against those who would pose obstacles to the smooth
unfolding of the peace process. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) will continue to provide assistance
to State institutions, with which it maintains a regular
dialogue. The dialogue aims, inter alia, at promoting
exchanges about cases of human rights Violations
and abuses that have been documented throughout
the country in order to allow appropriate legal action
to be taken in accordance with international human
rights obligations. The forthcoming establishment of
the international commission of inquiry will work in
this direction.

As for MINUSMA, it continues to face significant
challenges resulting from the activities of extremist
groups and other terrorists that have formed criminal
networks. These are the main obstacles to a return to
peace, in particular because the groups are enemies
of the implementation of the Peace Agreement. The
almost daily loss of United Nations peacekeepers,
caused by improvised explosive devices or land mines,
particularly on the main supply lines of the Mission,
has become unbearable and unsustainable. The death
of three peacekeepers and the wounding of four others
and a Malian civilian contractor who has since died, in
Gao on 24 September, is a small but perfect illustration
of this fact. Unfortunately, many questions remain
unanswered, including the identity of the perpetrators.
That is why we are urging the Government and the
signatory groups to accelerate their implementation of
the Agreement and their efforts aimed at reconciliation,
so that, first ofall, we can figure out who is who and pool
our capacities in order to address the situation together.

With regard to the fight against improvised
explosive devices, we intend to undertake several
actions in the coming days, but a global approach is
required, starting with a strategic Vision, including
finding backers and technicians, who mostly come from
abroad, as they are not Malians, as well as attracting
associated financial mechanisms. It is also high time
for the escort battalion convoy and the regional quick
reaction force to be fully deployed to give the Mission
the freedom of action it needs.

In the light of all the threats faced by MINUSMA
and the entire United Nations family in Mali, we
reiterate the funding needs, which are growing - we
will not hide that fact - given the need for investment
to protect against indirect attacks and improve
surveillance, detection and early-warning and alarm
systems. These are some of the protective measures
designed to mitigate the loss of life resulting from
indirect attacks on the MINUSMA camps, even
though, for some time now, outside patrols have limited
these indirect attacks. Technological upgrades are
also welcome.

The establishment of the joint force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) provides us with an
opportunity that could contribute to creating a climate
conducive to the proper execution of MINUSMA's
mandate. It is important to note that a holistic approach
that goes beyond the use of military force and ensures
coherence with the peace process, development
initiatives and the African Union peace and security
architecture is necessary. At the request of the
Secretary-General, an exploratory mission comprising
representatives of MINUSMA, all headquarter
departments and the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel visited the capitals ofthe G-5 Sahel
countries and the Force Headquarters based in Sevare
in early September. This mission noted the countries
of the region's commitment to operationalizing the
Force conjointe.

We welcome the ongoing exchanges between the
G-5 Sahel countries and their partners, including at
the high-level event in New York organized by Mali
in the context of the General Assembly and at the
Berlin meeting held on 19 September. In this regard,
we reiterate the Secretary-General's call for substantial
and sustained international support for the G-5 Sahel
initiative. The events that took place yesterday at Mali's
border with Niger are a cause for concern.

Pursuant to resolution 2364 (2017), consultations
are under way to determine which responsibilities
may be transferred to the United Nations country
team. It should be noted, however, that this transfer
of responsibility will take place only gradually and in
the medium and long terms, because the challenges
are enormous. I need only cite problems of access
and resources, among others. These are factors that
contribute to the increase in humanitarian needs.

In that regard, and as Council members know,
in 2017 humanitarian actors launched a $305 million
appeal to meet needs in the areas of health care, water,
nutrition, food security, protection, education and
shelter. However, as Council members also know, the
humanitarian response plan was funded only at just
over 35 per cent, which still allowed the Government
and its partners to assist thousands of Malian citizens
in the north who have been affected by the conflict.
With respect to the Peacebuilding Fund, it is worth
noting that Mali has received nearly $17 million, which
has been used to finance some 11 projects, and through
funding for the region we have received $3 million for
a programme linking Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso.

