Ms. Power (United States of America): We have
adopted resolution 2209 (2015) today, a year and a
half after the Council adopted a binding resolution in
the wake of a horrific, gruesome chemical weapons
attack that left more than 1,000 civilians and hundreds
of children dead. Resolution 2118 (2013) required the
Syrian regime to dismantle and destroy its chemical
weapons programme under international supervision.
The joint mission of the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), with the assistance of numerous Member
States, largely succeeded in that task. Yet significant
discrepancies remain with Syria's declaration to the
OPCW, and the Al-Assad regime must cooperate, as per
its obligations under resolution 2118 (2013), to resolve
those.

Despite having acceded to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Al-Assad regime has again
demonstrated its brutality by turning to chlorine as
another barbaric weapon in its arsenal against the Syrian
people. Today the Council has made it crystal clear that
the use of chlorine as a chemical weapon is no less evil
than the use of any other chemical as a weapon. The
Syrian regime's use of any toxic chemical as a weapon
is prohibited by the Chemical Weapons Convention and
constitutes a violation of resolution 2118 (2013).

The OPCW'S fact-finding mission was not
mandated to assign culpability for the chlorine attacks.
It was not mandated to do so, yet a couple of Council
members are suggesting that the absence of explicit
finger-pointing is a form of absolution. Let us look,
instead, at what the report actually says. The fact-
finding mission concluded with high confidence that
there is, "compelling confirmation that a toxic chemical
was used as a weapon, systematically and repeatedly"
(5/2015/138, annex 2, para. 29), in Syria between April
and August of 2014.

Further, the third fact-finding mission report lists
32 witnesses who saw or heard the sound of helicopters
over three opposition-held villages - Talmenes, A1
Tamanah and Kafr Zita in north-west Syria - at the
time of the attacks; the vast majority of interviewees
either heard or saw barrel bombs falling. Twenty-six
witnesses saw a yellow cloud or dust released from those
barrel bombs upon impact and 29 smelled a chlorine
odour. All of us, of course, know the smell of chlorine.
So let us ask ourselves, "Who has helicopters in Syria?"
Certainly, the opposition does not. Only the regime
does, and we have seen them use their helicopters in
countless other attacks on innocent Syrians using
barrel bombs.

In resolution 2118 (2013) the Security Council
determined that "the use of chemical weapons
anywhere constitutes a threat international peace and
security". And today we have reaffirmed that any use
of a chemical as a weapon, be it sarin or chlorine, is
prohibited by the Security Council. As we approach the
centenary the first use of chemical weapons on a large
scale, at the battle of Ypres, the Security Council must
continue to uphold the standards and norms against
chemical weapons use and we must work individually
and collectively to hold those responsible for such use
accountable.

