Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): Let me first
congratulate you on convening this important meeting
at a crucial juncture of the history of Venezuela and the
broader Latin American and Caribbean region.

The events of 23 February were a wake-up call to
the dangers that the international community - most
especially Latin America and the Caribbean - will
face if the crisis in Venezuela is not defused swiftly.
They also confirmed who ultimately sides with the
Venezuelan people. The regime's actions to block
humanitarian aid that would help feed the hungry
and heal the sick were not only inadmissible by any
reasonable human standards but were brutally cruel and
claimed human lives, including the lives of indigenous
people living at the Brazilian-Venezuelan border.

Ours is a region where the path of democracy and
development has been chosen. The Inter-American
Democratic Charter, alongside several subregional
instruments on the same topic, is a testament to the
strength of that commitment. We are all keenly aware
that the brutal and illegitimate regime of Nicolas
Maduro has taken a regrettable detour from any vision
of a free and prosperous future for its people.

It was only fitting that the president of the
democratically elected National Assembly, the only
legitimate power standing in Venezuela, swore himself
in as interim President of the country. This was done
in strict obedience to the national Constitution since
Maduro rigged elections, suffocated the voice of
Venezuelans and ultimately usurped power. Since then,
a growing number of members of the international
community - 50 countries as of today - have
denounced the regime's unlawfulness and recognized
Juan Guaido as the rightful President of Venezuela
until free and fair elections are finally held. Brazil has
added its voice to that call because we hope to see a
democratic and prosperous Venezuela flourish in the
aftermath of this protracted crisis.

Conscious of an escalating situation along our
borders, the Lima Group met in Bogotajust yesterday to
show hemispheric solidarity to our brothers and sisters
in Venezuela and also to help pave the way for the
democratic transition in the country. The Lima Group
does not claim to speak for the entirety of the region,
but our voice carries the weight of a group of nations
that, since August 2017, has been shouldering their
responsibility in finding a way to help Venezuelans in
their struggle against authoritarianism.

As stated in the Bogota communique, we
condemned the regime's criminal use of violence and
military force against the provision of humanitarian
assistance and reiterated the appeal to the Venezuelan
Armed Forces to adhere to the legitimate authority of
President Guaido. The Lima Group conveyed to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) its support for a
request submitted last September that the ICC examine
the humanitarian catastrophe committed by the Maduro
regime against its own people.

Latin America and the Caribbean is first and
foremost a region of peace. Brazil, its largest country
measured by territorial mass and population, has not
fought a war with its neighbours for the past 150 years.
That is no small achievement and did not happen by
chance. It is the by-product - or rather the direct
consequence - of the determined choice of diplomacy
and an irrevocable preference for peaceful means
to resolve international disputes, as befits those who
remain true to international law and the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, the Lima Group, through its Bogota
communique, decided to encourage the nomination by
the Human Rights Council of an independent expert
or an investigation commission on the human rights
violations in Venezuela, in accordance with Human
Rights Council resolution 39/1 of 27 September 2018.
The Lima Group also requested the Secretary-General
to engage the United Nations system in addressing the
situation in Venezuela.

Brazil calls upon the international community,
especially those countries that have not yet recognized
President Juan Guaide, to join the efforts for the
democratic transition in Venezuela, recognizing the
legitimate Government of Mr. Guaido and demanding
that the regime's violence against its own people
be stopped.

