Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina for his very objective and detailed
briefing and report (S/2019/364, annex) and for all the
efforts that he and his team have made to support peace
and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He continues
to have our full support. I would also like to echo the
tribute that he made to Lord Ashdown, who played a
Vital role in galvanizing international action during
the conflicts that followed the breakup of the former
Yugoslavia. We will not forget his personal contribution
to the stability and security of the region.

I think that the High Representative brought out
very clearly for us in his briefing the major challenges
with regard to the rule of law, the backsliding against
different commitments and the many risks to Bosnia
and Herzegovina's future. I believe that his briefing
really brought home to us the need for the Security
Council to remain highly focused on the situation in
Bosnia, as well as the continuing importance of his role
and that of the Office of the High Representative, which
remains the final authority concerning the civilian
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That includes the United Kingdom's
support for the use of the Bonn powers, if the situation
requires, as well as continuing support for the European
Union-led Operation Althea and its executive mandate.
He has our full support.

The previous time that we met to discuss this
issue (see S/PV.8392), elections had just taken place.
However, seven months later, the process of Government
formation is still not complete. While we welcome
the swift progress made in the Republic of Srpska,
we share the disappointment of the representatives
of South Africa and Cote d'Ivoire that the State-level
Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers, the
Federation entity Government and four of the 10
cantonal Governments have not yet been appointed.
We also urge political leaders to engage constructively
on Government formation at all levels so that they
can begin to implement reforms that benefit all of
their citizens.

Once again, when we met previously, many Council
members, including the United Kingdom, urged those
in positions of responsibility to refrain from spreading
divisive sentiments and act in the interests ofall citizens.
It is once again extremely disappointing that the divisive
nationalist rhetoric, which dominated the election
period, has persisted. As the High Representative
indicated, such divisive nationalistic rhetoric makes
politics difficult and compromise elusive. It does not
serve the citizens whom they are elected to represent,
nor does it encourage the peace and stability for which
we hoped for many years.

It is particularly of concern that some authority
figures have attempted to use theirposition to undermine
State institutions and intimidate Bosnian citizens, such
as through announced changes to the criminal code of
the Republic of Srpska, which the High Representative
highlighted in his report. We fully support the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board's commitment
to Bosnia and Herzegovina' fundamental structure as a
single sovereign State, composed of two entities. The
spread of nationalistic sentiment is indicative of the
wider political environment, in which the democratic
sphere is gradually being eroded. Laws on public
assembly fall short of international standards across
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, recent moves
to make those even more restrictive in the Republic
of Srpska were particularly alarming. The freedoms
of expression, peaceful assembly and the media
are fundamental elements of a healthy functional
democracy. Unnecessary and antagonistic legislative
changes serve only to undermine democracy and
move Bosnia and Herzegovina further away from the
international standards and democratic norms that it
needs to meet in order to progress.

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress made,
including the appeals judgment of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals on the case
of Radovan Karadzic'. That judgment is an important
result for international justice that sends a powerful
message that those who carry out atrocities will be held
accountable for their actions and sentenced accordingly.
It is therefore simply appalling that political leaders
and sections of society continue to deny not only the
judgments of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the Residual Mechanism but also the
genocide in Srebrenica, despite the conclusive finding
of genocide by both international tribunals and national
courts. It is deplorable that political actors are willing
to put their political pursuits ahead ofjustice for Victims
and peace for all.

We also commend the submission of the
answers to the follow-up questions of the European
Commission questionnaire, and we welcome the
public commitment of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the European path, as declared in
a joint statement in December. Bosnia must now
demonstrate its commitment to European-Atlantic
integration, including to the rule of law, democracy
and human rights. To ensure that this is successful, the
implementation of difficult but essential reforms are
necessary, as are efforts on socioeconomic reforms,
which provide more opportunities for the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and therefore help arrest the
flow of people leaving in search of a more prosperous
and stable future elsewhere.

Although there has been some progress, as I
have just mentioned, towards long-term peace and
prosperity for Bosnia and Herzegovina, there is clearly
still a very long way to go. I think, therefore, that it
would be useful for the Council to hear further from
the High Representative about what more we and the
international community could do to enhance the
rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina and encourage
reconciliation. We look forward to hearing from him.

