Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, for the third time in the month of April, I
must thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting of the Security Council in response to the
growing call of the immense majority of the Member
States of the United Nations, who are concerned by the
continuing deterioration and worsening of the crisis in
the Middle East, especially in Palestine.

As we waited with great patience for the long-
hoped for initiative of the United States Secretary of
State in the Middle East, the massacres and repression
perpetrated against the Palestinians continued. These
have been 10 extremely long days. The long delay in
the trip from Washington to Ramallah had nothing to
do with the technologically advanced modes of
transportation that are used nowadays. Nor was it
related to any threats to the security of the
distinguished traveller. This procrastination did not
augur well, and the final outcome comes as no surprise.
The initiative of the Secretary of State has been a
resounding failure.

But, let us be frank. Was it possible to expect any
other outcome? Of course not. All of us here know that
very well. The text of the joint declaration by the
Secretary-General, the European Union, the United
States and the Russian Federation was not applied.

Mr. Powell said at a press conference, just before
returning to his country, that he was disappointed with
President Arafat, who, in his opinion, could do more
because the time had come for him to adopt "a strategic
decision". Sentences such as this will be recorded in
the history of contemporary shamefulness.

I should like to ask, who should be disappointed
with whom? Can we be disappointed with the actions
of President Arafat? What we have seen over the past
few days and what has been said in recent debates in
the Council indicate several things. The heroic
resistance of the Palestinian people against the illegal
Israeli occupier remains firm despite the hundreds of
dead - which they are not allowed even to count -
accumulating in the towns and refugee camps.

The example of President Arafat, harassed,
besieged, deprived of water and electricity, with barely
any means of communication with the outside world
and confronted by the tanks and bulldozers
demolishing the Palestinian Authority's headquarters in
Ramallah, constitutes vivid testimony that he continues
to adhere to his ideals and that, although the Secretary
of State pretends not to realize it, President Arafat and
the Palestinian people elected many years ago their
own strategic option: to fight for the right to self-
determination and to create their own independent,
sovereign State in their own territories, with its capital
in East Jerusalem.

The immediate ceasefire demanded in recent
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), continues to be flouted
with total impunity. The withdrawal of Israeli troops
from the scant number of Palestinian areas that enjoyed
limited autonomy is a fluctuating phenomenon and not
at all permanent: the Israeli army withdraws then
returns to the cities, towns and refugee camps.
What should we do now? Should we sit quietly
and wait patiently for the Secretary of State to find
time in his busy schedule to return to the region? How
many Palestinian and Israeli civilians must die before
United States strategists feel like taking another look at
events in the Middle East and try again to take us for
fools with their supposed mediation of scant
credibility? Can it be that the Government of the only
surviving superpower of our times does not have the
necessary mechanisms to "persuade" - to use the
same word used by the State Department - its closest
ally in the Middle East to comply with the demands of
the Security Council, which it apparently voted in
favour of in our presence?

There is only one word for this: complicity. It is
enough to glance at the messages that we receive from
the White House, repeating ad nauseam the same
unbalanced refrain: the Palestinians must do more; the
Palestinians must condemn terrorism; the Palestinians
must give up their aspirations; the Palestinians...et
cetera. Always repeating the same thing to avoid the
truth.

My delegation comes here today to denounce the
immorality and the double standards of American
foreign policy. We do this on the basis of the strength
and the moral virtue we possess as victims even now of
direct aggression of all types. Could the Government of
the United States suspend sending the latest generation
of weapons to the Israeli army, which uses them
against a defenceless, civilian population? The answer
is no. Could the Government of the United States apply
unilateral, coercive, economic measures and sanctions
against the Government of Israel until it decides finally
to comply with the many resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, which it flouts and
tramples on with complete contempt? Of course not.
Could the Government of the United States vote in the
Security Council in favour of sanctions, restrictions,
limitations and penalties against the Government of
Israel, as it has done with boundless enthusiasm against
other countries whose Governments it does not happen
to like? Obviously not.

Could the Government of the United States
decide to put an immediate end to the tremendous
economic subsidies that it provides year after year to
maintain Israel's exaggerated military apparatus, which
is used in its attacks of aggression and repression
against the neighbouring Arab countries and against the
civil Palestinian population? Of course not.

Could the Government of the United States
muster some courage and truly believe in its self-
assigned role as the global champion of democracy and
human rights, and propose in this organization
resolutions condemning the Israeli authorities for their
contempt for the most fundamental human rights of the
Arab and Palestinian populations, including the right to
life? No, no, no.

The Council has held countless meetings, with
innumerable hours of denunciations and
condemnations, and death and horror continue to
prevail in the Palestinian territories flagrantly occupied
by Israel. Nothing has been resolved. Israel suffers
from a type of deafness that seems irreversible, and it
scoffs at whatever we say and propose here.

Perhaps a solution would be to stop talking to the
puppet and demand more of the puppetmaster. The
unlimited protection granted to Israel by the United
States must cease. The atrocities committed by Israel
with the consent of the United States must cease. The
human rights violations perpetrated by Israel and
tolerated by the United States must be rejected and
punished in a way that sets an example. The violations
of temples of various faiths by Israeli military troops
must come to a complete end. We cannot allow the
Council's credibility to remain hostage to the designs
of one of its members, no matter how powerful and
predominant it may be, protected by the immoral
weapon of the veto.

A few days ago, we appealed in this forum for
hypocrisy and diplomatic formalism to be set aside. We
cannot wait any longer to act effectively and swiftly.
We have had enough imposition of criteria that reality
has revealed as ridiculous. We must stop equating an
oppressive and occupying army with a heroic people
struggling for freedom and dignity. Cuba will continue
tirelessly to denounce all these manipulations and
distortions, all these crimes and this genocide being
perpetrated before our very eyes against the Arab
peoples, in particular the Palestinian people. Cuba will
continue to denounce, with force and conviction,
violations of resolutions, of Charter precepts, of
international law and of international humanitarian law.

