The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

At the outset, we thank the penholders, Germany
and the United Kingdom, for preparing the resolution
2479 (2019), which the Council has just adopted. For its
part, Kuwait voted in favour of the resolution, granting
a four-month extension of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), because we believe that the mission has an
important role to play.

We supported the technical extension for a number
of reasons. Kuwait supports UNAMID's exit strategy,
which will continue based on the technical extension
contained in today's resolution, in particular its
paragraph 2. We have been committed to the decisions
of the consecutive Summits of the League of Arab
States since 2016, seeking to promote the Sudan's
vision for UNAMID's exit strategy. In addition, Kuwait
believes that the Sudan, a brotherly Arab State, is
capable of shouldering its primary responsibility to
protect its citizens.

We are eager to discuss several issues over the
next four months, including the identification of
choices pertaining to the Mission's exit strategy and
the adaptation of its mandate to ensure a smooth and
gradual withdrawal in support of the efforts made
by the United Nations country team in the Sudan.
Furthermore, the period given by the extension to
assess the situation in Darfur will enable us to make
ensure continued improvements there, as we have seen
this year and in previous years, and as confirmed by
the reports of the Secretary-General and the periodic
reports issued by the Secretariat.

We support the Sudan and its partners, both inside
and outside the Council, in their efforts to build lasting
peace in Darfur, create the conditions necessary for the
safe, dignified and voluntary return and stability of the
displaced, and strengthen the capacity of the Sudan to
assume its primary responsibility to protect its citizens.

We reaffirm the primacy of a political solution and
we look forward to the concerted efforts of all partners
to reach that goal, based on Council resolutions and
in cooperation with organizations seeking to achieve
security and development in Darfur and of which the
Sudan is a member, such as the United Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States. That
should be attained within the framework of respect for
the sovereignty of the Sudan and non-interference in its
domestic affairs.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.

