Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Ambassador
Van Bohemen and Ambassador Murmokaite for their
briefings. The Non-Proliferation Committee, the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee have made positive efforts in
carrying out their respective work under the leadership
of the three Ambassadors, for whom China expresses
its appreciation.

Today, the world faces severe challenges in
combating terrorism. Regional conflicts provide
the breeding ground for terrorists and extremist
organizations with new forms of terrorist tactics.
Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind. The
international community should work closely together
to crack down on it. Concerning what to do next, I
would like to emphasize the following points.

First, international counter-terrorism operations
require that the United Nations and the Security Council
fully play a leading role and adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the relevant
countries, make extensive efforts to develop consensus
among Member States and carry out coordinated and
consistent actions. Regardless of what form it takes,
when or where it occurs and whom it targets, we should
take a tough position on combating terrorism. There
should be no double standards and nor should terrorism
be seen as being linked to any specific ethnic group or
religion.

Secondly, today the international non-proliferation
process faces new and complex situations. More
non-State actors are engaging in proliferation activities.
In terms of international non-proliferation efforts, we
still have a long way to go. Faced with new challenges,
the international community should tighten control on
the source of the problem, eliminate the root causes
of such proliferation and take a balanced approach to
address security and development. Countries should
be committed to implementing resolution 1540 (2004)
in a comprehensive and balanced manner to prevent
non-State actors, especially terrorists, from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction, and countries should step
up international security. China hopes that, through
the review process, the Committee will further raise
countries' awareness to implement the resolution and
promote a more important role for the Committee in
international cooperation, assistance and other areas.

Thirdly, China has noted that the number of
foreign terrorist fighters has continued to increase in
spite of the measures to stop them. They have been
inflicting more and more harm, and their participation
has intensified regional conflicts and made it more
difficult to resolve problems. When foreign terrorist
fighters return to their own countries, they constitute a
serious threat to the security and stability of their home
countries and regions. The United Nations and the
relevant international organizations should establish
a counter-terrorism database as soon as possible to
share information resources so as to create conditions
to effectively contain the transnational flow of foreign
terrorist fighters.

Fourthly, a new task and challenge in our fight
against terrorism is the need to crack down on terrorists'
use of the Internet. The international community
should take effective measures to respond to terrorist
groups' use of the Internet to post violent audio and
video content, disseminate extremist ideas, recruit,
finance, incite, plan and carry out terrorist activities.
All countries should effectively implement the relevant
resolutions of the Council and strengthen their
regulation of the Internet. We welcome the Counter-
Terrorism Committee's plan to host a special meeting
on the subject in November. We hope that the meeting
can result in devising new ideas and measures.

Fifthly, China has consistently asserted that
the international fight against terrorism requires a
comprehensive approach aimed at eliminating root
causes while addressing the symptoms, including in
the political, security, economic, financial, information
and ideological areas. The international community,
while actively responding to new forms, developments
and trends of terrorism, should also adopt effective
measures to help regional countries advance their
socioeconomic development, appropriately address
regional conflicts and promote equal dialogue among
diverse civilizations, religions and ethnic groups, so
as to eliminate the recourses and breeding grounds for
terrorism.

China is against terrorism in any form, and it
has actively participated in international counter-
terrorism cooperation and strictly implemented the
relevant Council resolutions. In November 2014, China
held a symposium on strengthening international
cooperation to prevent and counter terrorists' use of the
Internet. In the second half of 2015, China will host a
training course for Asian countries with the focus on
resolution 1540 (2004), and it is maintaining effective
communication with the Non-Proliferation Committee
on relevant arrangements. China stands ready to work
with members of the international community and to
make a positive effort to advance international counter-
terrorism coooperation in the joint effort to maintain
world peace and security.

