Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I welcome you back
to the Council, Mr. President, for your second day
as the presiding officer. May I also welcome Foreign
Minister Trujillo Garcia to the Council, as well as a
number of his colleagues who are now our firm friends
after a very productive visit last week. I once again
thank him and his Government for inviting and hosting
the Security Council.

Wejust spoke about our visit in the previous meeting
(see S/PV.8580), but I think it was truly invaluable for
all of us to see the situation for ourselves. I believe we
have all returned with a stronger understanding as a
result. Lastly, may I thank Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing to the Council and, through him, his colleagues
on the ground for all their hard work.

We share the assessment of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2OI9/530) that now is a critical moment for
the peace process in Colombia, because almost three
years on, the Colombian peace accord continues to
set a positive example to the rest of the world. In that
light, we welcome the commitment of President Duque
Marquez and his Government to the peace process,
which he and members of his Government reaffirmed
repeatedly during the Security Council's visit last week.
We particularly welcomed President Duque's request,
in consultation with members of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun, that the Security Council
should extend the United Nations Verification Mission's
mandate by one year. We look forward to giving that
request due consideration with our Council colleagues
in the coming months.

We are pleased to see that the Truth Commission,
the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing
in the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict and
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace have all started their
work. We also welcome the Government's efforts to
clearly set out a plan for ending threats and attacks
against community leaders, social leaders and human
rights defenders. We will continue to work with the
Colombian Government as it builds on these successes
to ensure lasting peace in the country. We see three key
areas of focus for this work.

First, it is, clearly, crucial that rural reform efforts
be accelerated, as this is one of the interlocking sets
of commitments of the Final Agreement for the
Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a
Stable and Lasting Peace. That goes hand in hand with
rural development. The Government has drawn up
many promising plans for development over the past
year and has approved a number of projects, but the
Government itself says that the time has now come for
concrete action. And while we recognize the significant
political hurdles the Government faces, we fully
support President Duque's efforts to build consensus.
We hope that progress on the development plans with
a territorial focus, land ownership and registration
processes, and crop substitution initiatives can help
Colombia build confidence in its commitment to peace.
We know it will not happen overnight, but we know,
too, that the Government is committed to achieving
results soon, which we think is essential for the ongoing
peace process implementation.

Secondly, the Colombian Government should give
full political and financial support to the institutions
that work for peace. We welcome the signing of the law
governing the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, as well as
the beginning of work by the Truth Commission and
the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing. I
think it is fair to say that we had an inspiring meeting
with representatives of those three bodies. They face a
huge task, but they are hugely impressive people. But to
inspire confidence among the Colombian people, these
institutions must be well resourced and given public
support by the Government.

Thirdly, the intimidation and killing of social
leaders, community leaders and human rights
defenders continue to damage confidence in the
perceived commitment of the Government to the peace
agreement. After our visit, I think we all now recognize
the difficulties and complexities, particularly after
having seen the situation on the ground, but we believe
the Colombian Government must continue its efforts
to enforce the rule of law in rural areas, to prevent
attacks against community leaders and to bring those
responsible to justice. In many regions of Colombia,
insecurity is increasing the risk that citizens might lose
faith in the State's ability to provide safety. The risk is
not only to this peace process, but to future ones as well.

Let me take this opportunity again to commend our
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
un Verification Mission in Colombia for their valuable
work, where they have a crucial role in supporting the
Government in its work to build lasting and sustaining
peace. Let me once again welcome the Government's
plans, activities, commitment and achievements to date.

Many times during our visit, we affirmed how
important it is that the inclusive Colombian peace
process is being supported by all sections of Colombian
society. The Colombian peace process is a bright spot
on the Council's agenda and a shining example to the
world. I thank all Colombians for their determination to
ensure a sustained peace.

