Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation will abstain on the draft
resolution before us.
We deeply deplore the unfortunate assassination
of Mr. Hariri, former Prime Minister of Lebanon.
China has consistently supported the fair and
independent investigation of the case by the United
Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission. We understand and support the request of
all Lebanese parties for the establishment a special
tribunal. We hope that that initiative will help to
establish the truth as soon as possible, hold the
perpetrators accountable and ensure justice for the
victims.

China notes the political consensus among all
Lebanese parties on the establishment of the Special
Tribunal, as well as the divergence of views regarding
procedural matters. We hope that political and
diplomatic efforts will assist the parties in reaching a
consensus as soon as possible. Only a special tribunal
that enjoys universal support among all Lebanese
factions can genuinely play a role in contributing to the
achievement of justice and the maintenance of peace
and stability in Lebanon. The point of departure and
the focus of Security Council assistance should be to
help to resolve real problems without further
complicating an already very complex problem.

The establishment of the Special Tribunal is, in
essence, Lebanon's own internal affair. Lebanon's
domestic laws provide the legal basis for the operation.
It is therefore only reasonable that Lebanon should, in
accordance with its constitutional procedures, complete
the domestic legal process required for the entry into
force of the agreement. That is explicitly provided for
in the agreement between United Nations and Lebanon
on the establishment of the Tribunal. As a result of the
special circumstances prevailing in Lebanon, that
process has encountered major difficulties, which is a
cause of great concern for us.

China believes that by invoking Chapter VII of
the Charter, the resolution will override Lebanon's
legislative organs by arbitrarily deciding on the date of
the entry into force of the draft statute. This move will
give rise to a series of political and legal problems that
are likely to add to the uncertainty surrounding the
already turbulent political and security situation in
Lebanon and create a precedent of Security Council
interference in the domestic affairs and legislative
independence of a sovereign State. Such actions are
likely to undermine the authority of the Council, as
they are not in conformity with the long-term interests
of either of the parties.
During the course of deliberations on the draft
resolution before us, China, together with other
members of the Council, expressed the hope that the
sponsors would listen attentively and respond to our
concerns by further revising the draft so as to make it
more balanced and prudent. Regrettably, however, our
recommendations were not adopted. That being the
case, China will have no choice but to abstain.

The situation in the Middle East is extremely
complex and convoluted. Various factors are
interlinked, and one drop in a pool of water has a big
ripple effect. It is our hope that at this difficult moment
the Lebanese people will stand united in maintaining
the security and stability of the nation and promoting
the process of national reconciliation. It is essential
that the Security Council, while addressing related
issues, take fully into account the unique and complex
situation in the Middle East and refrain from triggering
new tensions or turbulence in the region.

