The President: Thank you very much,
Mr. Holmes, for your briefing. It has been extremely
helpful that you have been here for as much of today as
you could have been. Thank you as well for the time
you have taken to respond to many of the comments
that have been made during the course of the debate.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full and effective
implementation of its resolutions on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and
recalls previous statements on the issue made by
its President.

"The Security Council remains committed
to addressing the impact of armed conflict on
civilians. The Council expresses its deepest
concern that civilians continue to account for the
majority of victims of acts of violence committed
by parties to armed conflicts, including as a result
of deliberate targeting, indiscriminate and
excessive use of force and of sexual and gender
based violence. The Security Council condemns
all violations of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, committed against civilians in
situations of armed conflict. The Council
demands that all relevant parties immediately put
an end to such practices. The Council reaffirms in
this regard that parties to armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to
ensure the protection of affected civilians, in
particular giving attention to the specific needs of
women and children.

"The Security Council re-emphasizes the
responsibility of States to comply with their
relevant obligations to end impunity and to
prosecute those responsible for war crimes,
genocide, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of safe and unhindered access of
humanitarian personnel to provide assistance to
civilians in armed conflict in accordance with
international law and stresses the importance,
within the framework of humanitarian assistance,
of upholding and respecting the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence.

"The Security Council recognizes the
increasingly valuable role that regional
organizations and other intergovernmental
institutions play in the protection of civilians, and
the

encourages the Secretary-General and the heads
of regional and other intergovernmental
organizations to continue their efforts to
strengthen their partnership in this regard.

"The Security Council takes note of the
Secretary-General's report of 28 October 2007
(S/2007/643) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and requests the Secretary-
General to submit his next report on this subject
by May 2009. The Security Council invites the
Secretary-General to provide an update in that
report on the implementation of protection
mandates in United Nations missions as
mandated by the Security Council. The Council
encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
include such updates on the protection of
civilians in his regular reporting on United
Nations missions."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/18.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.05 pm.
