Mr. Aboul Atta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, my delegation is pleased to see you
preside over the Security Council for this month, in
particular at this meeting. We are proud of you and the
delegation of Algeria for the skilful and able manner in
which you are managing the work of the Council this
month.

There is no doubt that the Security Council, in
continuing to address the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, reflects the recognition by
the United Nations that the performance of the
international community in this area still needs more
commitment, political will and diligent collective
effort.

The discussion of this issue this year coincides
with the issuance of the report of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change relating to
international peace and security and methods of
reform. The report deals with the issue of the
protection of civilians from the perspective of United
Nations humanitarian operations in areas of conflict as
one of the cornerstones of the role of the United
Nations within the framework of collective security.
My delegation would like to deal with some of the
factors that, in our view, show the importance of this
issue.

First, during the past few years, the Security
Council defined, in many of its resolutions and
presidential statements, the factors related to, and the
requirements for dealing with, the protection of
civilians in accordance with the provisions of
international law, humanitarian international law and
the principles of the United Nations Charter. Yet we
note that the hotbeds of armed conflict in the world
today are cause for concern, owing to the increase in
the number of crimes and violations of civilians' rights,
in the number of displaced persons, in acts of
destruction and in the plundering of natural resources
and cultural heritage. This reflects the continued
failure of the international community to effectively
and decisively confront violations that have been
banned under international humanitarian law. The mass
media have conveyed the suffering of civilians in
Palestine, in Iraq, in Darfur in the Sudan, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Somalia, in
Burundi and in Guinea-Bissau, among other States and
regions. These regions have all witnessed waves of
violence to which the international community has not
responded in a manner commensurate with the human
suffering caused by those conflicts or by harsh natural
phenomena. Therefore, the most serious problem today
is the lack of collective international determination and
will manifested by the United Nations in dealing with
the parts of the world affected most seriously by armed
conflicts and the implications of this for civilian life.
My delegation would like to say that the media
emphasis on the human tragedy in Darfur was not
commensurate with the repeated calls by the United
Nations to provide emergency humanitarian assistance
to hundreds of thousands of the victims. We maintain
that humanitarian concerns should take precedence
over political expediency in dealing with the protection
of civilians.

Secondly, we recognize the improvements and
developments in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, expanding the scope of their mandates to
include multiple aspects, including the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, by safeguarding the access
of humanitarian assistance to the majority of them, and
the deployment of the civilian components in such
operations. However, we must admit that the
procedures for the establishment and deployment of
personnel in these operations have seen varying levels
of commitment and dedication, depending on the
situation. The Council should, therefore, give adequate
attention to formulating a detailed vision for
implementing the ten points submitted by the
Secretary-General. These ten points should be the key
factors used by the international community in dealing
with the humanitarian crisis in all regions afflicted by
such tragedies. This would constitute only the
beginning of efforts to redress the shortcomings of the
international community's approach to dealing with the
threats to international peace and security and to
providing real protection to civilians in areas under
foreign occupation or in armed conflict situations.

Thirdly, it is important to recognize that the
concept of protecting civilians in armed conflicts does
not end with the cessation of military operations; it
continues after the war, and includes all humanitarian,
development and social aspects related to rehabilitation
and reconstruction. Armed conflicts affect social and
economic infrastructures, and this constitutes a grave
threat to the lives and future of civilians, since peace
itself, in its political and security aspects, is threatened,
if its not supported by comprehensive and focused
programmes and development plans. In this context,
Egypt intends to subscribe fully to the proposals
contained in the report of the High-level Panel,
including the proposals regarding the coordination and
financing of such programmes by the United Nations
and by the donors community.

Fourthly, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict should not occur at the expense of the
principles of the United Nations Charter, which
emphasizes the principles of political independence
and the sovereignty of countries, as well as their
responsibilities towards their populations and authority
over their territory. This balance between the
protection of civilians and sovereignty is indeed
necessary in order to protect the structure of the
international order and to avoid using humanitarian
suffering for political or ideological objectives with
resulting chaos and increased tragedies. In this regard,
the international community, in dealing with the issue
of the protection of civilians, should abide by the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and the provisions of international law, principles that
should be the basis for any development of the concept
of collective security.

