Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having proposed the theme "No exit without
strategy" for discussion today. The participation of
States non-members of the Council is likely to enhance
this debate.

The consideration of this issue comes in the
context of a major debate unfolding within the United
Nations following the issuance of the Brahimi report.
That report, based on lessons drawn from past
experience, serves as a point of reference in the search
for ways to strengthen the capability of the United
Nations in the realm of peacekeeping operations. Just
two days ago, the Security Council adopted resolution
1327 (2000), annexed to which is an important
document that is the product of in-depth consideration
within the Council, and it is this body's contribution to
collective efforts in this realm.

One of the major issues that arises is that of
finding out whether emphasis should be placed on an
exit strategy for a peacekeeping operation as an end in
itself or whether priority should be given to a long-
term solution to any given conflict. Obviously, the
Security Council's major goal must be to achieve peace
and stability on solid underpinnings that guarantee the
sustainability of that peace and prevent the renewed
outbreak of a conflict. This shows just how important it
is to have the conditions for a successful operation in
place right from the very first planning phases to the
implementation phase and to the exit phase. In fact,
successful exit must cap a process supported by all the
actors concerned, starting from the very conception of
an operation.

First, we would like to reaffirm the importance
we attach to rigorous respect for the purposes and
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter on
the part of peacekeeping operations, for the sake of the
legitimacy of such operations. In our view, the
following elements might constitute the parameters for
an approach designed to ensure the success of a United
Nations commitment. First of all, in cases where the
parties envisage calling on the United Nations to
deploy a peacekeeping operation, it would be
appropriate for the United Nations to give its assistance
to the parties during peace negotiations. The point is
certainly to help the parties to work out the best
possible peace agreement and to prepare for the
operation being envisaged. It is also important for the
Security Council to persevere in its commitment to a
mission until its end. Such a commitment should not be
affected by the complexity of a given conflict or
difficulties that crop up along the way, so long as the
parties show that they are committed to peace. They
must prove this through deeds and keep intact their
commitment to a peaceful settlement.

Moreover, it is important to endow peacekeeping
operations with a clear-cut and realistic mandate and
objective, while ensuring that they have the resources
they need for their swift and effective deployment. The
Council must have information that is as complete and
precise as possible in order to allow it to evaluate the
situation and to take the appropriate decisions
regarding the evolution of a given operation, including
possible adjustments to the mandate if necessary.

The troop-contributing countries play an essential
role in the implementation on the ground of
peacekeeping operation mandates decided upon by the
Security Council. Close and meaningful consultations
are likely to raise the chances for success of these
operations. The Council has already agreed to
strengthen the machinery in place for consultations
between the Council and the troop-contributing
countries. We welcome that decision; it is a step in the
right direction.

Before disengaging from a mission, the United
Nations must see to it that the objective it has set has
been attained. If we are talking about a conflict
between States, the Organization must make sure that
the causes of the conflict and the tensions it fuels have
disappeared, and that the conditions for peace and
stability, and thus for the foundations of normal
relations among the States involved, have been
established. To consolidate these gains, the Council
could encourage confidence-building measures. In the
case of a domestic conflict, it would be appropriate to
adopt an across-the-board strategy designed to
consolidate the underpinnings of peace and stability
and to make them last.

To sum up, we must deal with the root causes of a
conflict to prevent its resurgence. We feel that a
sustained commitment must be brought to bear in
dealing with the root causes of conflicts in the light of
the specificity of each situation. This requires a
comprehensive and coordinated approach to which the
United Nations bodies will contribute, in accordance
with their own competencies and it must be supported
by the parties concerned.

Populations should have the opportunity to enjoy
the dividends of peace and to experience their tangible
benefits in their daily lives. It is true that post-conflict
reconstruction and peace-building cannot succeed
without the support of society, to the full development
of which contribute such important and varied factors
as the building of a State of law and the promotion of
human rights in their broadest sense, including
political, economic, social and cultural rights and the
right to development.

We are convinced that peace and development are
intimately linked. Thus, a more sustained commitment
of the international community to reducing poverty
throughout the world and to promoting sustainable
development is both a step towards conflict prevention
and a contribution to peace-building.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that the success
of United Nations involvement requires the adoption of
a comprehensive, integrated and coordinated strategy
whose guidelines and objectives are clear and which
ensures an orderly and harmonious management of the
various phases of a peacekeeping operation, from its
conception to the completion of its implementation.

