Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): It gives me special
pleasure, Mr. President, to take part in this meeting under
your leadership. It is by coincidence that I had the honour
today to transmit to the Permanent Mission of Costa Rica
to the United Nations my foreign ministry's agreement to
the appointment of the first Ambassador of Costa Rica to
Ukraine.

Looking at the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
after more than six years of United Nations involvement
and two years after the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina was signed, the
international community can feel some sort of relief and
cautious optimism concerning the future of that country.
Despite the problems and the persistent difficulties on the
road towards the establishment of a democratic, multiethnic
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we cannot deny the
remarkable progress that has been made.

There is no doubt that it has been achieved thanks in
the first place to the efforts of the parties to the Peace
Agreement. However, the process could have been much
more difficult had it not been facilitated by the continuous
assistance of the international community. It is also true
that, despite signs of overall improvement, the present
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as that in the
whole region, will continue to require agile efforts.

The Peace Implementation Conference held at Bonn
earlier this month demonstrated once again the existence of
a strong international commitment to the process of
reconciliation and nation-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The international community must concentrate on
preventing the political development of the country from
moving in a direction contrary to the Peace Agreement. In
this regard we should remove the temptation to use military
force and the fear that the latter will be used. Ukraine
shares the view that the Stabilization Force (SFOR)
authorized by Security Council resolution 1088 (1996)
continues to be an important element in securing the first
outcomes of the ongoing process of reconciliation and
State-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in
contributing to the stabilization of the situation in the
Balkans.

We believe that the continued military presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina should not be limited by specific
time limits, but should be measured by the progress in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. This presence
can only ensure the concentration on the political,
economic and social issues and challenges that is so
desperately required.

Therefore, my delegation fully supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which includes the International
Police Task Force (IPTF), to pursue the work entrusted to
it in accordance with annex 11 of the Peace Agreement.
With this in mind, my country stands ready to extend its
participation in a feasible post-SFOR operation to be
mandated by the Security Council beyond June 1998.

The delegation of Ukraine is convinced that the role
of the United Nations in the process of reconciliation and
civilian consolidation in Bosnia remains indispensable. At
the same time, inasmuch as further success in
implementing the Peace Agreement depends largely on
the fulfilment of its civilian aspects, the United Nations
role in the solution of the humanitarian problems should
be increased. In our view, the issues of demining,
economic reconstruction, human rights, the return of
refugees and law enforcement are of special importance.
The proper coordination of humanitarian efforts between
the United Nations bodies in the field and all other
international structures involved, including the Office of
the High Representative, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, non-governmental
organizations and others, as well as between SFOR and
the IPTF, will be extremely helpful to that end. As no
agency has the lead in the field of human rights, further
coordination among the various organizations dealing with
different aspects of this problem is also necessary.

Demining still represents one of the serious obstacles
hampering the effective implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Agreement. There is no doubt that the
solution of this problem would substantially contribute to
the return of refugees, increased freedom of movement
and the economic reconstruction of the whole country.

 

As one of the contributors of personnel to the IPTF,
Ukraine notes with satisfaction that the Force has become
more assertive in focusing on enhancing freedom of
movement, police training and protection of human rights.
A high level of cooperation between the IPTF and SFOR
on the ground has proved to be very effective and should
thus be further developed.

The progress reached under IPTF guidance in police
reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina is also remarkable and
commendable. At the same time, we are of the view that
the multifaceted process of implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Dayton accords, in particular police reform
in the Federation and the Republika Srpska, should acquire
a more integrated character. Future progress cannot be
achieved in one sphere without being complemented by
relevant measures in another. We therefore share the view
that police reform in Bosnia necessitates adequate changes
in the country's whole judicial and penal systems.

It will be difficult to achieve final success in the peace
process in Bosnia unless the process is supported by
effective economic reconstruction in the country with the
continued assistance of the international donor community.
Top priority should be given to projects aimed at promoting
economic cooperation between the Federation and the
Republika Srpska, as well as within the Federation itself.
Both multiethnic entities and the three constituent peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, along with all other peoples
residing in the country, should equally enjoy the advantages
of economic recovery, including international financial aid.

In this context, I should like to stress that all these
practical measures aimed at improving everyday life should
be guided by the need to build confidence and mutual trust
among the multi-ethnic entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

However, the primary responsibility for building a
viable democratic society as well as lasting peace and
reconciliation lies with the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This will become a reality only with the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement by the parties
themselves, since it is up to them alone to define the
destiny of the country.

Finally, my delegation would like to join previous
speakers in paying special tribute to those who have
tragically lost their lives in the name of peace and a better
life for the Bosnian people. I should like also to take this
opportunity to confirm Ukraine's steadfast commitment to
the cause of peace in Bosnia in the pursuit of a secure and
prosperous future for that country and in the Balkans as a

whole, which, hopefully, has come closer during the past
year.

