Mr. Bellemare: It is my honour to present to the
Council today the eleventh report of the International
Independent Investigation Commission. As requested,
it outlines the progress made in the investigation of the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri
and other attacks that fall within the mandate of the
Commission since my last report to the Security
Council on 28 March 2008.

Public confidence is essential to the credibility of
any investigative or judicial process. The public, be it
the people of Lebanon or the international community,
must believe in the process that has been set up to find
the truth, to achieve justice and, eventually, to put an
end to impunity. The public must believe that the
Commission is professional, that it operates according
to the highest international standards, and that the
process it follows is objective, neutral and impartial.
Understandably, emotions are high, but there is no
room for emotion or sentiment in this fact-driven
process. While there is anxiety and impatience, the
process must be allowed to follow its course. And,
more important, while the process may have political
fallout, it must not be influenced by politics. The
paradox is that the elements that make the process
credible are the very same that make it frustrating for
observers.

While the creation of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon may at the outset have been a political
decision, the response that it is expected to provide
will be a legal response, not a political one. Indeed,
once created, the Tribunal will be expected to act
independently, according to rules of procedure and
evidence based on recognized principles of
international law. It should not be allowed to be
politicized. In that regard, during a recent interview
with the Al-Arabiya television station, the Minister of
Justice of Lebanon, Mr. Ibrahim Najjar, reminded
viewers that the Tribunal cannot and should not be
used as a political tool.

There is some confusion about the Tribunal and
what will happen after 1 March. Much of that
confusion results, in my view, from the terminology.
08-6561]
For many people, the word "tribunal" equates with
"trial". It is therefore not surprising that, when the
Secretary-General announced that the Tribunal was
fully on track to start functioning on 1 March 2009,
people immediately thought that this meant that
indictments would be filed and that a trial would start
soon thereafter.

At this point, it might be useful to clarify the
process. A good way to try to remove this confusion is
probably to explain my future role as Prosecutor.

As Prosecutor of the Tribunal, I was given two
distinct responsibilities: first, the responsibility to
investigate, and secondly, the responsibility to
prosecute. Accordingly, those who established the
Tribunal in 2007 foresaw that there would be two
successive phases in the process before the Tribunal:
an investigation and eventually, a prosecution. Of
course, the second phase cannot begin before the first
one is completed. Thus, when I become Prosecutor, it
should not be surprising to see me continue as an
investigator. This is the very nature of the process. The
investigation continues.

Fast-food justice is not on the menu. And let me
be clear: There will be no indictment of convenience.
The fact that it was contemplated all along that the
Prosecutor would continue his investigation after the
creation of the Tribunal provides a useful context to the
decision of the Secretary-General to announce the start
of the Tribunal. Indeed, he has determined that, in light
of all the circumstances, the time had come for the
investigation to move to its international phase, and
that the time had come for the Prosecutor to take on the
lead from the Lebanese authorities in the Hariri
investigation. The Prime Minister of Lebanon has
confirmed that Lebanon - for which, and at the
request of which the international Tribunal was
established - is content with this commencement date.

Progress has been made in the investigation since
my last report. Let me summarize what I can say
publicly about this progress.

In relation to the Hariri investigation, I stated
before that we had gathered evidence establishing that
a network of individuals acted in concert to carry out
the assassination. Since then, the Commission has
identified new information that may allow us to link
additional individuals with the network. Progress has
also been made in relation to identifying the
geographical origin of the suicide bomber in the Hariri
08-6561]
case and extensive work has been concluded in relation
to our inventory of exhibits.

In relation to the other attacks, there have been
two main developments. First, the Commission has
found additional elements to corroborate the links
already found between the Hariri case and some of the
other attacks. The second development is that the
Commission has found elements to link one additional
attack to the Hariri case.

I know that people want to have more details.
They want to know the exact nature of the progress
achieved; they want to know what the Commission has
discovered so far and what leads are currently being
pursued. I have said as much as I can, responsibly. It
must be remembered that lives are at risk. I will not
argue my case in the media or in public, and I know
that that is not what is expected of me. When I am
ready, I will present my case to a judge who will
decide whether I have sufficient evidence to proceed
with indictments.

Unfortunately, I cannot predict when the
investigation will be completed. While I can direct the
pace of the investigation, I cannot dictate its progress.
As much as I would like to, I cannot predict when all
the various elements of evidence required to support an
indictment will be discovered, nor can I predict when
individuals who have more information relevant to the
investigation, or who know what happened, will step
forward. Accepting this uncertainty, we must continue
to be determined and resolute. We must stay the course
on all the cases within the Commission's mandate.

As the Council knows, at the end of last month,
the Secretary-General announced that the Tribunal was
fully on track to commence functioning on 1 March
2009. The mandate of the Commission is set to expire
on 31 December of this year, but I have sought a two-
month extension to allow the Commission to continue
to function until the day the Tribunal starts its
operation.

This extension would serve two objectives. First,
it would allow the momentum of the investigation to be
maintained. Rather than have a two-month gap between
the end of the Commission's activities and the start of
the Tribunal's, the investigation could continue as
seamlessly as possible from one institution to the other.

Secondly, the extension would also provide a
period of time in which the Commission could
3
gradually transfer its investigative operations from a
Beirut base to a base in The Hague, several thousand
kilometres away. This is not something that can happen
overnight. Such a move has to be planned and well-
orchestrated. While the investigation continues, staff
members have to be transferred and new ones have to
be hired. In coordination with the Registry, the
infrastructure must be made ready to receive staff
members, their offices need to be furnished and
systems must be made operational.

Transition is a process - a process that requires
a large degree of coordination with the Registrar and
his staff and that must be supported by complex and
elaborate logistics. It should therefore not be surprising
that a transition period to achieve this move in an
orderly fashion.

This is why I am requesting that the mandate of
the Commission be extended for two months until
28 February 2009. During this period, the Commission
will continue to operate in Beirut while its staff and
assets are progressively moved to The Hague. By the
date set by the Secretary-General, staff, including
myself, will be fully installed and operational.

I cannot conclude my presentation without
referring to the situation of the detainees in the Hariri
case. This is an issue that is of interest to many, and
rightly so. I can assure the Council that this is an issue
that is also important to me.

As I mentioned in my report, the Commission has
continued to share with the Lebanese authorities all the
information required to allow them to make a decision
on the detainees. Moreover, the detention has been
discussed with the Lebanese judicial authorities, with
whom I have shared my views.

Again, I can only reiterate, as the Minister of
Justice of Lebanon forcefully did during a recent
television interview, that the Commission gives
information to the Lebanese judicial authorities, but
that the power of the judicial authorities is absolute on
these matters. If transferred to The Hague, the
detainees will then be in a position to seek new
remedies before the Tribunal. Meanwhile, as Minister
Najjar said, no one gives orders to the Lebanese
judiciary.

Having addressed the progress of the
investigation and the timing of eventual indictments,
one question remains, and this question is on
everyone's mind. Is there a case or will there ever be a
case? To put it differently, can this case be solved?

There is no such thing as a perfect crime, and the
process that I am involved in supports this assumption.
This investigation is probably one of the most difficult
in recent times. Nobody can give guarantees, nor
should we expect any. There are too many variables.

So, can this case be solved? While no one ever
said it would be easy, my answer to this question is
unequivocal: yes, this case can be solved. As we all
know, the investigative process is long and, at times,
fastidious. Accordingly, donor countries are entitled to
ask the question: Is it worth continuing? Once again,
my answer is unequivocal: absolutely!

The investigation at the Tribunal must indeed
continue in all the cases within the Commission's
current mandate so that I, as Prosecutor, can establish
which ones are connected to the Hariri case in the
manner required by the Tribunal's statute.

While progress has been made, more must be
done. As well-intentioned and committed as it is, the
Commission cannot do that alone; it needs help -
information, resources and expertise. Let me say this
one more time: Member States that can help must share
the responsibility in the investigation; they have an
obligation to help the investigation.

With the members of my team, I am committed to
this process. The search for the truth is a process that is
well worth pursuing. The day when I no longer believe
that we can make progress, I will say so. However, in
the meantime, What I said to my team on my first day
on the job continues to be very much applicable: I did
not come out of retirement to be associated with a
failure.

