Ms. Hunt: On behalf of my colleagues on the
Steering Committee of the Watchlist on Children and
Armed Conflict and the hundreds of members of our
network around the world, I thank the Government of
Viet Nam for hosting today's open debate and for
offering this opportunity to civil society representatives
to brief the Security Council. Welcome to New York,
Sir.

I also wish to express our appreciation for the
significant time and effort that all members of the
Security Council have dedicated to implementing the
Council's own groundbreaking mandates, including its
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1460 (2003), 1530 (2004),
1612 (2005) and, recently, 1820 (2008). Think of the
ordinary people we know in war-ravaged villages who
really do look to the Council to exercise its power to
achieve real improvements for their girls and boys
thousands of miles from this Chamber.

The Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict is
a coalition of non-governmental organizations that
brings together the resources of both operational
humanitarian and human rights agencies. Five and a
half years ago, the Watchlist first appeared before the
Security Council in an Arria formula briefing to
reiterate the call by Mrs. Graca Machel - in her
landmark survey on the effects of armed conflict,
already mentioned today - to make children and
armed conflict a matter of international peace and
security and to create a United Nations-led monitoring
and reporting system to protect children caught up in
W ar.

Since then, as previous speakers have outlined,
the Security Council's leadership on children in armed
conflict has made significant progress. Thanks to the
country-level task forces mandated under resolution
1612 (2005), the consolidation of efforts carried out
under United Nations country teams, peacekeeping
operations and the Peacebuilding Commission
demonstrates the Organization's enormous potential to
prevent egregious violations, to respond to them
quickly and to end impunity for their assailants.

However, given those successes and the Security
Council's potential to totally change the lives of
children in the most dangerous circumstances, there is
no time to lose. The Council must maintain its
momentum and enable the groundbreaking Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict to carry out the
mandate that the Council has given it. That means, first
and foremost, overcoming the delays and deadlocks
that have impeded the formulation of conclusions for
specific reports and making use of the range of tools in
the Working Group's innovative "tool kit".

Equally crucial in countries emerging from
decades of violence and destruction, it means ensuring
that programmes for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) of children are executed in a
timely manner and are sufficiently resourced over the
necessary long term so that girls and boys can enjoy
their basic rights to life, health and education in their
community's painful transition from bloodshed to
development.

When the Security Council became seized of the
plight of children and armed conflict, it was at a time
when hideous images of boys and girls slung with
bandoliers and Kalashnikov rifles, of civilians with
hacked-off limbs and of sexual savagery shocked the
human spirit, as they continue to do. Since then, the
monitoring and reporting system mandated by the
Council under resolution 1612 (2005) has made
considerable advances, which the Watchlist
documented in a study of four countries, released
before last February's open debate. The Council's
recent resolution 1820 (2008), as mentioned by
previous speakers, gives added hope for more robust
action to stop the rampage of sexual violence in armed
conflict and to provide desperately needed protection
and services to children and women.
Our statement is a call to action urging all those
present here, representatives of other States Members

of the United Nations, regional bodies, civil society
and national Governments to respond with the
resources and remedies needed to ensure that their
historic commitments to children and to international
peace and security do not lapse into vacant cliches. To
that end, we urge the Council to act without delay on
the following five priorities.

First, it is necessary to demand accountability
from perpetrators by imposing targeted measures when
warranted.

Secondly, the Council should call on its Working
Group to continue to review reports of violations, to
complete effective conclusions in a timely manner, to
make practical recommendations for action and to
utilize all the tools at its disposal.

Thirdly, we urge the Council to support the
system-wide strengthening of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and, as others have urged, to
expand the scope of the mechanism to include sexual
violence as a trigger for activating it.

Fourthly, it is also essential that donors
adequately resource DDR programmes for children,
with an emphasis on the necessary long-term,
community-based reintegration programmes, as
precisely described by Special Representative
Coomaraswamy.

Finally, looking towards the coming year, we ask
the Council to reaffirm its readiness to build upon the
provisions of resolution 1612 (2005) with a view to
increasing the efficiency of the resolution's key aspects
through a new resolution on children and armed
conflict in 2009.

As with all matters of peace and security, but
especially those concerning the most vulnerable
populations, we urge the Security Council to maintain
its vigilance and overcome obstacles - usually
political - that block full implementation of its
resolutions. Resolution 1612 (2005), together with its
related body of law, has set global standards and,
indeed, has made a global promise. It is a promise we
urge the Council to keep.

