Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2433
(2018), which is a strong signal of our collective support
for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), whose role is crucial to safeguarding peace
in an extremely troubled regional context. As penholder
and as is the case every year, France worked to preserve
this Security Council unity.

I wish to recall in the first place the significant
efforts undertaken by UNIFIL and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to implement resolution 2373
(2017), adopted last year. We wanted to continue those
efforts by improving and clarifying UNIFIL's tasks.
This new resolution also recalls the measures to be
taken by Member States to prevent the sale or supply of
weapons or materials not authorized by the Government
of Lebanon or UNIFIL. But the mandate of the Force,
its tasks and capabilities are preserved, and the balance
between all the concerns formulated is maintained.

As we often repeat, UNIFIL is a regional public
good. It is an essential element of stability in an area
marred by crises. It fulfils its tasks in a demanding
environment, monitoring the cessation of hostilities
around the Blue Line and preventing any risk of
escalation, including through the Tripartite Mechanism.
The mission's essential deterrent action is at the heart
of its mandate. Moreover, the requirement to guarantee
the freedom of movement of UNIFIL is strongly
recalled in this new text. For us, that is an essential
part of the Force's mandate to which we must remain
vigilant, as we saw in the 4 August incident.

UNIFIL's work also supports the strengthening
of the Lebanese Armed Forces and their deployment
throughout the territory, in order to enable the Lebanese
State to fully exercise its authority and sovereignty.
Only the presence of the Lebanese State and its armed
and security forces, in accordance with resolution 1701
(2006), will create the conditions for lasting stability in
southern Lebanon and in Lebanese territorial waters.
It is with that purpose in mind that we approached
this renewal, in particular with regard to the maritime
component of Force, whose missions are intended,
when the time comes and gradually, to be provided by
the Lebanese Navy. That is also the goal pursued with
the standing up of the model regiment, which UNIFIL
will continue to support.

In that context, and in order to face up to these
serious challenges, it is obviously necessary that a
Government be rapidly formed in Lebanon. That is also
reflected in this resolution.

It was essential to reaffirm the unanimous support
of the Council for UNIFIL, which we have done today.
Protecting the UNIFIL mandate and its neutrality is to
contribute to the stability of Lebanon, at a time when
its political balances are fragile, and to safeguard peace
along the Blue Line.
