I thank the High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. Progress on this file is indeed hard to achieve. The eighty-fifth monthly report of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) states yet again that there are still outstanding issues relating to Syria's chemical weapons declaration. The OPCW Technical Secretariat's assessment is clear: the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic still cannot be considered accurate and complete, in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention, the respective OPCW Executive Council decision and resolution 2118 (2013). As we have stressed before, this is not just a technical or theoretical issue, but rather indicates that Syria has not declared and destroyed all of its chemical weapons and their production facilities and continues to pose a threat to international peace and security. Moreover, we learn from the Director General's monthly report that the Syrian Arab Republic failed to complete the measures contained in the Executive Council's 9 July decision within the set timeline. We also understand that there was no effort whatsoever to cooperate with the OPCW or even respond to its offer of assistance. A complete lack of cooperation with the OPCW must have consequences, and that must be addressed through appropriate action at the OPCW Conference of State Parties at the end of this month. As to the work of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM), we note the recent reports regarding incidents in Saraqib and Aleppo. We acknowledge the professional and thorough investigations done by the FFM and _ their evidence-based results. We remain highly concerned about impunity. It is imperative to ensure accountability and end impunity for each and every use of chemical weapons. We owe it to the victims to bring the perpetrators of these abhorrent crimes to justice. Accountability is equally instrumental for sustaining the global norm against the use of chemical weapons. Let us face it - the global prohibition of chemical weapons is under threat. In recent years, we have witnessed the appalling use of chemical weapons in several places. On 6 October, the OPCW confirmed that the substance that was used to poison Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny was a chemical nerve agent of the Novichok group. We reiterate our call for Russia to investigate the crime thoroughly and in full transparency, bearing in mind Russia's commitments under the Chemical Weapons Convention. The international community should not tolerate the use of chemical weapons and the concomitant threats it poses to international peace and security. In that regard, Estonia supports the European Union autonomous sanctions regime specifically designed to fight the proliferation of chemical weapons. We hope the Security Council does not remain silent and instead addresses the non-compliance with its resolutions.
