Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): May I commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this open meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Afghanistan,
thereby allowing the larger membership of the
Organization to express their views on this important
subject.

Malaysia follows with keen interest developments
in Afghanistan as it embarks on the urgent business of
political, social and economic reconstruction. We
appreciate the Secretary-General's report and the
comprehensive briefing given by Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative on the situation. We join others in
paying tribute to Ambassador Brahimi and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for their outstanding work.

We hope that, with the help of the international
community, the long-suffering people of Afghanistan
will move away from the circumstances of the past and
the ills that had plagued them, such as warlordism,
terrorism and drug cultivation and trafficking, in
addition to poverty and other forms of deprivation. The
prospects for a permanent peace, which were once
elusive, are now no longer remote. They are
contingent, of course, on the political will of the people
of Afghanistan and the continued and sustained support
of the international community.

On the security front, we note the continuing
military operations against remnants of the Taliban and
Al Qaeda, which have greatly reduced the threat posed
by them. However, we are saddened by, and regret very
much, the deaths of innocent civilians in a few of these
operations. We hope that every effort will be made to
avoid such accidents in the future.

On the political front, we are gratified that
Afghans, aided by the international community, have
taken an important, and indeed critical, step in the
political rehabilitation of their war-torn country with
the convening of the Loya Jirga, or grand council, a
traditional political mechanism that served Afghans
well in the past and that is now being put to use to
resolve their decades-long conflict. We commend them
for their wisdom and success in utilizing this important
traditional institution to lay the foundation of national
unity, even as they strive to build new and modern ones
in the construction of the new Afghanistan.

My delegation offers its sincere congratulations
to President Hamid Karzai on his recent election as
head of the transitional Government of Afghanistan.
We wish him every success. His election, with the
overwhelming support of the people of Afghanistan
that went beyond his own ethnic group, and the
mandate that goes with it reflect the confidence of his
people in his leadership and vision. We hope that,
notwithstanding the tragic assassination of Vice-
President Haji Abdul Qadir, which we condemn and
deeply regret, under President Karzai's inspired
leadership, Afghanistan will move steadily ahead, away
from the precipice of becoming a failed State to the
threshold of becoming a viable, progressive and
democratic Islamic State. However, much will depend
on the Afghans themselves, even more than the
sustained support of the international community.

In that regard, we hope that the recently
concluded Loya Jirga will begin the process of
empowering the people of Afghanistan by putting the
country's future in their own hands. They clearly
demonstrated their new-found will and resolve to
decide their country's destiny when they overcame the
many difficulties, intimidation and coercion and other
impediments that had been put in their way by those
who wanted to derail the process, and ensured the
successful convening of that all-important Loya Jirga,
with the participation of their former King, whose
positive role is well acknowledged. The people of
Afghanistan and their leaders who took part in the
Loya Jirga must be commended for their patriotism,
faith in themselves and preparedness to put aside
personal and group interests in the larger interests of
the Afghan nation. The seeds of national unity that
have been planted must be carefully nurtured in the
coming months and years.

Despite the hopeful political outlook emanating
from the Loya Jirga process, which augurs well for
national reconciliation and stability, my delegation
shares the concern of many others about the security
situation in the country beyond the capital city of
Kabul. This is one of the major concerns of President
Karzai as he goes about the difficult task of asserting
the authority of the central Government in the
provinces, which are still very much under the sway of
independent-minded and even wayward provincial
Chieftains.

The role of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), which has brought about a visibly
improved security environment in Kabul, ought to be
extended to the other cities so that they too will benefit
from improved security. The Secretary-General has
highlighted in his report the many formidable tasks that
lie ahead, as well as the prevailing situation of
insecurity across the country, and has continued to
strongly advocate a limited expansion of ISAF beyond
Kabul. We hope the Council will heed the call made by
President Karzai, Secretary-General Kofi Annan and
Ambassador Brahimi and will seriously consider this
pressing issue of security, along with the other equally
pressing issues, if the gains that have been achieved so
far are to be preserved and built upon. As we respect
their judgement, we should respond positively to their
recommendation on ISAF, especially when we
recognize the continuing threats to Afghanistan's
security.

Of course, international support for an expanded
ISAF will have to be generated among Member States
of the Organization once that decision has been made.
Beyond that, there is a need to consider the deployment
of a United Nations peacekeeping force, an idea we
ourselves proposed earlier and which the representative
of Nepal just reminded me of now. I am confident that
there will be support for such a force, including from
my own country.

Indeed, the need for security in Afghanistan is a
prerequisite for the success of the entire political and
economic reconstruction processes. Upon it hinges the
success and viability of a host of other programmes and
activities, such as delivering humanitarian assistance,
repatriating refugees, establishing the nation's
institutions and infrastructure, enabling school
attendance, reopening local businesses and attracting
foreign investment, among others. Security provides
the necessary environment for the return of normalcy
to Afghanistan after decades of armed conflict. The
ready acceptance of a foreign presence should
encourage us to expand the international security
presence throughout the country so as to buttress the
transitional Afghan Government in its efforts to make
its presence felt throughout the country and weaken the
influence of the ethnic-based warlords. Needless to say,
the success of President Karzai and his Government in
these efforts will also be our success as supporters of
the peace process.

The transitional Government is likely to face a
tough 18 months in its efforts to rebuild and bring
about durable peace in the country. Many impediments
remain that must be overcome. However, in spite of all
those impediments, the present situation presents the
best opportunity for the people of Afghanistan to
resolve their internal conflict once and for all. With the
help of a concerned and caring international
community, the country can at last look forward to a
brighter future.

In addition to a political process that is advancing
smoothly, Afghanistan also has a viable economic
reconstruction plan firmly on the table. Prospects for
political reconciliation have never looked more
promising than now. The "spoiler" that could unravel
all the concerted international efforts - not to mention
the billions of donor dollars already ploughed into the
country's rehabilitation programme, is the prevailing
insecurity in the rest of the country, which makes the
issue of expanding the security umbrella to the other
parts of the country one of vital importance, if not
urgency, to the success of all these efforts.

