Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all, Sir, to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mariano
Fernandez, for his presentation, and to congratulate the
entire team of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their efforts on the ground. I
would also like, through their Permanent
Representative, who is here today, to convey my thanks
to the Haitian authorities for organizing and hosting the
Council's visit.

A little more than two years after the catastrophe
that struck Haiti, the joint efforts of the Government,
donors, the United Nations and the population have
brought improvements to the overall situation of the
country. Indeed, as we saw, Haiti is making its long
way back. We also witnessed close-up the extent of the
damage and the scope of the challenges that lie ahead.
But no one can question the progress made by the
Haitian authorities in enabling their country to recover
from the aftermath of the earthquake, or the relevance
of the initiatives taken to improve the security situation
and regenerate the economy and the social fabric of
Haiti.

We hope that the establishment of a new
Government will help to ensure greater unity of
Governmental action and lead to a national consensus
on long-awaited major reforms. Morocco hails the
efforts of the Haitian authorities to promote the
reforms under way, including those concerning the
Permanent Electoral Council, the Supreme Court and
the signing of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights. Those reforms deserve to
be fully implemented and should be complemented by
measures to strengthen the rule of law in all its
dimensions.

We particularly commend the improvements in
the security situation and MINUSTAH's decisive
contribution to maintaining a stable environment. We
observed not only the Haitian people's aptitude but
also their pride in being able to take responsibility for
their own national security by their own means.

With respect to the process of recovery and
development, huge challenges remain despite the
rebuilding efforts undertaken by the Government and
MINUSTAH, and also despite the notable progress
made in terms of clean-up and the reconstruction of
schools and housing. The problem of employment,
especially for young people, is easy for any visitor to
see. Young people deserve the priority attention of the
Government and the support of the international
community. Improving the climate for foreign
investment is critical in that regard, in order to attract,
reassure and encourage investors from abroad.

The day after the earthquake of January 2010, the
response of the international community was one of
spontaneous, unanimous and generous solidarity and
assistance. It made all the difference in comforting the
Haitian people. From the outset, the United Nations,
through MINUSTAH, played an early and decisive
role. Nothing, and I repeat, nothing can tarnish the
sacrifices that the Mission has made or the devotion
and integrity of the thousands of men and women who
compose its ranks.

