Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Please
allow me to begin by commending your initiative,
Sir, to convene today's open debate on this important
topic. I would also like to thank all the briefers for
their informative interventions. The Republic of Korea
welcomes today's unanimous adoption of resolution
2457 (2019). As a sponsor of the resolution, we reaffirm
our strong support for the African Union's (AU)
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

Achieving a conflict-free Africa by 2020 is a
very ambitious goal. However, over the past several
years, much progress has been made in preventing
and resolving conflicts in Africa. The list of successes
includes peace agreements between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 non-State armed
groups and between Ethiopia and Eritrea, signed earlier
this month and in September 2018, respectively. The role
of the African Union in promoting peace and security
on the continent has shown remarkable progress with
its strengthened ownership and capacity in the context
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
Regional economic communities and mechanisms are
also playing an increasingly proactive role, as we saw
when the Economic Community of West African States
took the lead to help overcome political crises in the
Gambia in late 2016 and deployed forces to maintain
stability in the country.

Of course, conflicts in Africa are far from over,
and the challenges facing peace and security on
the continent are becoming increasingly complex.
Persevering in confronting such challenges is a task
that no single country, the United Nations or the AU,
can take on alone. Rather, it calls for collective efforts
under a comprehensive political strategy that reflects
individual region- and country-specific situations. It
is against that backdrop that we believe the following
three points should be highlighted in our efforts to
silence the guns in Africa.
First, the partnership between the United Nations
and the AU must continue to be strengthened. Both
organizations should synergize their respective
strengths. While welcoming the Joint United Nations-
AU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, we believe that sharper focus should be
placed on joint efforts to facilitate sustainable political
solutions. A more effective division of labour among
the United Nations, regional organizations and other
stakeholders, and a closer alignment of the agenda
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, will help establish effective and
durable joint decisions and actions. Furthermore,
sustainable and predictable funding for AU-led peace
operations will enhance their effectiveness, as would
their compliance with the agreed norms pertaining
to human rights, accountability and oversight. The
Republic of Korea, for its part, is currently providing
financial contributions to the AU Peace Fund. We
are supporting the Office of the African Union High
Representative for the Silencing the Guns by 2020 and
the implementation of the AU African Union Master
Road Map of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020. We will continue to make our due
contributions in those and other areas in future.

Secondly, as stipulated in the AU Master Road
Map, more efforts should be made to address the root
causes of conflicts, including economic and social
disparities. Many of the crises and conflicts in Africa
are being driven by poverty, human rights violations
and inequality. Countries in transition to post-conflict
reconstruction often relapse into violence, thereby
finding themselves trapped in a vicious cycle ofconflict.
It is therefore critical to holistically address the entire
peace continuum, from prevention to peacebuilding,
to reconstruction and reintegration and to long-term
development. It is also crucial to strengthen the nexus
involving peace, development, and humanitarian
assistance, thereby eliminating the structural factors
that contribute to groups and communities relapsing
into violence.

It is against that backdrop that the Republic of
Korea, as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
in 2017, took the lead in assisting the Gambia in
its peacebuilding efforts during its critical time of
transition. The Commission also held a joint meeting
with the Economic and Social Council to address the
social and economic dimensions of the challenges of
the Sahel, deliberating on how to better work with other
stakeholders to bring about a cross-pillar, coherent and
integrated approach to peacebuilding. Working with
the United Nations, the AU and Mali, my Government
also deployed a level 2 hospital in Gao, Mali, last year.
The hospital, which treats both military personnel and
civilians, aims to help the Malian Government fight
violent extremism by winning the hearts and minds
of the local population through improved provision of
basic services. Furthermore, as a member ofthe Steering
Committee of the Global Coalition for Reintegration, as
well as the Group of Friends of Reintegration of Child
Soldiers, the Republic of Korea will continue to play
an active role in improving and garnering international
support for the reintegration of former child soldiers
in Africa.

Thirdly, priority should be given to addressing the
illegal trafficking, circulation and use of small arms and
light weapons (SALW). The proliferation of SALW puts
civilians at risk, destabilizes communities and limits
economic and social development. Furthermore, those
weapons spill over into neighbouring societies, fuelling
conflict and criminal violence. Over the past 50 years,
Africa has suffered no less than 5 million fatalities, of
whom 90 per cent were civilians, owing to the scourge
of SALW. As such, comprehensive and collective
efforts are urgently called for. We must spare no effort
to fully implement United Nations arms embargoes,
as well as the relevant international and regional
instruments, including the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The
Republic of Korea, through its financial contributions
to the AU Peace Fund, will continue to support AU
programmes to tackle the illegal proliferation of SALW.
It is also important to empower the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), which establishes common standards for the
international trade in conventional weapons, to which
the Republic of Korea is one of the original signatory
States and a State party. We firmly believe that the ATT
is a powerful tool against the illicit and destructive
trade in SALW.

As we hold today's open debate, a significant effort
towards achieving a nuclear-free and peaceful Korean
peninsula is taking place in Hanoi, Viet Nam. In
hoping that regional peace initiatives in various parts
of the world will inspire everyone in the quest for a
peaceful and prosperous future, the Republic of Korea
is committed to working closely with African States as
well as the United Nations, the AU and other regional
and subregional groups in moving towards our shared
goal of silencing the guns in Africa.

