Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
joining other colleagues in condemning in the strongest
possible terms this morning's deadly attack on the
United Nations building in Abuja. The people and
Government of Bangladesh stand by the people and
Government of Nigeria, as well as the members of the
United Nations family, at this difficult time.

My delegation expresses its heartiest
congratulations to the Indian delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. I also take this opportunity to thank the
presidency for focusing this debate on the theme
"Peacekeeping: taking stock and preparing for the
future" and for sharing with us a thought-provoking
concept note (S/2011/496, annex). It amply delineates
the priority and importance attached to the cause of
international peace, security and stability by the
Security Council. Our appreciation is also owed to the
Secretary-General and other speakers for their
statements.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Kingdom of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

It hardly requires reiterating that United Nations
peacekeeping is a unique and flagship activity of the
Organization. The presence of Blue Helmets in the
field provides hope of sustainable peace to the victims
of conflict, buttresses efforts to achieve peace among
world communities, reinvigorates related activities for
making peace sustainable, and compels conflicting
parties to resort to a peaceful solution.

In that regard, we convey our heartfelt gratitude
to those who have made the ultimate sacrifice while
working under the United Nations umbrella. However,
their sacrifice was not in vain. Mediation and
peacekeeping have contributed to an 80 per cent
decline in the total number of armed conflicts since the
end of the cold war. As the study suggests, 87 per cent
of United Nations peacekeeping operations have been
successful, as compared to the 50 per cent success rate
of other peace operations. Furthermore, United Nations

peacekeeping is the most cost effective vis-a-vis that of
others. Above all, the opportunity cost of peacekeeping
is immeasurable in terms of any financial or other
resource standard. It means that United Nations
peacekeeping is a must, and that we must ensure proper
and effective support services to peacekeeping
missions for the effective implementation of their
mandates.

Peacekeeping has turned out to be a more
multidimensional and complex task compared to what
it was a few years ago. The future success of a
peacekeeping mission will therefore largely depend on
the political support that it receives and on the
adequate and timely provision of financial, logistical
and human resources, as well as the involvement of
stakeholders on the ground. In that regard, we reiterate
the importance of closer and active involvement with
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and police-
contributing countries when deciding on new
peacekeeping missions or extending or amending the
mandates of current missions. We emphasize the
following specific measures for building an effective
partnership throughout the whole process, especially at
both the decision-making and the implementation
levels, for the successful operation of peacekeeping
missions in the future.

There must be a broader political partnership
between the United Nations and the host Government
to ensure political support for peacekeeping operations.
Effective and inclusive consultation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs must be
ensured. The views of TCCs must be reflected when
deciding mission start-up and in effecting any change
in the mandate of existing missions. The initial
mandate must be crafted carefully and fully reflect
potential TCCs.

A specific timeline must be stipulated, in
consultation with the TCCs, in finalizing the
memorandum of understanding. Any change in
operations must be in compliance with the views of
those who work in the field. Fair representation of
TCCs in the decision-making process within the
Secretariat, as well as in the process of
implementation, must be ensured. The representational
issue of TCCs in the relevant department, such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, must be ensured, as
repeatedly requested by the General Assembly. The
mandates of peacekeepers must be clear, specific and
well defined, supported by adequate resources, with
sufficient safety and security, as well as the provision
of training.

At the operational level, partnership should
include the followingzensuring the minimum peace to
be kept by the peacekeepers; creating workable
conditions for the peacekeepers to operate in; ensuring
the necessary coordination among relevant
stakeholders and among the United Nations and other
bilateral and regional stakeholders; and concerted
efforts among the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and the Bretton Woods institutions in the
field.

For our part, Bangladesh has played a cardinal
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security, for which we take a modicum of pride. In that
context, I refer to the statement of the Honourable
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in the general debate of
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, in
which she said:

"Bangladesh is proud of its outstanding role
as a major troop-contributing country serving the
United Nations in maintaining peace and security
worldwide." (A/64/PV.9, p. 24)

We have had to brave poor odds and many
difficulties and to endure many sacrifices in the
process of fulfilling the commitment to international
peace and security, as enshrined in our Constitution,
which has been a constant source of our motivation and
dedication. Since 1988, Bangladesh has been involved
in 36 United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
approximately 100,000 personnel. Today, Bangladesh
is ranked first in the field.

With a mix of pride and gratitude, I say that over
the years some 103 of our valiant peacekeepers have
laid down their invaluable lives for the cause of United
Nations-sponsored peace. On this occasion, we pay
homage to all peacekeepers from Bangladesh and other
TCCs who have made the supreme sacrifice for the
noble cause of international peace and prosperity. We
also reiterate our firm commitment to continuing our
partnership with the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

