My delegation commends you, Mr. President, for convening this high-level open debate on conflict-related sexual violence for two consecutive years. The Republic of Korea offers its deep appreciation to the briefers for their valuable interventions today, and we take this opportunity to reiterate our full support for Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and her Office. This year holds a special meaning for the women and peace and security agenda as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). However, we are still witnessing a significant gap between commitments and implementation. Furthermore, the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis on the socioeconomic and security environment may pose even greater challenges to addressing sexual violence in armed conflict. As such, we must once again renew our commitments and pay heightened attention to this critical agenda. Against that troubling backdrop, while aligning myself with the statement submitted by the representative of Canada on behalf of 62 Member States (see annex 20), I would like to highlight the following five points on this important topic. First, COVID-19 could aggravate the suffering of those who are exposed to sexual violence in armed conflict, and we must do our utmost to minimize its negative impacts. In that connection, we welcome the recent adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), and call for its full implementation, particularly the general and immediate cessation of hostilities and the durable humanitarian pause. Any military threat or attempt to incite violence must stop and political solutions must be pursued. Additionally, sexual violence must never be used as a tactic of war, terrorism or political repression, particularly in situations where people are suffering from the current health security crisis. Secondly, we emphasize the importance of a survivor-centred approach. The landmark resolution 2467 (2019), which recognizes a survivor-centred approach in preventing and responding to sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations, must be fully implemented. We should ensure survivors' non-discriminatory access to all the services that they need, such as sexual and reproductive health-care services and psychosocial care, so as to prioritize the rights and needs of victims of sexual and gender-based violence. Furthermore, we must increase our efforts to prevent stigmatization, discrimination, hate speech and any form of revictimization to protect all survivors. To that end, the Republic of Korea actively participates in the Global Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence as one of its board members, and is also providing $8 million in tailored assistance to survivors through the United Nations Population Fund, UNICEF and the International Organization for Migration in 2019 and 2020. Addressing sexual violence in armed conflict carries a very special meaning for Korea. The Korean Government has been endeavouring to restore the honour and dignity of the so-called comfort women victims during the Second World War. We believe that it is crucial to ensure that lessons are learned from these victims' painful experiences. Thirdly, we reiterate the pressing need for prevention. In that regard, my delegation would like to highlight the expanded role that United Nations peace operations can play. We encourage the increased participation of women in peace operations, more gender-sensitive mandates and enhanced training on gender- sensitivity for all United Nations peacekeeping and civilian personnel with a view to preventing sexual violence and exploitation. We emphasize the importance of incorporating the latest technologies to support such efforts. In that regard, the Republic of Korea hopes that the 2021 United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting, to be held in Seoul next April, will serve as a timely platform to promote relevant discussions. For our part, the Korean Government continues to increase women's participation among our peacekeepers. Fourthly, women must play a meaningful role in peacebuilding and decision- making processes. We should also endeavour to increase engagement with a wider range of actors and stakeholders, including civil society. Inclusivity is key to sustaining peace. Women's full, equal and meaningful participation must be ensured in the full continuum of peace processes, including peace negotiation, mediation and post-conflict reconstruction. Women's electoral rights must be upheld as well. Last but not least, holding perpetrators of sexual violence to account is vital to delivering justice to victims and deterring future crimes. We must end impunity and safeguard judicial justice. To that end, we call for improving national, regional and international legal mechanisms for reporting and prosecuting sexual violence cases, putting perpetrators on trial and fully respecting international law, particularly international human rights law. We should not forget that sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to genocide, as stipulated in resolution 1820 (2008). The Republic of Korea reaffirms its driving commitment and strong support for the women and peace and security agenda and looks forward to hosting the second International Conference on Action with Women and Peace this year. As we now begin the third decade of the agenda, we will continue to stand with all victims and survivors and to work together in solidarity with the United Nations, as well as all Member States, to address the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence and ensure a survivor-centred approach.
