Mr. Moreno Charme (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile wishes to congratulate Colombia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and on its initiative to hold a
debate in the Council on the situation in the sister
Republic of Haiti, a topic at the forefront of our
concerns in Latin America and the Caribbean.

The participation in this meeting of the President
of the Republic of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Rene'
Preval; a great number of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
from the region; the Secretary General of the
Organization of American States, Mr. Jose Miguel
Insulza; and the President of the Inter-American
Development Bank, Mr. Luis Alberto Moreno, strongly
underscores our commitment to addressing the needs of
and challenges facing the Haitian people. It also
reinforces our appeal to the international community to
demonstrate its solidarity with and support for the
Haitian people and their efforts to attain peace and
security, political stability and economic and social
development.

Chile aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, of
which Chile is a member.

Chile has a long-standing interest in the situation
in Haiti. As a member of the Security Council when the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti was
established pursuant to resolution 1542 (2004), Chile
was one of the first countries to participate in the
Mission. Since that time, we have supported the efforts
of the Government and the people of Haiti to achieve
peace and security, development, the protection and
promotion of human rights and the establishment of the
rule of law.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) (S/2011/l83*), which gives a full
picture of the latest developments and indicates the
areas in which our action must be strengthened. We
also thank the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
former President of the United States Bill Clinton, for
the comprehensive report submitted on the activities of
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission. We recognize
and appreciate his commitment to seek productive
investments that can use and enhance the national
strengths of the people of Haiti, its workers, its
business people and its professionals. Our special
gratitude also goes to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Edmond Mulet, for his
tireless efforts at the head of MINUSTAH. His work
deserves the highest praise.

As the Secretary-General's report acknowledges,
2010 was a year of multiple crises in Haiti. Chile hopes
that 2011 will be remembered as the year when there
was a peaceful transfer of power, consolidation of the
process ofpolitical and social stabilization and national
reconstruction. In accordance with the principles
underlying our foreign policy and with the priority
accorded by the Government of Chile to its regional
relations, our special commitment to support Haiti's
own efforts to meet the challenges of reconstruction,
development and stability is based on the principle of
national ownership.

The interrelated nature of those challenges means
that sustainable and sustained progress must cover
aspects ranging from security to democratic
consolidation and from the rule of law to national
reconstruction, including institution-building, the
promotion of human rights and economic and social
development. Accordingly, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti must continue to work
towards those goals, strengthening cooperation with
institutions involved in the process of stabilization,
reconstruction and democratic consolidation of the
country, such as the Organization of American States
(OAS), the European Union, the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), the Union of South American Nations,
the Inter-American Development Bank and
international financial institutions.

With regard to the country's institutional
reconstruction, I wish to highlight the electoral process
currently under way and wish to note the valuable
contribution of MINUSTAH and the cooperation of
OAS and CARICOM, through the joint electoral
observation mission headed by Mr. Colin Granderson.
The Government of Chile is grateful to him and to his
entire team. The role of the joint mission was crucial
for the smooth conduct of the second round of
elections. Chile hopes that the final vote counting will
also proceed smoothly and that in May power can be
transferred to a new democratically elected President
who, vested with legitimacy, will tackle the challenges
with the full support of the Haitian people and the
international community.

When it comes to the strengthening of the rule of
law, as shown by the report of the Secretary-General,
much still remains to be done. There must be an end to
the serious upsurge in crime, armed gangs and gender-
based sexual violence, as well as to the trafficking and
sexual exploitation of children. My country is
committed to providing the maximum possible
assistance in that regard. We are currently reviewing
the projects submitted by the Office of Rule of Law
and Security Institutions of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, with a View to choosing the
ones we will support, in addition to continuing to
provide police fellowships.

MINUSTAH must continue to perform its
mandate for the implementation of quick-impact
projects and assistance to the Haitian Government for
the adequate protection of the civilian population, with
particular attention being given to internally displaced
persons and other vulnerable groups, especially women
and children.

It is a matter of particular concern that organized
crime, in particular crime related to drug trafficking, is
using Haiti as a base for drug distribution operations.
Clearly, the precarious state of the rule of law,
combined with the lack of development, provides
fertile soil for crime. Accordingly, we believe in
comprehensive support from the United Nations for
Haiti. In due course, the Council should renew the
mandate of MINUSTAH and emphasize its links with
the efforts of other stakeholders relevant to the
development of Haiti, in the light of existing
circumstances.

In order to contribute to the future of Haiti,
Chile's participation is not limited to security aspects
but also includes human resources training, police
training, early childhood education and technical agro-
ecology instruction. In all of these areas, we hope to
continue to work to enhance our contribution to the
security, peace and sustainable development of our
kindred nation.

