Mr. Seepanovic' (Montenegro): Allow me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
would like to thank you for having organized today's
important and timely debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
Director for International Law and Cooperation for
their interventions.

Montenegro fully associates itself with the statement
made by the European Union. Let me, however, make
some additional comments in my national capacity.

It is a sad reality that civilians continue to
account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflicts. Deliberate targeting, indiscriminate or
disproportionate attacks and sexual and gender-based
violence are just a few examples of the worrisome trend
of the frequent failure of parties to conflict to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and refugee law to
respect and protect civilians.

Despite some positive developments and the
important progress achieved since the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999), reflected mainly in
advancements at the normative level, the abysmal
state of the protection of civilians has changed little,
as the Secretary-General pointed out in his 2012 report
(S/2012/376).

The suffering of civilians, especially women and
children, and the harsh conditions they endure in
many of today's conflicts requires our continued close
attention and decisive action. Of particular concern
is the deteriorating situation in Syria. Montenegro is
alarmed and condemns the widespread and systematic
violations of human rights and international law in
Syria, which, according to the independent international
commission of inquiry, may amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes under the Rome Statute of
International Criminal Court.

We would like to emphasize that all perpetrators
of such crimes, without exception, must be held to
account and that there should be no impunity for such
violations and abuses. Bolstering accountability serves
as an integral component in strengthening compliance
by parties to armed conflict, including individual
perpetrators, with their international obligations.
Moreover, without accountability there can be no
sustainable peace. When national authorities fail to
take the steps necessary to ensure accountability, the
international community, and the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court above all, has a role to
play in ensuring an appropriate international response.
Since accountability through national processes was
not guaranteed in Syria, Montenegro has decided to
support the Swiss initiative calling on the Security
Council to refer the situation in that country to the
International Criminal Court. In addition, Montenegro
is of the view that utilizing independent commissions
of inquiry and fact-finding missions, especially early
in a crisis, along with taking the necessary follow-up
action, can indeed help to end further violations and
provide accountability.

Ensuring safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance is fundamental to the
protection of civilians and an effective humanitarian
response. We emphasize how important it is for States
and other parties to conflict to prevent attacks on or
interference with medical and humanitarian personnel
and journalists, and to prosecute those responsible for
such acts. We also call on the parties to conflicts to
honour their obligations in refraining from the use of
explosive weapons in densely populated areas.

The final United Nations Conference on an
Arms Trade Treaty, to be held in March, presents
a vital opportunity for enhancing the protection of
civilians as we seek to address the human cost and
dire consequences resulting from a poorly regulated
international arms trade. We hope that the Conference
will produce a strong treaty with the highest possible
common standards for regulating the global trade in
arms, so that it can make a real difference to the lives
and security of millions of people around the world.

We recognize the valuable progress that has been
made in the area of enhancing the implementation of
protection mandates by United Nations peacekeeping
and other missions. We need to achieve more
effective interaction and better coordination among
protection-mandated missions, host States, political
missions and humanitarian organizations undertaking
protection efforts, in a spirit of joint endeavour, in order
to continue to improve the protection of civilians from
physical violence. One step to that end would be the
increased use of training modules on the protection
of civilians by Member States sending personnel to
protection-mandated missions.

As the Secretary-General stated in his 2012 report
(S/2012/376), international humanitarian law requires
parties to a conflict to protect the civilian population
from the effects of hostilities. A failure to do so can
result in deaths and injuries to civilians who are directly
targeted or otherwise caught in the fighting.

We recognize the importance of translating
normative progress into concrete improvements in the
protection of civilians on the ground through strong
leadership on the part of the Security Council and a
focus on the five core challenges and recommendations
outlined in the Secretary-General's report. I would like
to conclude by expressing Montenegro's commitment
and readiness to contribute constructively to ensuring
greater effectiveness in the protection ofcivilians, which
is a core responsibility and priority in the mandate of
the Security Council and the United Nations system.

