Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (Spoke in Arabic): I take
this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I also thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of France, for his able leadership of the
Council's work last month.

I further thank the Security Council for the spirit
of cooperation and consensus that allowed it to adopt
resolution 2386 (2017), extending the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) for six months. We also thank the delegation
of the United States of America for its efforts in
drafting resolution 2386 (2017), and I reiterate my
country's commitment to cooperating with UNISFA
in the implementation of its mandate under resolution
1990 (2011).

We confirm that security and stability in Abyei
today and the remarkable progress that has been made
towards establishing peaceful coexistence between the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka there, as confirmed by the
reports submitted to the Security Council recently, are
the direct result of the joint efforts of the Government
and the community, together with the positive role
played by UNISFA since its establishment.

My delegation affirms that the Sudan was never
behind the suspension of the work of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM),
the obstruction of its movements, or the difficulties
encountered in the implementation of the September
2012 Cooperation Agreement between the Sudan
and South Sudan. We believe that the Mechanism is
necessary to sustaining peace along the border between
the two countries and the full normalization of relations
between them. That opinion is shared by many regional
and international partners, foremost amongst whom is
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, as indicated in his letter to the
Secretary-General of 23 October 2017. It is therefore
difficult to find any justification for ending support for
its operations.

We also reiterate the commitment of the Government
ofthe Sudan to the implementation ofthe decisions ofthe
Joint Political and Security Mechanism, as confirmed
at the 31 October meeting in Khartoum, particularly
with respect to the operationalization of the JBVMM,
the establishment of the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone, and the implementation of the first phase of the
border-crossing initiative and the implementation of
the decisions of previous meetings of that mechanism.
We hope that the decisions arising from the visit of
President Salva Kiir to Khartoum on 1 and 2 November
will mark the beginning of the full normalization of
relations between the two countries and of addressing
all concerns, in particular those related to security.
We affirm our complete commitment to all
agreements signed with the Republic of South Sudan,
starting with the 2004 Abyei Protocol; the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan
and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on
temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area, of 20 June 2011; and the
Cooperation Agreement of 27 September 2012. We
call on our brothers and sisters in the Government of
South Sudan to engage positively and seriously with
the Government of the Sudan and the African Union in
accelerating the establishment of the Abyei institutions
foreseen in the June 2011 Agreement, including the
Abyei Area Administration, the Abyei Area Council
and the Abyei Police Service.

Council members will no doubt agree that those
institutions are critical to adminstering the Area,
providing the necessary services to its inhabitants,
promoting peaceful coexistence among its various
societal components, and allowing for a final settlement
of the status of Abyei in a manner that is acceptable
to all and meets the expectations of all stakeholders.
Needless to say, the adoption of resolution 2386 (2017)
today clearly demonstrates that developments and
events have not superseded the Cooperation Agreement
on security arrangements or its provisions concerning
the Abyei Area Administration, the Abyei Area Council
and the Abyei Police Service, as claimed by my brother,
the representative of South Sudan, at the latest meeting,
held on 26 October.

With respect to the deployment of a police unit
to secure the Diffra oil facilities, as mentioned by
the representative of the United States, my delegation
confirms that its presence is necessitated by the fact
that the Abyei Police Service has yet to be established
and by the existence of rebel movements in South
Sudan that may target those vital installations, as they
did in 2012 during the occupation and sabotage of the
Heglig oil field, near Abyei. My delegation is of the
View that we must address the matter by finalizing the
establishment of the police force, which is a pillar of
the June 2011 agreement. Once we do, there will there
be no justification for the deployment of the Diffra
police unit.

I should like to reiterate our gratitude and thanks
to all our partners whose efforts have facilitated
UNISFA's work, in particular the Government of
Ethiopia, the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council, the AU High-Level Implementation Panel, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan, and all personnel affiliated with
UNISFA. We also reiterate the Sudan's commitment to
cooperating with UNISFA in fulfilling all its mandated
tasks smoothly under resolution 1990 (2011) and
subsequent resolutions.

In conclusion, Council members may rest assured
that since last May only one goal has spurred us to
make every effort to retain UNISFA and its subsidiary
mechanisms, including the JBVMM, in Abyei. That
goal is to maintain the current peace until we arrive at a
final settlement on the status of the Sudanese region of
Abyei. Our tireless efforts to end all manifestations of
conflict south and west of our territory arise from our
desire to eliminate all forms of friction, confrontation
and violence. That is our only motive for coordination
with South Sudan regarding Abyei, as evinced by the
joint letter sent by our respective Foreign Ministers
to the Council and the Secretary-General, andthe
subsequent steps taken, including the recent meeting of
Joint Political Committee in Khartoum, as well as the
operationalization of the various related mechanisms,
alongside the several communications with all members
of the Council, without exception.

We call on the Security Council today to support us
in maintaining that momentum. Blessed are those who
pave the way to peace and support it.

