Mr. Herczynski (Poland): Let me start by
thanking the presidency for organizing today's open
discussion on the working methods of the Security
Council. The concept paper prepared by the delegation
of Belgium (S/2008/528, annex) and the document
annexed to the presidential note of 2006 (S/2006/507)
can serve as an excellent basis for our discussion. We
would like to underline that it is up to the whole
membership of the United Nations - not exclusively
Council members - to debate on reform of the
Security Council. I hope that today's meeting will
create a good opportunity to assess the ongoing efforts
to improve the transparency, efficiency and
effectiveness of the Council.

The world situation is very dynamic, sometimes
even turbulent and worrisome. Security threats and
challenges put at risk fundamental values and
principles, as well as the very nature of effective
international cooperation. Therefore, only a well-
functioning and transparent Security Council can react
to crisis situations in a timely manner in order to
protect international peace and security.

Poland perceives the enhancement of the
efficiency and transparency of the Council's work as
well as its enlargement as the key issues of Security
Council reform. Such reform should be built on the
assumption that membership not only grants privileges
but, first and foremost, increases responsibilities. We
truly believe that all Security Council members,
particularly the permanent ones, should defend and
secure the fundamental values set out in the Charter. In
no way should they undermine them.

Let me briefly underline some ideas that might be
helpful in our discussion.

First, the Security Council should further enhance
its cooperation with regional organizations, troop-
contributing countries, the Secretariat and the entire
United Nations system.
Secondly, the enlargement of the Council should
ensure the balanced representation of all regional
groups. In this context we reaffirm our conviction that
an additional seat for the Eastern European Group
should also be envisaged, due to its substantial
enlargement in recent years.

Thirdly, we support more active engagement of
non-member States, especially countries directly
affected by conflict situations, in the work of the
Security Council, in particular during the process of
preparing draft resolutions, presidential statement and
press statements.

And fourthly, real improvement of the
functioning of the Security Council should also include
closer consultation with civil society.

Improving both the working methods and the
composition of the Security Council is not only a
question of enhancing the ability of the Council to
function effectively. It is a question of its very
credibility.

In conclusion, I would like to commend all
countries which have contributed to developing and
strengthening the current practices of the Council. My
special appreciation goes to the delegations of Costa Rica,
Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland - as
well as to those of Japan and Slovakia, which successfully
chaired the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

