Mr. De Croo (Belgium) (spoke in French): As

others have done, I would like, on behalf of Belgium, to

thank the Secretary-General and the other speakers for
their briefings.

We welcome the constructive cooperation
between the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the United
Nations. That excellent cooperation is demonstrated
by the invaluable assistance provided to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate by those
organizations during the visits of their member States.

It is important that the partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations be aligned
with United Nations documents, such as the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, Security
Council resolutions and fully embrace the values of the
United Nations. A11 measures taken by Member States
to combat terrorism must be based on the full respect for
obligations under international law, international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law. Indeed, any lack of respect for those
essential guarantees runs the risk of compromising the
success of combating terrorism and contributing to the
breeding ground for violent extremism.

An effective fight against terrorism involves
a resolutely comprehensive approach in which
prevention, punishment and due diligence to go hand
in hand. An approach that includes strengthening civil
society, promotes socioeconomic inclusion and avoids
the polarization of communities is essential. Only such
a method will bolster the resilience of our societies
against violent extremism and terrorism. In that regard,
I would like to express my sincere gratitude for the
work accomplished by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Natalia Gherman.

Struck by several devastating terrorist attacks,
the European Union has developed a comprehensive
anti-terrorist framework. The protection of citizens,
the prevention of radicalization and cooperation
with international partners are at the very heart of
that anti-terrorism fight. The signature of a counter-
terrorism charter by the European Union and the
United Nations in April is testament to the importance
that we attach to cooperation between those two
partners. That framework is based on the Charter of
the United Nations and advocates the strengthening
of international law and respect for the rule of law
and human rights. The partners seek to increase their
respective commitments to Central Asia, South Asia
and South-East Asia. The European Union, in a holistic
spirit, is developing its efforts to combat terrorism with
its partners in the region.

With the Strengthening Resilience to Violence and
Extremism (STRIVE) programme in Asia, the European
Union is tackling the root causes of radicalization. At
the very centre ofthat project is an effort to increase the
role of women, promote dialogue among communities,
strengthen the capacity of the media and reinforce
the education sector to confront extremist ideologies.
The programme is also a good example of the close
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. STRIVE Asia is being implemented
because of the effective partnership among the United
Nations, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Development Programme.

The programme is part and parcel of a strategy
recently approved by the European Union for Central
Asia, which aims to take up common challenges, such
as the deterioration of the environment and terrorism,
and to strengthen cooperation with our partners in the
region in order to promote peace in Afghanistan. As a
donor, the European Union has allocated over €l billion
for bilateral and regional assistance to the region over
the course of the past seven years.

Terrorism is not an abstract concept. It is a
tragedy that kills civilians on a daily basis and without
discrimination, whether they be men, women or
children. We owe it to our people, and especially the
most affected populations, such as in Afghanistan, to
respond jointly to this threat, without ever forgetting
the founding values of the United Nations.

