Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America):
Mr. President, the United States welcomes your
presence today and expresses its gratitude for this
opportunity to discuss peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comments and Ambassador
Mufioz, Mr. Ryan and Mr. McKechnie for their
briefings. In addition, we express our appreciation to
United Nations staff worldwide who are working to
help countries make the difficult transition from
conflict to peace.

Too many populations that have endured the
hardships of conflict experience persistent violence and
instability. They often lack the conditions necessary to
restore governance, restart economies and rebuild
communities. Shoring up peace processes at risk can
often take attention from the wider efforts needed to
put countries on a steady path to long-term stability
and development.

The overarching objective of our peacebuilding
efforts must be to assist local authorities to develop the
capacity to manage their own transitions to recovery.
This means helping them restart basic functions of
governance, establish the conditions for economic
recover and create a secure environment in which
affected populations can begin to rebuild shattered
lives.

While other actors besides the United Nations
have a role in peacebuilding, an effective United
Nations can provide an unparalleled platform for unity
of effort and overall success. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/304) provides a clear road map for the
United Nations system to ensure that its assistance is
well conceived, well led and sufficiently resourced. We
welcome the Secretary-General's personal commitment
to ensuring an improved United Nations response in
post-conflict situations.

The United States strongly supports the report's
recommendations on strategy, leadership and
accountability, which are essential to delivering critical
support to national authorities, and we agree that
effective civilian capacity and response should be at
the core of international efforts to support sustainable
peace. We welcome the report's emphasis on the need
for rapid deployment of high-quality leadership and
multidisciplinary teams to backstop it, and we
particularly welcome the emphasis on Southern
capacity, an undertapped and invaluable resource.

Let me also underscore the important contribution
of women to post-conflict recovery and the need to
involve women more actively in the essential tasks of
rebuilding communities and lives.

The Secretary-General's report also makes a
number of observations regarding financing post-
conflict activities. The United States agrees that early
and flexible assistance is crucial. We also support the
call to revitalize efforts to strengthen cooperation in
peacebuilding between the United Nations and
international financial institutions. The division of
labour within the United Nations system and between
the United Nations and other key partners continues to
be a high priority for us, and we stress the need to
make progress in this area.

Efforts to build national capacity must start early.
Capacity-building cannot be delayed until the day an
international security presence departs. Early and
sustained attention to the requirements of
peacebuilding must occur alongside peacekeeping in
order to ensure a successful transition to a durable
peace. To that end, we welcome early dialogue with the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The United States will work to ensure that the
Council takes earlier account of peacebuilding in
decision-making on peace operations and in reviewing
mandates. We have already expressed our intention to
consider critical peacebuilding requirements when we
review peacekeeping missions in Liberia and Haiti this
coming autumn.

Council members will soon have had the
opportunity to consider questions related to mediation,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, including the New
Horizon initiative of the United Nations. The United
States believes that now is the time to move forward on
these issues in a more integrated way.

Finally, we also are fully supportive of the draft
presidential statement submitted by the delegation of
Uganda.

