Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I should
like to stress that Slovakia fully aligns itself with the
statement to be made by the Permanent Representative
of Austria on behalf of the European Union. That is
why I will limit my statement to just a few remarks.

First of all, I would like to join my colleagues in
thanking Mr. Mark Malloch Brown for his
comprehensive briefing, as well as to express my
delegation's appreciation to the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) for its important work. On
the basis of what we heard today in the briefing, we are
even more convinced that the issue of the efficient
management of peacekeeping operations requires the
urgent attention of all relevant bodies within the United
Nations system.

In that context, we welcome the decision of the
Fifth Committee to hold a meeting on that subject this
week. In the same context, we also thank the United
States presidency of the Security Council for holding
this public meeting and debate, open to all Members
for an interactive exchange of views on that important
matter.

Slovakia remains a dedicated supporter of United
Nations peacekeeping, which constitutes a core
function of the Organization. It is precisely because of
that commitment that we cannot turn a blind eye to any
flaws in peacekeeping management, be they intentional
or accidental. Therefore, we note with discomfort that,
along with the surge in peacekeeping, we are
increasingly being presented with allegations of serious
managerial flaws and wrongdoing. As Mr. Malloch
Brown mentioned, the OIOS audit of procurement has
revealed evidence of waste leading to financial losses
that we cannot afford to ignore or take lightly. With the
costs of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions currently exceeding $5 billion annually, we
need to ensure that each and every dollar is spent
effectively, efficiently and exclusively for the purposes
mandated by this body.

We understand that there are many new challenges
stemming from the increase in peacekeeping
requirements, but that is why we expect management to
be strong, competent and accountable. It is always very
unfortunate when allegations of managerial inadequacies
and incompetence overshadow the majority of dedicated
United Nations staff members who work with the
utmost professionalism and unwavering commitment to
make United Nations peacekeeping a success.

The findings of OIOS are symptomatic of a larger
problem and yet further proof of the urgent need to
proceed even more vigorously with the complex reform
process. My delegation considers it crucial that all
allegations be properly investigated and that the
recommendations of OIOS be followed and strictly
implemented without delay. In that regard, we welcome
the establishment of the OIOS Procurement Fraud Task
Force to conduct the investigations. Furthermore, it is
imperative to enhance internal control mechanisms and
update existing financial rules and regulations and
procurement procedures.

We trust that the Secretary-General will take all
necessary measures expeditiously to clarify all the
alleged wrongdoings and hold those responsible fully
accountable. We support the steps already taken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Management, and we are eagerly
awaiting the results of the investigations, as well as the
update on the implementation of the OIOS
recommendations.

Every effort must be made to re-establish the
credibility of and general trust in the United Nations
system.

