Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I, too, extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa Radmanovic',
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and thank him for his important statement. I also thank
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his informative
briefing and the report (see S/2010/575, annex) before
us.

Brazil commends Bosnia and Herzegovina for
having held free, fair and credible general elections last
month. The vote should contribute to the consolidation
of democracy and help to strengthen key political
institutions. Bosnia and Herzegovina is also to be
commended for the calm that continues to prevail in
the country. Brazil acknowledges the role of the
European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
contributing to a safe and secure environment in the
country. We fully support renewal of the Security
Council's authorization for the Force.

Also positive is the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to develop its relations with its
neighbours. The completion of conditions for visa
liberalization with the European Union is also a
positive step on the path towards regional integration.

My delegation reiterates its commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We support all efforts to strengthen the
State at the national level and, at the same time, to
preserve the rights and prerogatives of all communal
entities. The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
stable, prosperous and united country hinges on strict
respect for the pertinent international and domestic
legal provisions on the division of powers among the
different levels of Government.

We are therefore concerned by statements and
measures of the entities that question the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Challenges to the
Dayton Peace Agreement and its institutional
arrangements, as well as divisive rhetoric, should be
avoided. In this regard, we call on all actors to respect
the authority of and cooperate with the High
Representative. It is collaboration between and among
entities and between the entities and the State that will
lead to the closure of the Office of the High
Representative and the transition to a reinforced
European Union presence.

The international community should maintain its
active support for Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
pursuit for political stability and socio-economic
development. There is no future for a divided Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We hope that all concerned can come
to this conclusion, set aside differences and work
together. We are convinced that the Bosnian people,
with the support of this Council, can and will succeed
in consolidating a fully functional and self-sustaining
State.

