Ms. McAskie: First of all, I wish, through you,
Mr. President, to thank the members of the Council for
their very sincere expressions of concern and support
for the humanitarian effort, in terms of support for the
victims, support for the humanitarian agencies working
on the ground, and support for the coordinating role of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. I find particularly gratifying the growing
synergy between humanitarian and political discussions
which has increasingly characterized the work of the
Security Council.

Let me touch first on some points raised by the
representative of the United Kingdom, who made some
comments about the coordinated aid strategy. We were
very gratified by greater donor interest at a meeting
held in October in Geneva, where a number of donors
urged us to mount a much more aggressive
humanitarian programme in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That is one of the reasons why the
consolidated appeal being distributed now is
considerably larger than that for 2000. There is
definitely interest in a broader strategic approach. What
one needs to understand is that the evolution of the
consolidated appeal process means that that process
now in fact represents a common humanitarian action
plan, which is outlined in the document and which has
in itself become a tool for a much more coordinated
approach.

We see much closer cooperation between the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), and I see - not just in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but also in other crises - a
breakdown of the "them and us" mentality that has
characterized relations between the NGO and the
United Nations communities in the past. We recognize
that some NGOs have very specific niches and that
they should be respected; provided that we respect each
other's roles, we find that it is getting easier and easier
to work very positively within the framework of an
overall common objective.

In terms of relations between the United Nations
and the local authorities - the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - and in terms of
United Nations relations with parties to the conflict and
of what obstacles are seen in those relations, perhaps I
could just refer again to the issue of access. We find
that access has been constrained, sometimes hampered,
but sometimes also assisted. There is good and bad in
every situation. Certainly, the Minister of the Interior
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has helped overcome certain bureaucratic
constraints. But at the same time, I recall the comment
I made in my opening remarks about one notable
instance of being unable to get access to an estimated
300,000 displaced persons in Equateur: that was
because of delays in issuing travel permits - not that I
would ever consider that that was deliberate. But it was
an unfortunate byproduct of the very complicated and
difficult situation on the ground. In terms of our
working with rebel groups, it is true that they welcome
humanitarian assistance. But no rebel movement is able
to guarantee security for us.

What is interesting about the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is that in many
parts of the upcountry areas it is not that the roads are
deteriorating; it is that there are virtually no roads. As
the representative of the United States mentioned, a lot
of the traffic is by river. And a lot of the river traffic
right now is dominated by military movements and
rebel movements. What that means is that the
humanitarians are denied access to the only form of
transport in and out of some areas. What we would be
looking for is guarantees of river access. But we would
also want to be in a position to negotiate humanitarian
access across the lines of conflict.

With respect to other constraints to the
humanitarian effort, I mentioned the issue of child-
combatant recruitment. I mentioned the exchange rate,
and I could repeat that: the exchange rate issue is one
that we would hope will be solved.

On the better side, as I said, in some areas our
relationships with the authorities are very good. In fact,
with the support of authorities at all levels, the United
Nations is currently organizing a workshop on health
and education issues in rebel-held Kisangani with the
participation of specialists from all over the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In other areas, the
Government is helping us with access to schools and to
clinics. So it is a bit of this and a bit of that; there is no
one specific answer.

In answer to a more specific question raised by
the United Kingdom about where the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) could assist, the obvious area, of
course, will be security for access. That goes without
saying, and I think it is something we have consistently
hoped for should MONUC be able to fully deploy.

But there is one specific area in which the
Council might wish to consider taking action. At the
moment, the funds voted for peacekeeping operations
are very specific in the sense of being limited to
activities undertaken by peacekeepers in the
performance of their peacekeeping duties. There have
been a number of instances where the humanitarian
community has sought the help of a peacekeeping
operation for transport, for example, because it is much
more secure. Now, in the case of MONUC, in
Kisangani for example, we had a recent instance of
MONUC providing transport to the humanitarians.
Because that is not budgeted in the peacekeeping
effort, they have to charge us at cost, and their cost is
twice as much as it would cost us to hire commercial
transport on the local market. We have the choice of
going for the cheaper one or going for the safer one.
That will also be an issue in the request which Mrs.
Ogata has made to MONUC - a request to which the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has gladly
acceded - for assistance with MONUC transport in
the assistance to refugees in the Central African
Republic and in the Republic of the Congo. Again, the
issue of cost will come in. And this money is coming
out of donor contributions to the humanitarian effort.
One way or another, we pay; the question is do we pay
through the assessed peacekeeping budget or do we pay
through the voluntary humanitarian budgets. I leave
that particular conundrum to the Council to consider.

In terms of the greatest security threats, these
vary with the changing military situation. Currently,
the greatest difficulties we have been facing have been
in South Kivu, and also in Katanga. As I mentioned,
we hope that further deployment of MONUC will
expand the security envelope, which will promote the
ability of humanitarian organizations to gain access to
the populations.

In response to the question of my Canadian
colleague, we do in fact believe that the presence of
MONUC, with the additional security that it would
provide, will facilitate humanitarian assistance. It is
true that the presence of the United Nations is seen as
controversial and that questions have been raised as to
whether or not the humanitarian workers should go it
alone. I think that, given the situation prevailing in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we would welcome
the security MONUC that would provide in terms of
potential access and escorts and with regard to the
issue of international witnesses.

With regard to the related question of civilian
observers, which was raised by our French colleague, it
is true that the deployment of civilian observers would
increase MONUC's potential to see and report on
human rights violations. Obviously, it should be noted
that there are already 11 humanitarian affairs officers
and child protection officers within MONUC who are
working very closely with the humanitarian
community. In fact, a multi-agency visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that took place just
last week has recommended better organization of the
coordination arrangements and even closer cooperation
between the civilian aspects of MONUC and the
humanitarian community.

Let me just add one point with regard to security.
There are reports of the Secretary-General to the
General Assembly on the security of United Nations
and other humanitarian staff, and we know, of course,
that the potential for raising budgetary funds for this is
constrained by the fact that we will have to wait until
the next biennium, as that is the budget cycle. In the
interim, we have made a much greater concerted effort
this year - with the full encouragement of donors -
to include in the consolidated appeals a particular
appeal for paying the cost of the security elements of
each mission. Out of the total amounts being requested,
we are requesting between $13 and $14 million across
the board, not just for the Congo, for the cost of
security.

I mention now, because this applies particularly
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that we
would encourage donors planning to contribute to
humanitarian projects to also ensure that they fund this
vital security line. Without a proper security regime in
place for the humanitarian workers in the Congo, there
is a very real danger that the projects themselves that
we wish to support will not be able to go ahead.

I thank you very much, Mr. President. I hope that
I have commented on all the points that were raised as
questions. Once again, let me thank the members of the
Council very much for their very strong words of
support for the humanitarian community in their
interventions this afternoon.

