Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I welcome you, Mr. President, as you preside over
our meeting today. I would also like to thank the
briefers -Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Lamamra and Mr. Gounden.
I thank them for their detailed and valuable briefings,
which included a wealth of information on various
aspects of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative, the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020
and the challenges and obstacles that could prevent the
African continent from implementing that initiative by
the target date.

The concerns and aspirations of the African continent
are on the agenda today - not only in the Security
Council but throughout all United Nations organs
and specialized agencies in Africa. That reflects the
importance of the African continent for the international
community and international organizations.

The African Union (AU) has achieved many
accomplishments in its efforts to resolve a number of
African issues, which enables the United Nations to
build upon them. The cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, is an exceptional and
commendable development. If we review the various
aspects and kinds of cooperation we have seen in recent
months, we will note that there is substantial progress,
such as the signing of joint frameworks for sustainable
peace and development, as well as holding annual
meetings between both organizations at the highest
levels, which has been institutionalized, in addition
to the Joint Statement on Support for United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations and increased cooperation
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. The two Councils hold annual
meetings, and additional meetings are held between the
AU Peace and Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. Recently, the AU Commission and the
United Nations Secretariat also held for the first time a
dialogue on human rights.

We call for the preservation of that momentum,
which led to many gains, and for building upon them,
especially the initiative related to maintain peace in
order to enable peace missions to be more efficient,
better equipped, safest and stronger. Undoubtedly,
that requires robust Security Council mandates and
sustainable and predictable funding. The positive
developments that we have seen in the Security
Council on a number of agenda items well exemplify
the outcome of constructive cooperation between the
two organizations.
It is important to pool efforts in responding to the
challenges that threaten peace and security through
preventive diplomacy and mediation as a first line of
defence to prevent the outbreak of conflicts, for which
there are several examples. In that regard, the best way
by which to silence the guns in a lasting manner lies
in building sustainable peace. There is no peace amid
a turbulent climate, and no prevention of conflicts
without working on establishing the foundations of
peace, which can be done only through establishing
societies whereby all citizens can effectively participate
in building those foundations, achieve lasting peace
and implement the Sustainable Development Goals of
the 2030 Agenda. It is therefore necessary to resolve the
root causes of conflicts before they erupt.

The African Union's Agenda 2063 envisages a
number of factors that would prevent the emergence of
conflicts as well as resolving them. That would require
establishing a culture of peace and tolerance through
educating children and young people about peace, the
principles of good governance, democracy, human
rights, the rule of law, access to justice and addressing
the root causes of interrelated and complex differences.

Development - together with peace, security and
human rights - is one of the main pillars of the United
Nations for achieving lasting peace. Accordingly, the
State of Kuwait has attached great importance to that
pillar in partnership with all African States, based on
its conviction that Africa is of strategic importance for
the international community, especially the Arab world.
As was mentioned a while ago, peace and security in
Africa are imperative to the international community.
The State of Kuwait, as an observer State in the African
Union, will continue to support development in Africa,
whether at the governmental or grass-roots level or
through the institutions linked to the Kuwait Fund for
Arab Economic Development. We believe that Africa is
an important region with regard to our activities.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait relies on the
United Nations and its relevant organs in promoting
the potential of African countries to implement the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative and Agenda 2063
in cooperation with donor countries. We were pleased
to work with all Council members on resolution 2457
(2019), related to silencing the guns in Africa. We are
also pleased to sponsor and implement that resolution,
as well as to reap its benefits in the near future.

