Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Under-Secretary Feltman for his briefing and the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/589). The
Secretary-General had a difficult task on a sensitive
topic. In our View, he has presented a balanced report
that provides a useful overview of developments since
the adoption and implementation of the agreement
negotiated between Iran, the United States, Russia,
China, the United Kingdom, France, Germany and the
European Union. We also thank Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for briefing the Council in his capacity
as facilitator of resolution 2231 (2015), as well as
Ambassador Vale de Almeida for his briefing on behalf
of the Joint Commission.

We welcome a key message in the Secretary-
General's report that is also reflected in recent reporting
by the International Atomic Energy Agency. Iran is
honouring its nuclear-related commitments under the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). This
is vital to building further trust between Iran and the
international community.

New Zealand appreciates the efforts of all parties to
uphold the spirit of the agreement as well as the letter. It
was this spirit of constructive engagement - a success
of diplomacy and cooperation over confrontation and
mistrust - that enabled agreement in the first place. As
we said when the agreement was endorsed by the Council
in resolution 2231 (2015) under our presidency, in July
2015, we hope that Iran will seize this opportunity to
reset its relationships with the international community
and play a more constructive role in its region. That is
urgently needed.

At a time of increasing instability and conflict, the
need for cooperative regional engagement could not be
more critical. In this regard, reports of conventional
arms transfers to Yemen are of particular concern.
Such transfers are unhelpful to Yemen's stability and
further undermine efforts being made by the Council
and others to secure peace for that country. Provocative
actions, such as the Iranian launch of ballistic missiles
in March, also risk further inflaming regional tensions.
While we recognize Iran's right to provide for its self-
defence, its leaders cannot pretend that the intemperate
indeed ridiculous actions of the Revolutionary Guards
are not their responsibility.

The Secretary-General's regular reporting to the
Council is a vital tool for keeping the process on track.
We look forward to the Council receiving this further
analysis of how the resolution's implementation is faring.

Ifthe JCPOA is to be sustainable, all sides must live
up to their commitments. Iran must act responsibly. It
also has the right to the full benefits of the agreement,
including economic benefits. The responsibility for
achieving this is a shared one, not just for the parties
that negotiated the JCPOA but for the international
community, whose support was represented in the
resolution adopted by the Council.

For its part, the New Zealand Government is
engaging with our banking sector and others to
strengthen our commercial ties with Iran. Reciprocal
visits by the Foreign Minister of New Zealand and Iran
have reinforced progress in our bilateral relationship.
We look forward to building on this progress in the
year ahead.

It has taken longer than we all expected for the
private sector to re-engage with Iran. The complex
terms of the JCPOA have been difficult to navigate,
particularly for those who were not involved in the
negotiations. We appreciate the efforts taken by the
parties to share information and clarify expectations
with the private sector, and we encourage this to
continue. We also appreciate outreach efforts under
the 2231 (2015) format so that members can better
understand and fulfil their own obligations.

We all have an interest in the long-term viability
of the agreement and in ensuring the peaceful nature
of Iran's nuclear programme. We recognize that the
international community must maintain its vigilance to
ensure that this historic agreement is fully and properly
implemented. We must also now capitalize fully on the
opportunity to promote trust and cooperation between
Iran and the international community.

