Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation commends
Canada for emphasizing on the issue of human security
during its presidency of the Council this month. We
believe that the subject of the Council's meeting today,
"Protection of civilians in armed conflict", is a clear
reflection of Canada's continuing commitment to the
promotion of human security, for after all, the underlying
purpose of maintaining peace and security around the
world is to preserve the security and well-being of each
individual. My delegation is also gratified, Mr. President,
that you have made this an open meeting to allow for the
participation of the general membership of the
Organization, thereby contributing further to the openness
and transparency in the work of the Council to which
Canada, and others in the Council, is also strongly
committed. We are particularly pleased to see you, Sir,
preside over today's meeting. Your active participation in
the meetings of the Council has set a benchmark for your
ministerial colleagues to follow.

My delegation is appreciative of the important
remarks made this morning by the Secretary-General and
Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Their very pertinent
observations and proposals deserve the serious
consideration of the Council. My delegation also
appreciates Mr. Kellenberger's comments on the
humanitarian impact of sanctions, which is equally
pertinent to the discussion at hand. We note that the
Secretary-General himself has also touched on this aspect
in his report.

The seriousness and emphasis placed by the Security
Council on the protection of civilians affected by armed
conflict are evidenced by the number of meetings already
devoted to this subject. Only last month the Council had
an open meeting to discuss the important subject of
humanitarian aspects of issues before the Council in the
context of the maintenance of peace and security. We also
discussed, in February this year, the issue of the

 

protection of United Nations and associated personnel, and
humanitarian personnel in conflict zones. The report of the
Secretary-General to the Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which forms the basis of the
draft resolution we will be adopting later today, is a
response to the need for a set of guidelines on how to
better protect civilians, which have more and more often
become the targets of violence by combatants and armed
elements in armed conflicts.

The international community is becoming increasingly
alarmed at the growing number of civilians caught up in
armed conflicts around the world, and particularly
vulnerable groups such as women, children, the aged and
the infirm, who constitute some 90 per cent of conflict
casualties around the world. What is more disturbing is the
fact that they have increasingly become deliberate targets as
part of the combatants' war strategy. This is a deplorable
development in the history of warfare. Such inhumane acts
are unacceptable and must be condemned in the strongest
terms. They are criminal and cruel acts for which the
perpetrators must not be allowed to go scot-free, as this
would only strengthen the culture of impunity that is so
pervasive in so many areas of armed conflict around the
world.

My delegation believes that the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts should be all-encompassing. They should
not only be assured of their physical security in situations
of armed conflict but also be provided with legal protection
under international law. This point has been underscored by
the Secretary-General and the President of the ICRC and
previous speakers. There are a number of international
instruments or conventions that provide a legal basis for
their protection, but these have not prevented civilians from
being attacked and targeted with impunity. The perpetrators
of these crimes must be warned that they are accountable
for their actions and cannot hope to escape the full penalty
of the law, even after the conflict is over. Only through
such stern warnings by the international community and the
actual prosecution and punishment of the guilty can these
criminal acts be brought to an end. We must, singly and
collectively, demonstrate our resolve to mete out
punishment to those responsible.

As a practical measure to ensure the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is important that both military
and civilian United Nations personnel involved in
peacekeeping missions be appropriately sensitized on the
subject and provided with adequate training and instruction
on international humanitarian and human rights law so as
to be better able to handle actual situations on the ground.
It is imperative that they have unimpeded access to
civilians in need.

The physical protection of civilians in armed conflict
has become even more urgent than before in respect of
the hundreds of thousands of refugees in refugee camps
around the world. The Secretary-General has stressed this
point just now. Serious efforts must be made to ensure
that armed elements are not allowed into refugee camps,
unless they are first disarmed. This is to ensure that the
civilians are not harassed or intimidated by these elements
in their midst. This is a particularly difficult task to
undertake but an extremely important one if we are to
ensure that refugee camps remain refugee camps and do
not become recruiting grounds for combatants or for the
fomenting of violence and disorder.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
requires a comprehensive approach on the part of the
international community. It also requires coordinated and
concerted efforts on the part of all concerned -
peacekeepers, United Nations humanitarian workers and
personnel of other international relief agencies and
non-governmental organizations. They are indispensable
partners in the field. While performing its own specialized
duties, each plays a supportive and reinforcing role in
ensuring the physical, legal and psychological protection
and well-being of the hapless civilians caught in the
traumas of armed conflict.

The Secretary-General has made a number of
recommendations in his report. This morning he has
highlighted three of them, which my delegation whole-
heartedly supports. The Council has also adopted
resolution 1265 (1999), which, inter alia, set up a
mechanism to review the recommendations contained in
the report. These recommendations have been examined
and incorporated in the draft resolution before the
Council, which, if fully implemented, will make a major
contribution towards fulfilling the goal of ensuring the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Malaysia
therefore strongly supports the draft resolution and will
play its part towards its effective implementation.

