Mr. Iyamuremye (Rwanda) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, to commend
you and through you pay a tribute to your country, the
Netherlands, for the attention you are giving our continent.
We in Rwanda can testify to the enormous assistance your
country gave Rwanda to help it emerge from genocide.
Other evidence is this meeting of the Council, which your
country convened.

I also congratulate the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on the excellent, very comprehensive report he has
submitted.

In addition, I pay tribute to the Secretary-General of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, for his statement yesterday.

I am delighted to be able on behalf of my country to
give the Council a brief survey of the progress we have
made so far and to ask the international community to
support our efforts to establish lasting peace and give
decisive momentum to the sustainable development of our
country.

What is the situation in Rwanda regarding security
and peace? I am proud to tell the Security Council that
our country has overcome two major problems affecting
its security: genocide has ended, and almost 3 million
refugees have returned, with the assistance of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Committee of the Red Cross. We are
extremely grateful to all the friendly countries that have
displayed solidarity towards our country.

I take this opportunity to inform the international
community that peace and security now reign throughout
Rwanda. Nonetheless, the forces of genocide, the
Interhamwe militia and the former armed forces, are more
active than ever. They are heavily armed by their allies
and directed by former politicians and high-ranking
officers of the EX-FAR, all adherents of an ideology of
genocide. These forces of evil have only one objective -
acknowledged and known to all: to complete the genocide
in Rwanda, establish it throughout the subregion and
exterminate all those who do not share their ideology.

In the past, we have on many occasions referred to
the existence of this ideology. We have repeatedly put
forward the facts, but the international community has not
listened to us. Once again today we inform the
international community that those same forces of evil are
hovering around Rwanda at this very moment, ready to
resume their odious work of extermination and
destabilization in the Great Lakes region.

I urgently appeal to the Security Council to see that
the Ceasefire Agreement signed in Lusaka is strictly
respected by all the parties concerned. That Agreement
has as its backbone two important clauses. One relates to
the inter-Congolese political negotiations on a new
political order in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
the other relates to tracking down and disarming the
armed groups, including the militias that have been
integrated into the army of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Rwanda will be vigilant with regard to
implementation of that Agreement, and we hope the
international community will help us. The Lusaka
Agreement brings peace; its failure would have disastrous
implications.

May I quote a clause from that Agreement, as a
reminder of what the heads of State and Government and
the other signatories expect of the United Nations:

"The United Nations Security Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the UN Charter and in

 

collaboration with the OAU shall be requested
to constitute, facilitate and deploy an appropriate
peacekeeping force in the DRC to ensure
implementation of this Agreement; and taking
into account the peculiar situation of the DRC,
mandate the peacekeeping force to track down
all armed groups in the DRC. In this respect,
the UN Security Council shall provide the
requisite mandate for the peacekeeping force."
(5/1999/815, annex, para. 11a)

As far as my country is concerned, "armed groups" mean,
inter alia, the genocidal forces and the Interhamwe militia.

How is Rwanda handling such a delicate and tragic
situation, in which victims live side by side with the
executioners? The people of Rwanda have learned very
quickly to live together again, as they used to, in spite of
the fresh memory of genocide. This is explained basically
by the determination of the new political leaders and others
responsible at all levels to advocate mutual tolerance,
reconciliation and respect for others. Our slogan is: "No
one has the right to take justice into his own hands. There
is no place for impunity in Rwanda. Never again."

Those who are familiar with the history of Rwanda,
dating back several centuries, know that the three
components of the Rwandan population have always lived
together in peace and harmony, sharing the same beliefs,
the same language, the same practices and customs, living
side by side on the same hillsides, intermarrying - in
short, a people with the same culture. Instead of
strengthening that valuable asset, colonialism contributed to
the disintegration of our society and institutionalized ethnic
divisions.

In the past the idea of genocide had never occurred to
any of the three components of our population. We are
saying this not to dredge up the past, but, rather, to
emphasize that Rwanda is in the process of rebuilding its
social fabric, of being reborn from its own ashes, thanks to
the good leadership it now has and the help of the
international community. Considerable progress has been
made towards reconciliation and national unity. In this
context, a Commission on Unity and National
Reconciliation has been established and is already
operating.

My country has also made significant progress in
many other areas, such as justice, the social sphere, human
rights, the status of women, democracy, the economy and
development.

As for our presence in the Congo, I would like, in
conclusion, to tell the Security Council about the causes
of conflict in our subregion. The only cause of the
destabilization of the countries of the Great Lakes region
is very well known and is completely recognized by the
heads of State and Government of the countries of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) and
the Great Lakes. The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
recognizes unequivocally that the various militias,
including the Interhamwe and the EX-FAR, which
advocate and practise the ideology of genocide, are the
source of the insecurity throughout the region. The best
action the international community can take is to
contribute to the complete implementation of that
Agreement.

The international community knows that if it does
not contribute energetically to the fight against the
ideology of genocide in the subregion, and against the
intellectual revisionism looming on the horizon that would
downplay the genocide in Rwanda, the peace and security
of the entire region will be jeopardized. Rwanda therefore
once again calls to the attention of the international
community the need for, and relevance of, implementation
of that Lusaka Agreement.

