Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I take sincere pleasure in taking part in this
meeting of the Security Council under the presidency of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, with which
Russia has long had friendly relations that were further
developed during a recent Visit of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation to your wonderful
country, Mr. President.

A few days ago, it was the second anniversary of the
Security Council's decision to lay the foundation for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Looking back and evaluating how far we have
come, we note with satisfaction that although there have
been some difficulties, the peace process is being
implemented.

On the whole, the way the implementation of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement has gone can be regarded as
positive. Undoubtedly, the continued peace and the
establishment of the basis for a unified State are major
achievements. We have been able to move ahead in the
process of forming pan-Bosnian institutions, and refugees
continue to return gradually. Thanks to international
assistance, some progress has been made in the economic
sphere.

The Bosnian sides, as a whole, are abiding by the
commitments they made in the military sphere, have carried
out plans for arms reduction and are implementing
confidence-building measures. In a word, as was again
acknowledged at the recent Bonn Conference of the Peace
Implementation Council, there is now no alternative to
Dayton.

At the same time, it should be recognized that the
pace of implementation of the Peace Agreement does not
correspond to the level of international support given. The
peace process is not yet irreversible. We see a lack of
political will to ensure reconciliation and we have not
overcome stereotypical thinking based on confrontation and
attempts to secure advantages for one side.

To a great extent, negative trends have been kept in
check by the presence of multinational forces that make it
possible to stabilize the situation and intensify efforts in
civilian areas of implementation.

In this connection, we once again reaffirm our
resolute rejection of attempts at an arbitrary, unilateral
interpretation of the mandate of existing international
structures, which is leading to a build-up of elements of
military force in the arsenal of peacekeeping efforts in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Russia is seriously concerned at
the fact that such recidivism is continuing.

Yesterday, near the town of Vitez, sub-units of the
Stabilization Force carried out a pre-planned operation to
forcibly detain individuals indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. They
thereby went beyond the mandate of the Stabilization
Force approved by the Security Council, which ruled out
such acts of force targeted at individuals.

Russia is surprised and concerned that the High
Representative, Ambassador Westendorp, who is
ultimately responsible for respect for the civilian aspects
of the Agreement, was informed of this arrest only after
the fact.

Russia frowns on any unilateral actions that might
threaten the lives of the peacekeepers or jeopardize the
entire process of a Bosnian settlement, and we do not
intend to take responsibility for this. Justice must triumph,
but only by legitimate means.
Russia is taking an active part in international efforts
to stabilize the situation and in the activities of other
international structures in Bosnia, in strict compliance
with the provisions of the Peace Agreement and Security
Council decisions. We believe that the bulk of the
responsibility for the success of the peace process lies
with the Bosnians themselves and the authorities they
have elected.

At the same time, the situation as it stands requires
the continued cooperation of the international community
with the Bosnian parties. The United Nations is making
a real contribution to the Bosnian settlement. We value
highly the concrete work of the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) in helping ensure freedom of movement, in
supervising the safe return of refugees and displaced
persons, in creating safe conditions in which elections can
be held and in trying to reform law enforcement bodies in
Bosnia. The United Nations Mission is actively involved
in confidence-building on the ground and in coordinating
the efforts of other United Nations specialized agencies.

 

An important role is being played by the United Nations
Mine Action Centre. We support the further continuation of
the activities of the United Nations Mission and of the
IPTF in the framework of the current mandate, worked out
with the agreement of the Bosnian sides, which is a
combination of the relevant provisions of the Peace
Agreement and the decisions of international structures on
a Bosnian settlement, including the decisions of the Bonn
Peace Implementation Conference.

This approach is reflected in the draft resolution, of
which Russia is one of the sponsors.

The Russian Federation, as an active participant in the
Bosnian settlement, is firmly convinced that at this current
crucial stage of the peace process, all international
institutions involved are required, as never before, to
monitor closely the situation neutrally and dispassionately
and to comply strictly with the spirit and the letter of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement. In this way, the successful
implementation of a lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Bosnia's emergence as a unified,
democratic, multi-ethnic and prosperous State can be
guaranteed.

