Mr. Aboul Atta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to discuss one of the
most serious challenges of our world today, one that
threatens the security and safety of our societies:
international terrorism. Despite the many successes of
United Nations efforts in the area of counter-terrorism,
particularly in coordinating the efforts of States with
one another and with the United Nations, such efforts
still need the support of the international community if
we are to tighten the grip around the terrorists' throats
and deprive them of any financial or political
assistance.

My delegation would like to deal with some of
the elements of our vision of what the Organization
needs if it is to achieve its objectives efficiently and
effectively.

First, our experience has shown that in our fight
against terrorism, we must not be blind to the fact that
it is not the product of a single culture, nor does one
region have a monopoly on it. The fight against
terrorism should not be limited to political and security
aspects; terrorism is a multidimensional phenomenon
that must be addressed comprehensively, including at
the political, economic, security and legal levels. We
must also deal with the conditions that some use to try
to justify it.

Secondly, on the basis of our support for
international efforts aimed at formulating a clear vision
of counter-terrorism, Egypt has called for the holding
of a high-level international conference under the
auspices of the United Nations to deal with the
phenomenon, which would also address the issue of a
comprehensive legal definition of terrorism.

Thirdly, the most effective way to deal with
terrorism is to do so within a legal framework that
takes into account the principles of international law,
including international humanitarian law, and the
importance of distinguishing between terrorism and
legitimate armed struggle. Such a framework would
make the distinction between terrorist acts, which must
be criminalized, and the popular expression of political
demands, which are legitimate - thus paving the way
for the international community to take a collective
response in isolating terrorist elements and laying bare
their illegitimate objectives.

Fourthly, we should underline the centrality of
the role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts to combat terrorism, emphasizing
the universality of such efforts for all States, without
exception. In that context, we must consider increasing
and revitalizing the role of the General Assembly. The
Assembly has in the past played a very important role
in fighting terrorism, and we must revitalize its work in
order to finalize the draft comprehensive conventions
on international terrorism and on the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism. But the General Assembly's
counter-terrorism efforts go beyond the task of drafting
those two conventions. Thus in our statement to the
Assembly we proposed the establishment of an open-
ended working group, with a view to making the
Organization more efficient, effective and capable in
confronting terror.

Fifthly, there can be no doubt that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee has proved that it is a vital and
effective tool for confronting terrorism. We reaffirm
once again the role of the United Nations in dealing
with international challenges. The adoption by the
Security Council of resolution 1566 (2004) gives the
Committee further responsibilities. In this context, we
would like to express our appreciation for the briefing
by the Chairman of the CTC, in which he set out the
Committee's priority work for the forthcoming period
and addressed the issue of the implementation of
resolution 1566 (2004).

We would like to take this opportunity to
underline some of the elements that were reflected in
consultations among Member States on the resolution.

First, they stressed the importance of maintaining
the General Assembly's role in confronting
international terrorism and dealing with sensitive
matters, such as producing a clear definition of
terrorism that enables the international community to
deal properly with the phenomenon and not to confuse
terrorism with the right to legitimate armed struggle,
which is legal under international law and international
instruments.

Secondly, they emphasized the importance of
relying on the provisions of international conventions
aimed at international cooperation, rather than at
increased resort to Chapter VII of the Charter in this
matter, which indicates the inability of the United
Nations to adopt such measures.

Thirdly, they underlined the importance of the
Committee's taking into account the provisions of
international law and legal safeguards in its work.

