Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Let me first
congratulate Ambassador Baki Ilkin and express my
personal wishes and the congratulations of my
authorities for the significant coincidence of Turkey's
very successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and the completion of his mission to the United
Nations, which has been one of great achievements for
Ambassador Ilkin's career and for his country.

I wish to thank Ambassador Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his frank
and always thought-provoking briefing. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his important
remarks, especially on the political perspective of his
country, the development challenges that Afghanistan
is facing and the need for a genuinely unified approach
by the international community to its efforts in
Afghanistan.

We fully share the assessment provided by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/323). The
United Nations efforts remain essential to building
Afghan ownership and capacity in the security,
infrastructure, agriculture, governance and rule of law
sectors. The deployment of additional international
troops, whose importance we all understand against the
background of security developments, should be
accompanied by a resolute civilian surge. Enhancing
the presence of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) at the provincial level will
be equally critical to maximizing the benefits of our
efforts.

Italy supports the Secretary-General's call for
additional resources in the Mission's 2010 budget. My
Government will also continue to promote Afghan
empowerment at all levels, including those of
institution-building, economic development and
cultural dialogue. I would like to add that my country
is deeply committed to Afghanistan's security. A
further reinforcement of the Italian contingent has
already been announced as part a strategy that must
include all the necessary efforts to protect and ensure
the safety of the civilian population.

The Secretary-General has underscored the link
between peace and development in Afghanistan. He has
urged us to move beyond the simple logic of conflict
management. That was indeed the main message of the
G-8 ministerial meeting on Afghanistan and the
regional dimension, which took place in Trieste on
26 and 27 June. The meeting reiterated the need for a
comprehensive approach. That was a concept that was
endorsed by the G-8 foreign ministers and the Foreign
Ministers of Afghanistan and Pakistan in their joint
statement, and echoed by the communique issued at the
outreach sessions with neighbouring countries, major
contributors and international actors.

Both documents emphasized the importance of
building on a number of critical initiatives, including
the tripartite talks initiated by Afghanistan and
Pakistan with Iran, Russia, Turkey and the United
States, and the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, which in our view is an
essential mechanism to spur socio-economic
development in the country. They also reiterated the
need for full support for UNAMA and their
commitment to working with the Independent Election
Commission, the United Nations and the International
Security Assistance Force to ensure credible, inclusive
and secure presidential elections.

The discussion on drug trafficking and border
management underlined the limitations of past
approaches. It shed new light on the potential of the
draft regional programme of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and on the opportunities provided
by a climate of mutual trust in the region through
enhanced border cooperation, intelligence exchanges
and joint actions between Pakistan and Afghanistan in
the framework of the Dubai initiative.

A wide range of development programmes is
needed to ensure the return of Afghan refugees and
internally displaced persons. The Trieste meetings
further emphasized the centrality of agriculture to
Afghanistan's future. As the Council knows, refugee
repatriation and food security are key components of
the Afghan National Development Strategy.

What is needed now is more tangible aid,
including support for such United Nations agencies as
the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, the
Food and Agriculture Organization, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development and the World
Food Programme. Access to regional markets through
new infrastructure, as well as greater integration and
the availability of human capital, are all essential
priorities, together with the education of young people
and women and the promotion on the role of the media
as drivers for social participation in public life, in
particular in view of the upcoming presidential
elections.

On that point, the Afghanistan-Pakistan
international support group met in Trieste and spelled
out the prerequisites for a credible electoral process,
including fair play by all candidates, scrupulous
respect for the principle of non-interference, and
impartiality of the international community. Also
stressed was the UNAMA coordination mandate and
Ambassador Eide's crucial task in enhancing the
coherence of the international presence.

Participants in the Trieste meeting focused on
regional stabilization, with specific attention to the
situation of internally displaced persons in Pakistan.
Lack of security will become even more serious when
the monsoon season will affect life in the camps and
make it easier for the Taliban to exploit poverty and
discontent among the internally displaced persons. All
this calls for immediate action and for supporting the
democratic Government in Islamabad in dealing with
the current humanitarian emergency and the upcoming
phase of reconstruction. The G-8 should meet again on
this subject at the margins of the next General
Assembly ministerial week in New York.

I add my remarks to the statement that was
pronounced this morning by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union.

