Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Allow me to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Xanana Gusmao, Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, to the Security Council and to thank him
for his insightful and comprehensive statement. I
would also like to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, for her lucid briefing today in the context of the
Secretary-General's report (S/201l/32). We appreciate
her contributions and dedicated service as Head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT).
I will limit my remarks to three important issues,
namely, the political and security situation in Timor-
Leste, its economic and development agenda and its
judicial and correctional system.

The Nigerian delegation welcomes the climate of
calm and stability that continues to characterize the
overall political and security situation in Timor-Leste,
especially since 2008. The prevailing condition
undoubtedly manifests the commitment of the
Timorese leadership and stakeholders to sustain peace
through national dialogue and political inclusiveness.
Indeed, the relative calm has also facilitated focused
implementation of the Government's national
development plan. In that context we welcome the
consultations held in Dili from 27 to 29 December
2010 on the Government's proposed development plans
for 2011, as a firm determination by the Government to
promote internal peace and security.

The resumption of primary policing
responsibilities by the Policia nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) is also critical to bolster the country's peace
and stability. We therefore welcome the recent progress
recorded in the resumption of primary policing
responsibilities by the PNTL in two additional districts
and three more units. We fully support the district-by-
district process of handing responsibility back to the
Timorese police. We expect, however, that the process
will be completed within the given timeline, thus
paving the way for the PNTL to assume full command
and control responsibility for all police operations in
Timor-Leste.

We want to emphasize that an effective
disciplinary mechanism is vital for the creation of a
strong, professional and independent PNTL. In that
regard, the recent decision of the Government to certify
52 PNTL officers who are facing various disciplinary
and criminal charges is of serious concern. The core
challenge facing the Government and the country's
judicial authorities is how to safeguard the integrity of
the PNTL and ensure that its internal discipline
systems are effective.

The constructive interaction between the various
political parties and major stakeholders in guaranteeing
peace, harmony and continuity in governance is
commended. In particular, we note the Government's
initiative on roads to peace and national unity, which
has helped to foster dialogue and reconciliation among
the parties.

The prospects for long-term peace, political
stability and economic recovery and growth are huge
incentives for the parties to approach the 2012
elections with renewed vigour and compromise. We
therefore welcome the commencement of the joint
transition planning mechanism, especially the fourth
meeting of the High-Level Committee on Transition.

The recent measures taken by Government to
strengthen the capacity and effectiveness of the justice
and correctional sectors are commendable. Those
measures have clearly enhanced access to justice,
reduced pending criminal prosecution cases and
improved prison infrastructure. Nonetheless, the
challenges of staffing and insufficient budgets are
daunting. To underpin the notable progress already
achieved in these sectors, the Government should
emphasize combating impunity. Steps should also be
taken to generate public confidence in the judicial
system and ensure respect for the independence of the
judiciary.

Regarding economic development, Timor-Leste's
social and economic revival is rapidly gaining traction,
with improved security and greater confidence in the
country's leaders. We therefore welcome the reduction
in poverty and improvements in human development
indicators and the prudent use of resources by the
Government, including the huge investment in
infrastructure.

To fully transform the economy, the Government
should give priority to rural development and youth
employment. There is also an overarching need for the
Government to communicate its goals and programmes
more clearly to the population. If properly harnessed,
investments in the three economic pillars identified by
the Government - agriculture, natural resources and
tourism - will generate economic growth and
accelerate the pace of development in the country.

Finally, we wish to express our appreciation to
UNMIT and the United Nations country team for the
important roles they have played in promoting peace,
stability and development in Timor-Leste. We call on
donors and development partners to provide long-term,
predictable support that will strengthen the
Government as it faces the onerous challenges of
achieving lasting peace and security in the country. We
commend the United Nations capacity-building and
technical assistance support for Timor-Leste, rendered
through UNMIT and the United Nations Development
Programme. The establishment of the National Defence
Institute is a laudable demonstration of this
commitment.

Nigeria shares the Secretary-General's view that
UNMIT's police presence will be vital to support the
PNTL in capacity-building, skill enhancement and
specific advisory functions in all districts and units of
Timor-Leste throughout 2012. UNMIT police will also
provide operational support to the PNTL in the event of
extreme circumstances, if so required and requested,
during the period of elections in 2012. Given the
critical roles to be played by UNMIT, Nigeria supports
the extension of its mandate for another year.

