Mr. Haavisto (Finland): At the outset, let me
congratulate Uganda as President of the Security
Council for taking up the important topic of peace and
security in Africa and support for African Union (AU)
peacekeeping.

I associate myself fully with the statement that
will be made on behalf of the European Union (EU).

We have to recognize that African Union
peacekeeping has already made a difference in two of
the most challenging conflicts on the continent,
namely, the conflict in Darfur, Sudan, and the conflict
in Somalia. The African Union was the first to react to
the atrocities in Darfur through its African Union
Mission in the Sudan operation, which has now been
incorporated into the joint African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. The current
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is
working under the utmost of difficult conditions on the
ground in Mogadishu and providing basic security for
the Transitional Federal Government and for the people
of Mogadishu. Uganda and Burundi have continued to
be the major troop-contributing countries to AMISOM,
despite the risky situation on the ground.

The AU-led AMISOM. in Somalia is in many
ways one of the most demanding operations being
conducted. It is in the fundamental interest of African
countries and international partners to ensure that the
AU-led operations operate efficiently and on a sound
financial basis. Together we also need to do more to
build African capabilities. We warmly welcome closer
cooperation among the AU, EU and United Nations
towards that end.

While the AU and subregional organizations have
a key role in the management and resolution of African
crises, cooperation and support from international
partners are important. Finland is committed to support
EU and United Nations efforts in this field. Currently,
for example, we are supporting the Amani Africa
exercise as well as a United Nations pre-deployment
course for African police officers to be deployed in
Darfur and Somalia. Together with other Nordic
countries, we are examining ways to enhance our
support for the development of the East Africa standby
force.

With regard to Somalia, Finland contributes to
the fight against piracy trough the EU Operation
Atalanta and to the training of Somali security forces
through the EU training mission. However, we all
know that efforts conducted outside Somalia will have
little impact unless we are simultaneously able to
support the Somali peace process and a stronger
AMISOM. presence in Somalia. Therefore, Finland is
also preparing funding to additionally support the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia in its
efforts to reach out to all stakeholders to achieve
sustainable peace in Somalia.

We look forward to the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General on United Nations-AU cooperation
on peace and security. We hope that the report will also
be able to provide more clarity on the question of more
predictable funding for United Nations-mandated AU
operations. In that regard, we also welcome the
management reforms within the AU Commission as
well as the efforts of the Commission to strengthen the
African Union's own resource base.

I want to take up two examples of how Finland
supports its African partners in the field of peace and
security. First, we support the AU in developing its

peace mediation capacity through a three-year
programme. The purpose of this programme is to
develop Africa's own capacities to prevent and resolve
conflicts, including support in the participation of
women and adequate consideration of gender issues in
peace processes. We wish to congratulate the African
Union for its work in advancing the agenda on women,
peace and security. As the Security Council prepares to
celebrate the tenth anniversary of its resolution 1325
(2000) next week, it is good to remember that the
strong call for the resolution came from African
countries, including civil society actors.

Secondly, Finland contributes to the work of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel on the
Sudan, led by former South African President Mbeki.
The aim of the Panel is to provide support for the
Sudanese parties in resolving the conflict in Darfur and
in implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Also, the role of regional organizations, such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
is important. Finland has supported IGAD in its
Somalia and Sudan activities since 2004.

Non-governmental organizations have an
important role to play in enhancing peace and security.
Finland, together with the South African
non-governmental organization the African Centre for
the Constructive Resolution of Disputes, established
the African Peacebuilding Coordination Programme.
We have also been a longstanding supporter of Femmes
Africa Solidarite', most recently in their work in
assisting the Governments of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi in the preparations
of their national action plans on women, peace and
security.

Despite the economic crisis, Finland has been
able to increase its official development assistance
(ODA) funding. More than 50 per cent of our ODA
goes to Africa.
The African Union and the subregional
organizations in Africa have created a political and
security architecture for the continent that deserves our
full recognition and praise. I believe it is in the interest
of everyone that the African Union develops further
into an even stronger actor. The crisis prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development efforts
of African organizations deserve all possible support
from international partners.

Also to this end, the United Nations Security
Council must be enlarged to better correspond to the
current realities in the world. I think it would be in the
interest of all of us if Africa were more strongly
represented in the Security Council.

