Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this Security
Council briefing on Kosovo. We welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, and we note with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/74) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dacic', and the statement made by Mr. Hashim
Thaci.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates that
full adherence to international law - non-intervention,
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and political independence of States, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes - is critical to the maintenance
of international peace and security. In calling for a
peaceful solution to the question of Kosovo, Venezuela
believes that resolution 1244 (1999) remains the
internationally accepted legal basis applicable to this
dispute, aimed at finding a general solution through
political negotiation. In that regard, we call for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia to be
guaranteed.

Our country supports the resumption of dialogue
and negotiations between Serbia and the local authorities
in the province of Kosovo, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to achieve a mutually acceptable
solution between the parties. An important step in
this direction was the establishment of the Kosovo
Assembly and the establishment of a new Government
in Pristina.

We note with cautious optimism that security on
the administrative border of Kosovo remains stable,
although certain incidents have been reported since the
most recent Council meeting on this issue (S/PV.7327),
held in December 2014. We appreciate the positive
role played by the United Nations through the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo by
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, as well as its cooperation with the Kosovo Force
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), under the auspices of the Organization.

The mediation of the European Union between
Belgrade and Pristina and the transfer of functions from
UNMIK to EULEX do not, in our View, undermine the
work being done on the ground. We hope that such
missions will continue, on the basis of their respective
mandates, to play a constructive role in achieving an
appropriate solution to the Kosovo issue. However, we
note with concern reports that some senior officials of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
have been implicated in acts of corruption. We hope that
Mr. Gabriele Meucci, in his efforts as Head of EULEX,
and the independent legal expert Mr. Jean-Paul Jacque
will continue, in a fair and transparent manner, to
carry out their assigned task to clarify the facts and
thereby pursue their work to promote the rule of law in
Kosovo. Moreover, we encourage interested parties to
intensify their joint efforts in the process of clarifying
the situation of missing persons, and we thank EULEX
for its forensic cooperation in this matter. We also
urge the speedy establishment of the specialist court
to investigate allegations of crimes against humanity
committed during the armed conflict.

Venezuela rejects terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as the spread of extremism.
In this regard, we note with appreciation the steps
being taken in Kosovo to prevent the recruitment of
persons as foreign terrorist fighters to participate in
armed conflict in Syria and Iraq. However, we urge the
authorities to remain highly vigilant in this matter of
extreme sensitivity in terms of security.

We attach great importance to the full respect of
the human rights of displaced persons and minorities,
as well as to their right to return to their places of
origin so that they can fully enjoy their human rights
free of discrimination. However, we are concerned
that incidents continue to occur against Kosovo Serb
citizens in certain areas, and we therefore call for
appropriate measures to be taken to remedy this
situation and prevent persecution and hostility on the
basis of ethnicity or religion.

We are further concerned that the sale ofbusinesses
and property in Kosovo undermines the rights of the
Kosovo Serb minority and may become yet another
factor impeding the return of the displaced to their
homes. Illegal actions against cultural and religious
heritage have given rise to serious incidents between
the two communities that hinder the process of peace
and dialogue in Kosovo. We encourage both parties
to work together to prevent a recurrence of such acts,
which endanger peace and dialogue in the region.

Finally, we call on all parties to redouble their
efforts to find a peaceful, just and lasting political
solution within the framework of international law,
including full compliance with resolution 1244 (1999).

