Mr. Jobe (Gambia): Let me at the outset express my
delegation's appreciation to the delegation of the
Netherlands for organizing this important debate on small
arms. The holding of this debate during the Netherlands
presidency of the Council reflects the importance the
Government of the friendly Kingdom of the Netherlands
attaches to the subject. We congratulate you, Sir, for
convening this meeting.

The widespread availability of small arms is a major
cause of concern for my delegation. Small arms and light
weapons have a serious destabilizing effect on societies. In
the African continent, which presently is replete with
conflicts, the availability of small arms and light weapons
exacerbates and fuels conflict. In societies where there are
social problems, poverty and crime the availability of small
arms contributes to those problems through their negative
impact in terms of their psychological, physical and social
consequences.

The problem of small arms and light weapons poses
complex challenges which cut across all levels of society
and relate not only to inter-State or intra-State conflicts but
also include banditry and crime. For societies that are
experiencing conflict or are emerging from conflict
situations, the availability of small arms and light weapons
poses an even bigger challenge.

We believe the cold war is over. The supply of arms
as a conflict-management device is no longer acceptable.
My delegation recognizes the close linkage between the
proliferation of small arms and international peace and
security. We recognize also the interrelationship between
international peace and security, and sustainable
development. We in Africa need sustainable development:
we therefore need peace and security, and hence less
proliferation of the millions of small arms in which our
continent is awash.

The challenges posed by the problem of the
proliferation of small arms cannot be addressed by
individual Governments alone, least of all those of countries
in regions of conflict. The problem of proliferation
transcends national and regional levels and must therefore
be tackled through international and global cooperation.

This is not to suggest that local efforts are not
necessary: of course they are. In our view, local efforts are
central to curbing the problem. Such efforts may include
buy-back programmes; collection and disposal; and
effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants in societies emerging out of conflict.
Recently, a ceremony of that nature took place in Liberia,
at which more than 20,000 small arms were incinerated.

I hope that this practice continues and, in addition, that it
is monitored, so that the results can prove permanent.

Because of the magnitude of the problem, an
international process - or processes - is necessary to
reinforce local, national or regional processes. It is
necessary that international norms should be developed to
address the problem. We in West Africa, aware of the
problem that the proliferation of small arms has presented
for our subregion, have adopted - at the conference of
the heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States held in Abuja, on 30
October 1998 - a moratorium on the production of and
trade in small arms.

Since the end of the cold war, there has been
remarkable progress towards the development of a
comprehensive global framework for action against small-
arms proliferation. I crave members' indulgence to
mention a few.

At the United Nations level, the General Assembly
has adopted resolutions which focus on the potential
destabilizing effects of arms accumulation and transfers,
their possible impact on socio-economic development and
illicit trafficking thereof. The "Supplement to an Agenda
for Peace" also makes a case for microdisarmament. The
United Nations Group of Governmental Experts on Small
Arms also contributed significantly to the efforts of the
General Assembly.

It is also noteworthy to highlight that a range of
United Nations and other global bodies have been
developing programmes to tackle this issue. The
Economic and Social Council - through the Commission
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice - the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World
Bank and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
are all engaged in this issue in one way or another.

At the regional level, the ECOWAS Moratorium is
a good example. Other regional organizations, such as the
European Union - through its Programme for Preventing
and Combating Illicit Trafficking in Conventional Arms
and the European Union Code of Conduct on Arms
Exports - and the Organization of American

 

States (OAS) - through its Inter-American Convention
Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related
Materials - are finding ways to tackle the problem.

My delegation welcomes these initiatives. It is our
view that any international effort designed to address the
twin problems of illicit transfers and excessive
accumulation should be encouraged. However, a coherent
and coordinated approach is needed to address the problem.
As such, we welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General
for coordinated action on small arms, which is designed to
ensure a coherent and coordinated approach to the small-
arms issue within the United Nations system.

We welcome the high priority accorded to the role of
the United Nations in promoting better understanding of the
direct and indirect consequences of the proliferation of
small arms. It is our hope that, ultimately, international
consensus will emerge for global action.

In order to effectively address the problem of the
proliferation of small arms, measures for the promotion of
social, economic and political conditions that provide safety
for individuals and societies are indispensable. Coupled
with such measures should be well-defined policies
designed to improve domestic regulation, controls for
production and transfers, measures to address illicit trade
and measures to ensure removal of weapons from post-
conflict situations.
In this context, the Security Council has a special role
to play in conflict and post-conflict situations. The Security
Council could, in such situations, address the issues of
proliferation in its interventions. Arms embargoes could
also play a central role in helping to reduce proliferation.
However, many such embargoes of the Council are more
honoured in their breach than in their observance. The
Security Council should therefore make constructive efforts
to ensure the effectiveness of such embargoes. The
leadership role of Canada on efforts to render more
effective the sanctions against UNITA is therefore
commendable and worthy of emulation.

One might argue rightly that all States have the right
and responsibility to acquire arms for their defence needs.
In the case of Africa, however, I might hasten to support
the view of the Secretary-General in his report on Africa
that our compelling development interests require that a
minimum of our resources be diverted for military
purposes. African States can help to diminish the large
military expenditures by implementing transparency and
confidence-building measures in the military and security
fields. We therefore support the proposal for African
States to participate in the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and also welcome the
recommendation for the establishment of regional
registers.

We must, however, acknowledge that the
responsibility in the case of Africa is two-pronged. While
African States must get their priorities right, arms
manufacturing countries, too, must exercise restraint in
supplying arms to African States, particularly in regions
of conflict.

In conclusion, while the efforts of the Council to
lend its voice to the efforts to halt the excessive
accumulation of and traffic in small arms is laudable, we
wish to caution that the underlying sociological, economic
and political causes of conflict must be addressed so as to
create conditions of stability and thus reduce the need for
arms and, consequently, for conflict.

In this context, we welcome the momentum
generated by the Secretary-General's report on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. It is our hope that the
momentum generated by this report will not be lost and
that recommendations contained therein will be
implemented. We believe that it is in this spirit of
solidarity that you, Sir, have decided to highlight this
issue during your country's presidency, at this historic
moment when the General Assembly is holding its last
session of this millennium. History will positively judge
the pertinence of the move undertaken by your country,
the Netherlands, as you have always worked in this field
in past decades to create an asylum for humanity against
the cruelties and the pains that are created by man's own
invention against the human race.

