Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
First, allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening this debate
on Angola, at a crucial stage of the peace process of that
country. We would also like to thank the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the member States of the Southern

 

African Development Community (SADC) for having
requested today's meeting of the Council.

In addition to the invaluable contributions of the
Foreign Ministers of SADC, the Secretary-General has
submitted an excellent report on recent events in Angola.
We welcome that report, as well as the efforts of his
Special Representative to ensure that the final phase of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) will be successfully concluded. We would
also like to express our thanks to the troika of observer
States for their political work of recent days to overcome
existing problems.

The peace process in Angola is at a critical juncture
and that is why delays in the political negotiations in
recent months have caused widespread alarm. We have
received with deep concern news of the rejection of the
offer made by President Dos Santos to the UNITA leader
of one of the two vice-presidential posts. It is unfortunate
that such a sensitive matter - one on which agreement
already existed - was not handled in such a way as to
place the country before the interests of UNITA.

The extremely tense political climate resulting from
this fact jeopardizes the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the world. We believe that the
"Mediation Document" has been an important and timely
contribution in restoring confidence and easing the
deadlock. However, the lack of receptivity to its
proposals - demonstrated by non-compliance with
suggested timetables for the adoption of concrete
measures - reflects unutterable contempt for this new
effort of the Secretary-General's Special Representative
and observer countries.

In the light of all this, it is obvious that the fifth
meeting between President Dos Santos and the leader of
UNITA is of particular importance. The Council must
take measures to ensure that the leader of UNITA attend
that meeting, since it has been his practice not to attend
meetings to which he has been invited. The most recent
demonstration of his lack of interest was his absence at
the recent summit convened by SADC members in a
praiseworthy attempt to promote progress in the peace
process.

The process of demobilization and reintegration
requires financing, since only 27.4 per cent of the budget
is currently covered, and if new contributions are not
received, the process will be paralysed. Support from the
donor community is also necessary for rehabilitating high-

 

priority projects to absorb the large number of refugees,
displaced persons and ex-combatants. The international
community is completely justified in calling for a show of
political will successfully to conclude the peace process in
Angola on the part of those leaders who bear the
unshirkable responsibility to ensure improved living
standards for those who have suffered most from this civil
war: the people of Angola.

The economic and social challenges before Angola are
of such magnitude that they require the efforts of all of its
inhabitants and leaders. That is why the Government and,
in particular, UNITA, must increase their efforts to
consolidate peace, as that is the only way to elicit the
contributions needed from the international community to
overcome this lengthy crisis in Angola.

