Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): We too would like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing on
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/43) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, a country with which
Gabon is proud to have excellent relations. We thank
him for his statement, the content of which we fully
support.

Throughout the period under review, the political
situation in Kosovo was dominated by the holding, on
12 December 2010, of the first legislative elections
since the contested unilateral declaration of
independence, which took place on February 2008. We
regret that those elections were not organized or
supervised by UNMIK, as provided for in its mandate
under resolution 1244 (1999).

We also regret that the resumption of dialogue
between Serbia and Kosovo, which the General
Assembly recommended in its resolution 64/298, of
9 September 2010, under the facilitation of the
European Union, has been delayed owing to the
holding of those elections. Furthermore, the
publication of the Dick Marty report, detailing the
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo, is a source of concern to my
delegation. We believe that this is an important issue
that deserves all due attention. Gabon therefore
supports the need for the Security Council to establish
an investigation mechanism answerable to it in order to
shed light on the facts highlighted in the Marty report.
In that regard, we welcome UNMIK's readiness to
provide the necessary support for those inquiries.

Furthermore, we deplore the deteriorating
environment in Kosovo, in particular in the north,
where UNMIK is subject to hostile and unjustified
reporting by some media. We also deplore the fact that
illegal construction has helped to stoke tension
between the communities. We urge all parties to show
restraint and to favour the path of dialogue in stead.

On the security front, while the situation remains
generally calm, my delegation nevertheless continues
to be concerned about the increase in the number of
murders and cases of illegal possession of weapons.
Organized crime, smuggling and drug trafficking
contribute to an unsafe environment and continue to be
of concern in Kosovo.

My delegation would again like to underscore the
importance of the two parties pursuing talks on the
issue of missing persons, which continues to
undermine efforts at reconciliation among the various
communities. However, we welcome the progress
already made in that regard. We also welcome the fact
that the parties have continued their cooperation on
religious and cultural heritage.

With regard to the issue of the return of internally
displaced persons and refugees, we are concerned
about the financial and material difficulties that hinder
their reintegration. We would therefore urge the
international community to provide consistent
assistance in order to encourage the return of those
people to their places of origin.

I would like to reaffirm that my country promotes
dialogue and consultation to settle crises and conflicts.
In the case of Kosovo, Gabon rejects any unilateral
declaration of independence and continues to strongly
support respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic Serbia.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our
appreciation to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, which
continue to play an important role in the context of
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). We also renew
our support for the work of all agencies of the United
Nations system present on the ground, including
UNMIK and its entire staff, whose professionalism we
commend.

