Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): 1 would like to thank
Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing. We have taken note
of the report (S/2013/72) of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

We welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie, Prime
Minister of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo, to the Security
Council and thank them for their statements.

There has been intense engagement between the two

Prime Ministers during the current reporting period.

We are encouraged by the commitment demonstrated

by both sides to resolve their differences through

peaceful means. We would like to commend the High

Representative of the European Union for Foreign

Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine

Ashton, for her tireless efforts to bring the two sides

closer to an agreement. Dialogue offers the best means

to address the outstanding issues between Kosovo and
Serbia and reach mutually acceptable solutions. We
therefore urge both sides to maintain the momentum of
the dialogue process and seize the present window of
opportunity by making the necessary compromises. We
sincerely hope that the next round of talks on 2 April
will lead to an agreement.

The report of the Secretary-General notes that
the high-level engagement between the two sides
has resulted in the start of the implementation of the
agreement on integrated border management at four of
the six crossing points. The full implementation of the
agreement will help to address a key source of discord
that has caused much of the violence witnessed over
the last year and a half. Implementation of the other
agreements concluded with the facilitation of the
European Union would also serve to enhance mutual
confidence and help the dialogue process.

The security situation in Kosovo has remained calm.
However, the north continued to see some violence. The
overall number of recorded incidents affecting minority
communities has decreased. All such incidents should
be thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice. Incidents involving the vandalism of
religious sites, damage and theft at Orthodox churches,
and the desecration of Orthodox graves continue to be
reported. Such incidents are harmful to intercommunal
relations and must be addressed.
The Kosovo police should ensure that it equally
provides for security for all communities inhabiting the
country. The adoption of the community policing and
action plan is a step in the right direction. The creation
of conditions for the peaceful integration of minority
communities and sustainable returns is essential for
building the foundation for long-term reconciliation. It
would help in convincing the Kosovo Serbs that they
share a common future with the Albanians.

We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
of the need for well-grounded efforts aimed at promoting
reconciliation among the communities in Kosovo
alongside the political process. That will require sincere
efforts on the part of the leadership on both sides. We
therefore encourage political leaders in both countries
to reach out to their respective constituencies in order
to prepare them for the difficult decisions and painful
compromises ahead.

Finally, UNMIK continues to play a vital role
in ensuring stability in Kosovo. We would like to
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and his team for their dedication and hard work
in the service of peace in Kosovo.

