Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his
introduction of the Secretary-General's comprehensive
report (S/2004/888), and we thank him for his work as
the head of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). We would also welcome the
presence here among us of Ambassador Jose Luis
Guterres, Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste.

We fully support the statement to be made by the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, and I
will therefore limit myself to making a few comments.

We welcome the fact that in recent months
Timor-Leste has continued to make steady progress in
institution-building and in developing the rule of law.
With the support of UNMISET and bilateral and
multilateral support, the functioning of the judicial
system, the public administration and law enforcement
agencies have improved and have been further
strengthened. We must thank for all of that the Timor-
Leste authorities and UNMISET.

That notwithstanding, from the Secretary-
General's report, we can see that there are many tasks
still pending in important areas. I would highlight in
particular the upcoming holding of local elections, the
anticipated appointment of a Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice, the adoption of important bills on
the development of the rule of law, the training of civil
servants in the judicial and financial areas and building
the capacity of the national police and the armed
forces.

In view of that, Spain wholeheartedly supports
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
his report. We consider that the UNMISET mandate
should be extended for a final six-month period,
retaining its present tasks, configuration and size. We
thank the delegation of Brazil for the draft resolution
on this matter, which has our full support because it
will give Security Council support for an UNMISET
exit strategy.

We support the initiative taken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to set up a
number of joint working groups to prepare for the
transition of the present peacekeeping and peace-
building mission to a mechanism for assistance to
strengthen institutions and ensure sustainable
development. A support and coordination role will
continue to be played by the United Nations system,
which, with the cooperation of other multilateral
institutions, is now doing outstanding work. In
addition, we hope that the international donors
conference to be held in March 2005 will ensure that
assistance will be provided to the Timorese people,
which will continue to be needed in the new phase.

In the area of human rights, we welcome the
Serious Crimes Unit's efforts to complete its activities
on time. We hope that the final report of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
will soon be made public. We also agree with the
Secretary-General's conviction that all the perpetrators
of serious crimes carried out in 1999 in East-Timor
must be tried; we await proposals from the Secretary-
General to avoid impunity for those perpetrators.

Finally, we must highlight the good relations
between Timor-Leste and neighbouring States.
Undoubtedly, these are a key factor for the stability and
development of the Timorese nation. In particular, we
hope that this propitious climate will soon lead to
specific agreements on maritime and land border
demarcation, and that it will ensure good-neighbourly
relations and regional cooperation.

