The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.

I want to first thank Mr. Jean Arnault for his
excellent work and his briefing today. I want to reiterate
Sweden's full support of his efforts and those of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

I also welcome Vice-President Naranjo to the
Chamber today. We thank him for his very important
personal contribution to peace in Colombia. Through
him I also want to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to President Juan Manuel Santos for his leadership, as
well as that of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC) for their determination to turn
a new page and to deliver peace for the benefit of all
Colombians. Indeed, FARC's transition from guerilla
movement to political party is historic and irreversible.
We also congratulate the people ofColombia on the recent
elections and incoming President Duque, as he assumes
his office soon. The Colombian Peace Agreement
demonstrates that conflicts can be solved with dialogue
rather than guns. It is an inspirational example.

Ensuring that the full benefits of the peace
process are secured will require continued investment
in its implementation. We welcome that the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, a key component of the Peace
Agreement, has started its crucial work. It was
designed and agreed with the objective of guaranteeing
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition, and the
fulfilment of this commitment should help heal the
divisions created by decades of conflict.

The continuing violence against, and the
increasing number of killings of, human rights
defenders, community leaders, FARC members and
their families, as outlined in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/723), is of grave concern. It underscores
the need for the State to fill the power vacuum, to
do its utmost to ensure respect for human rights and
accountability for violations and abuses thereof, and to
safeguard that the rule of law benefits all Colombians
in all of Colombia.

In that connection, we welcome the national pact
signed by both President Santos and President-elect
Duque and by key State institutions and political
parties. We encourage the Government of Colombia to
pair its efforts to provide security in conflict-affected
areas with a stronger presence of civilian authorities
and agencies providing basic services to communities.

The Peace Agreement has provided a historic
opportunity to bring socioeconomic development and
the rule of law to all parts of the country. To seize that
opportunity, a redoubled and sustained effort is now
needed from all parts of the State in support of the
wider Peace Agreement, including comprehensive rural
reform, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible peace
dividends for all Colombians.

The full political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration
of former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo members is of the utmost
importance. That includes progress on the setting up of
productive projects and the key issue of access to land
for reintegration.

We would like to highlight the important
recommendation in the report on the importance of
combating the drug trade as an integral part of the
effort to advance peace, development and the rule of
law in former conflict areas. We also want to stress the
importance of encouraging the voluntary illicit-crop
substitution programme, which can provide people with
a lawful and predictable income opportunity.

The Peace Agreement in Colombia is a model for
inclusion. To succeed in consolidating the peace, the
implementation of the peace process must continue
to be inclusive. In that regard, I want to highlight the
important work the Mission has undertaken on gender
mainstreaming, as well as its engagement with women's
groups and youth groups in Colombia.

Finally, we welcome the ongoing talks between the
Government and the Ejercito Nacional de Liberacion
and reiterate that the United Nations and the Security
Council should stand ready to assist the parties in a
meaningful way. As a member of the Grupo de Paises
de Apoyo, we will assist the process as much as we can.

Over the last two years, the Council has travelled
the path of peace with the Government and the
people of Colombia. We look forward to continuing
our constructive engagement with the incoming
Government, given the Council's commitment to
support implementation of the peace agreement.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Vice-President of Colombia.

