Let me first congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council in July, wish you the greatest of success and assure you of our full support. We thank Germany for convening this high-level open debate on pandemics and security. I welcome the Secretary-General, thank him for his briefing and commend his leadership in mobilizing the United Nations system and the international community in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. lalso thank the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the civil society representative for their briefings. With the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the world has clearly embarked on a volatile and unstable new phase. For the first time in living memory, humanity is confronting a common threat that it must defeat collectively. Since the early weeks of the pandemic, at the initiative of Tunisia and France and with the support and help of the rest of 10 elected members of the Council, Council members started working on a draft resolution to address the impact of COVID-19 on issues under its mandate. As we all know, the process was long and difficult. We all tried hard to go beyond our divergent views and concerns, and just yesterday, | July, we finally managed to prioritize the interests of the international community. That resolution, even though adopted after a delay of three months, bears the important message that consensus is possible with political will and a message of hope and renewed faith in multilateralism. I take this opportunity to congratulate all Security Council members on the unanimous adoption of that important resolution, and thank them for their patience, support and constructive engagement. In this regard, Tunisia shares the Secretary-General's assessment concerning the impact of the pandemic on peace and security, as outlined in his statement before the Security Council on 9 April. My country fully supports all the initiatives and measures he proposed to mitigate the potential impact of the pandemic, especially in conflict-affected areas, in particular his appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and the launching of the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19 by the United Nations. At the same time, we commend the leading role of the United Nations system in coordinating the global response to COVID-19, and we support, in this regard, the central contribution of the World Health Organization to these efforts. The COVID-19 pandemic has reversed our assumptions about the current world order. It is telling us that the hierarchy of global security threats is changing rapidly, that we are dealing with new global enemies, and that no country, no matter how developed, will be immune to its impact. Obviously, we can expect the impact to be even more devastating in less developed countries and on vulnerable populations. Tunisia profoundly believes that we will not be able to defeat this pandemic in each of our countries without solidarity and unity at the international, regional and national levels: solidarity because none of us can face this huge challenge alone; unity because the virus will use all weaknesses in our local, national and international systems to spread and kill. We should never forget that no one is immune until everyone is immune. Beyond the heavy death toll of more than half a million persons and the immediate health consequences of the pandemic, the global economy is heading towards another great depression. As food supplies come under strain, prices are getting higher and unemployment is rising, especially in fragile societies or less developed countries. This will translate into food insecurity, and could quickly escalate into political unrest, violence and conflict. Tensions are already flaring around the world, and not just in war zones. In conflict settings, the situation could be even worse. The uncertainty created by the pandemic encouraged some actors to promote further division and turmoil, leading to escalation of violence and disastrous consequences on civilians and vulnerable persons, especially internally displaced persons and refugees. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to all United Nations troops in peace operations, as well as to humanitarian actors and relief personnel providing support to contain the pandemic and to ensure the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance to those vulnerable populations, sometimes risking their lives in the context of the pandemic. In conclusion, as we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, it is important to recognize that humanity is today witnessing new types of threats to international peace and security, emanating not only from pandemics but also from climate change and cybercriminality. As the nature and scope of threats evolve, we need to rethink security, and adapt our approaches and tools. It is clear we cannot face such dangers using the same tools we inherited from a bygone age. A change of paradigm is greatly needed. Tunisia strongly believes that the Security Council needs to discuss these issues more in depth to be able to deliver on its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
