Mr. Jurica (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. I also thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his
report on the efforts of the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I).

Let me begin by expressing our appreciation for
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) under the able leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura. The UNAMI mandate is an
important one, that of assisting the Iraqi people and
their Government to achieve stability, security and
prosperity. Croatia salutes UNAMI's efforts aimed at
advancing political dialogue, extending electoral
assistance, supporting the constitutional review process
and facilitating the regional dialogue process. We
commend Mr. De Mistura's approach to resolving
disputed internal boundaries.

While not underestimating the remaining
challenges, we are pleased at having been presented
with a very different picture of Iraq than that of just a
year ago. The recent episodes of violence should not
obscure the larger trend of improved security that has
begun to assert itself with the surge in MNF-I forces.
Despite the challenges, there is visible progress in
achieving the political, economic and security
objectives set by the Government of Iraq, and those
achievements should not be minimized. There are
continuing improvements in the capacity of Iraq's
national security forces, which we see as critical in
reaffirming the independence and sovereignty of Iraq.

08-3196]
We welcome this progress and commend the resolute
steps taken by the Iraqi Government to assume greater
responsibility for security, including its response to the
threat of sectarianism, terrorism and outlaws.

The institutions of today's Iraq are based on
democratic elections and a constitutional referendum.
Now they need to be consolidated. Violence must not
be allowed to disrupt the political process. By the same
token, my delegation continues to believe that, without
serious advances in the political process, the recent
security gains could be at risk. We share the view of
the Secretary-General that more needs to be done to
help Iraqi communities resolve the fundamental issues
that divide them. The Government of Iraq and all the
political actors should rise to the occasion and act
responsibly, engaging in a meaningful and inclusive
political dialogue, while rejecting sectarianism and
extremism.

We are looking forward to the upcoming
provincial elections as an occasion to consolidate the
democratic institutions of Iraq and advance national
reconciliation. We took note of the preparatory
activities already under way and hope to see the timely
adoption of the governorate elections law. The
intensified pace of enacting the relevant legislation
should also be applied to other important areas, notably
on the issue of hydrocarbon resources, the
implementation of article 140 of the constitution and
the constitutional revision process.

Dialogue with and the constructive engagement
of Iraq's neighbours is another critical component in
the long-term stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq.
Aiding groups that attack Iraqi and coalition forces and
undermine the security and stabilization of Iraq is
unacceptable. My delegation takes note of the positive
trends in regional dialogue, including last week's third
expanded ministerial conference of the neighbouring
countries of Iraq, as well as the preceding meeting of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Gulf
Cooperation Council in Kuwait. Regular meetings of
the three Working Groups are encouraging. We listened
with attention to Mr. Pascoe's comments and can only
echo his call regarding the need to further strengthen
regional dialogue and cooperation.

Moreover, my delegation is mindful of the need
to protect and assist displaced and vulnerable Iraqis,
through concerted efforts by all concerned parties: the
Government of Iraq, Iraq's neighbours and the
international community. Following the launching of
the Iraq consolidated appeal in February, we hope to
see further contributions and pledges.

At this point, Iraq is still at a stage where it
deserves our support - that is, the support of the
international community, and particularly the countries
of the region - in its transition to a stable, peaceful
and prosperous democracy. We look forward to the
forthcoming Iraq Compact annual review conference in
Stockholm as an opportunity to reaffirm the
international commitment to assist in the realization of
the aspirations of the Iraqi people. For its part, the Iraqi
Government should meet its obligations as a
responsible partner and co-owner of this process.

The United Nations is well placed to play a
central role in assisting the Iraqi Government in this
endeavour, both through the UNAMI mandate and
through its leading role in the Iraq Compact. Let me
conclude by expressing our support and gratitude to all
the United Nations staff on the ground, who under
difficult conditions continue to carry out the tasks
entrusted to them in resolution 1770 (2007).

