Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to thank you for having
convened this debate under your presidency,
Mr. President.

Since the last debate on this subject (S/PV.6427),
many events have underscored the depth and solidity of
the reasoning that has guided Nicaragua in the debates
on the protection of civilians, both in the Council and
in the General Assembly. What we are witnessing in
Libya - the exploitation for political purposes of a
noble subject by a small group of countries - has
drained any credibility from the allegedly altruistic
intentions behind the promotion of the protection of
civilians.

Once again we have witnessed the shameful
manipulation of the slogan "protection of civilians" for
dishonourable political purposes, seeking
unequivocally and blatantly to impose regime change,
attacking the sovereignty of a State Member of the
United Nations and violating the Organization's
Charter. Once again, the logic of interventionism and
hegemony has prevailed through a disastrous decision
with incalculable potential consequences for tens of
millions of individuals worldwide.

If the founding Charter of the United Nations
does not include any kind of reference to a supposed
right of humanitarian interference, that is not because
attempts were not made at the time of its drafting to do

so, but rather because it was obvious that this principle
was attempt to interfere for purely political purposes in
the internal affairs of States. That, inter alia, is why
respect for the sovereignty of States, for
non-interference and for non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States was placed above any other
consideration. Therefore, there is no legal justification
for poorly defined concepts such as the protection of
civilians to prevail over the sovereignty of States.

The Security Council must explain to us,
particularly in the light of resolution 1973 (2011), how
civilians are to be protected from shelling. We ought to
be told - because we have the right to know - how
many civilians have perished in the name of this
alleged protection of civilians. We need to be told who
is going to protect the civilians from their supposed
protectors. Someone needs to explain to us how, in
applying the protection of civilians, the assassination
of a head of State of a sovereign country is planned.
We must be told how the bombing death of innocent
children contributes to the protection of civilians.

Here, I would like to quote Bishop Giovanni
Martinelli, a witness of the atrocities committed by
NATO's aircraft and the Apostolic Vicar in Tripoli:

"Bombings, however targeted they may be, cause
civilian casualties. Bombs are immoral. I ask
myself then, is it moral to assassinate a head of
State? What right to we have to do so?"

I would also like to recall what was said by
Commander Daniel Ortega, President of Nicaragua,
who stated a few days ago:
"NATO's military intervention in Libya,
condemned by heads of State, including by Pope
Benedict XVI, by leaders, individuals and
movements worldwide, is causing an ever-
increasing number of civilian deaths. I reiterate
Nicaragua's call for an immediate ceasefire. We
once again call for a return to dialogue and
negotiations, which should be the hallmark of
international relations and of relations between
the inhabitants of a country when any form of
dispute divides its citizens."

In conclusion, I wish to underscore that the
inexcusable double standard of actions dishonours and
fatally undermines the credibility of the Council and
tarnishes the Organization as a whole. Where is the
Council's resolve when it comes to the heroic and
martyred Palestinian people? It is precisely this double
standard that fuels, inter alia, the expansionist and
occupation policies that allow Israel to continue to act
with full impunity against the heroic Palestinian people
and the Arab nation.

