Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to deliver this statement at this quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. The question of Palestine has historically been an issue of concern and vital importance to the Movement, and it is with deep regret that we witness the passing of yet another year without a resolution to the conflict. Constituting a matter of international peace and security and also being the cornerstone for peace in the Middle East region, the situation there remains critical and unsustainable, and therefore continues to require the immediate attention of the international community. The statistics from 2019 are appalling. In the Gaza Strip, 44 Palestinian, including nine children and three women, were killed by Israeli security forces as a resultof air strikes during demonstrations, clashes, security operations and other incidents. Two thousand nine hundred and forty Palestinians were injured, including approximately 400 Palestinians by live ammunition, among them dozens of children. In the occupied West Bank, four Palestinians were shot and killed, including one woman, and 1,064 Palestinians were injured, including 23 children. In 2019, it was documented that the Israeli occupying authorities seized or destroyed 617 homes and structures in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, forcibly displacing 898 Palestinians. An increased number of settler-related attacks, incitement and harassment, particularly around the olive harvest season in the Hebron area, are also deeply concerning. In reflecting on this dismal reality, the Non-Aligned Movement seizes this opportunity to reaffirm its abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people, its unwavering support for their inalienable rights, including to self- determination, and its commitment to the alleviation of their plight, as well as to reaching a just, lasting and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine in every aspect. That solution is well-known and must be in line with international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations itself. The tools provided by multilateral diplomacy are the way to achieve such a solution, which cannot be unilaterally, forcibly or unfairly imposed. The Security Council has been entrusted with the clear responsibility to ensure the maintenance of international peace and security. Therefore, it must uphold its Charter duties and act to ensure the implementation of its own resolutions, which not only comprise the foundation for a peaceful solution to the conflict, but are, on top of that, legally binding for all United Nations Member States. We are deeply concerned that, for too long, this organ has been unable to fulfil its mandate with regard to this important question. At this critical moment, this requires immediate action to hold Israel - the occupying Power - accountable for its violations. The absence of justice only fosters greater impunity and further destabilizes the situation on the ground, severely diminishing the prospects for peace. The States members of the Movement deplore ongoing Israeli intransigence, illegal policies and measures that greatly undermine the realization of a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The Movement also reiterates its grave concerns about the continued deterioration of the situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem and in particular the Gaza Strip, where the illegal and suffocating Israeli blockade has imposed a dire humanitarian situation and deplorable socioeconomic conditions. The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe that resolution 2334 (2016) provides the most viable path towards peace, setting forth the essential requirements and parameters for the achievement of the two-State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders, in accordance with the long-standing terms for reference of peace endorsed by the international community, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. Hence, we call for its full and effective implementation. Israel must be compelled to cease completely all illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, the demolition of Palestinian homes and property, the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, all acts of violence, provocations and incitement against Palestinian civilians, and other human rights violations, many of which may amount to war crimes. Israel must fully comply with its duties and responsibilities under international law, including its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention as the occupying Power. It must immediately cease all policies and measures aimed at the alteration of the demography, character, identity and legal status of the occupied territories. It must also respect the historic status quo at the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem, including at Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The Non-Aligned Movement also reaffirms its support for Jordan in preserving and administrating the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, including Al-Haram A1-Sharif, and for the Hashemite custodianship of the holy sites, as exercised by His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein of Jordan. The Non-Aligned Movement commends the efforts of His Majesty King Mohammed VI as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The Movement welcomes the call for Al-Quds/Jerusalem, signed in Rabat on 30 March 2019 by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco and His Holiness Pope Francis, to stressthe important role that Al-Quds/Jerusalem plays as a city of tolerance and mutual respect among the people of the three monotheistic religions and the need to preserve its specificities and features as a city of peaceful coexistence. The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and that it withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The members of the Non-Aligned Movement condemn the statement made by the President of the United States of America on 21 March 2019, regarding the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as the subsequent unilateral and arbitrary proclamation on recognizing the Golan Heights as part of Israel, and call upon the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility by clearly condemning that provocative statement and proclamation. In the absence of a solution, the States members of the Movement reiterate their call for the continued provision of the required humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestine refugees. The Movement expresses its deep appreciation for the invaluable work done and the essential assistance provided by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to the Palestine refugees and welcomes the extension of its mandate until 30 June 2023. Inconclusion, the Non-Aligned Movementreaffirms its abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people, as well as its unwavering support for their just cause, and renews its commitment to further strengthening and coordinating the international efforts to achieve a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including the plight of Palestine refugees, on the basis of resolution 194 (III). We express our sincere hopes that this year will witness tangible progress in the heroic quest of the Palestinian people to attain justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations, including their right to self-determination, freedom and independence in their sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
