Archbishop Auza (Holy See) (spoke in French):
On behalf of His Holiness Pope Francis, I greatly thank
the French presidency for convening this debate on the
victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious
grounds in the Middle East.

(spoke in English)

The debate is not only timely, but also most urgent,
especially when calling to mind those who have already
lost their lives, for whom this open debate has come too
late. Their fate urges us to do all that we can to prevent
further victims of attacks and abuses based on ethnic
and, or, religious grounds. Christians and other religious
minorities of the Middle East seek to be heard by the
Council and other international forums, not in some
abstract form, but in a manner that is truly conscious
of their pain and suffering and their existential fear for
survival in the Middle East and elsewhere.

We must acknowledge that the problem exists
and that the hour is grave. Ethnic and religious
communities - including Turkmen, Shabak, Yazidi,
Sabaean, Kaka'e, Feyli Kurd, Shiite Arab and even
Sunni Arab and Kurd 4 face extreme pressure, abuse
of their human rights, torture, killing and all forms of
persecution, purely due to the faith they profess or the
ethnic group to which they belong.

The Christians in the Middle East have been
specifically targeted, killed or forced to flee their homes
and countries. We have helplessly watched as Assyrian
Christians have been kidnapped in Iraq by the so-called
Islamic State group, Egyptian Coptic Christians have
been beheaded by organizations affiliated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya, and the
Christians in Mosul have been nearly eliminated. Only
25 years ago, there were 2 million Christians living in
Iraq, while the most recent estimates are less than a
quarter of that figure.

Faced with the unbearable situation of living in
a conflict zone controlled by terrorist and extremist
organizations that constantly threaten them with death,
and with a deep sense of feeling abandoned to their
fate by the legitimate authorities and the international
community, entire communities of Christians,
especially from northern Iraq, have been brutally
forced to flee their homes and have sought refuge in
the Kurdistan region of Iraq and in the neighbouring
countries of the region.

The Holy See expresses profound gratitude to
countries and leaders in the region that have openly
defend the Christians as an integral part of the
religious, historical and cultural fabric of the region.
For 2,000 years, Christians have called the Middle
East home; indeed, as we know, the Middle East is the
cradle of Christianity. Thus, it pains us deeply that the
ancient Christian communities in the region - many
of which still speak Aramaic, the language of Jesus
Christ - are among those threatened with extinction.
Their uninterrupted existence in the region is testimony
to many centuries of coexistence, side by side, with
Muslims and other religious and ethnic communities.

Those communities are an integral part of the
cultural and religious identity of the Middle East,
thus their disappearance from there would not only
be a religious tragedy, but the loss of a rich cultural
and religious patrimony that contributes so much
to the societies to which they belong and which the
whole world has much interest in preserving. The Holy
See therefore calls on all of the leaders and people of
goodwill in the region and throughout the world to act
before it is too late.

In 2005 at the World Summit, the entire
international community agreed that every State has the
primary responsibility to protect its populations from
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing and related incitement. Moreover, the
international community recognizes its responsibility
to assist States in fulfilling their primary responsibility.
However, when a State is unable or unwilling to
uphold that primary responsibility, the international
community must be prepared to take action to protect
populations in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

As Pope Benedict XVI underlined in his address
to the General Assembly in 2008 (see A/62/PV.95),
the responsibility to protect is not a novel creation in
international law, but rather is rooted in the ancient ins
gentium 4 the law of peoples - as the foundation of
every action taken by those in Government with regard
to the governed. Building on that ancient tradition and
its reiterations in international humanitarian law and
in today's United Nations forums, Pope Francis has
repeatedly called upon the international community to
do all that it can to stop and to prevent further systematic
violence against ethnic and religious minorities.

The Holy See avails itself of this opportunity to
convey its deep appreciation to the countries in the
region and to all those who work tirelessly, even risking
their lives, to provide assistance to some 2.5 million
internally displaced persons in Iraq, to 12 million
Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance, of whom
4 million are living as refugees and 7.5 million are
internally displaced. Let us help these neighbourly
countries as they care for and welcome the refugees.
Delayed action will mean only that more people will
die, or be displaced or persecuted. Pope Francis exhorts
us all to join our efforts to support a Middle East that
will continue to be a welcoming home for all of its
ethnic and religious groups.

