The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to
the victims of human trafficking. This year alone,
nearly 3,000 people have lost their lives trying to
cross the Mediterranean simply to achieve a better
future. Operation Sophia, launched by the European
Union - which owes its name to the birth of a child
in a German boat after the rescue of her Somali
mother - summarizes the spirit of the undertaking
that brings us together today. Such vigilance and rescue
missions have the main purpose of saving lives and
fighting the trafficking in human beings.

The newly adopted resolution 2240 (2015) is an
initial step towards a qualitative leap at a time when
we must tackle those challenges. For some time, Spain
has been a witness to the unscrupulous exploitation to
which thousands of people have been subjected in the
Mediterranean. We have been pioneers in promoting a
comprehensive approach to respond to the phenomenon
of migration, based on an alliance among the countries
of origin, transit and destination. We enjoy excellent
cooperation with Morocco, Mauritania, Senegal,
Algeria and other African countries. We were one of
the promoters of the so-called Rabat Process, and later
of the Khartoum Process for East Africa. Within that
framework, Spain will demonstrate once again its full
commitment on the occasion of the upcoming summit
of the African Union and European Union to be held in
Malta in November.

I conclude by thanking all members of the Council
for their support in adopting the resolution, particularly
our neighbours from the African continent - Angola,
Chad and Nigeria - with which we will continue to
work in the coming months in addressing this challenge.
We also trust that we will receive confirmation of the
excellent news coming from Morocco that Libya will
soon have a Government of national accord. That would
be the best possible contribution to peace and security
in the region.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Representative of
Libya.

