Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
pleased to note that Liberia has come a long way, both
with the support of the international community and,
especially, through the great efforts of the Liberians
themselves to foster peace. We are committed to
ensuring that peace is sustained. West Africa remains a
volatile region, in which, unfortunately, the Council
has had to authorize repeated interventions. The
nations of West Africa are interdependent. Their
economies will rise together as stability takes hold, or
fall together if conflict, chaos and refugee crises repeat
themselves.

Resolution 2008 (2011) continues to support
Liberia as it strengthens its own State capacity for
security and the rule of law. We were not ready to
predetermine Security Council actions on so important
a matter as the drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), given the uncertainty
surrounding the election and tensions in the region.

As Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Loj noted in her remarks to the Security
Council (see S/PV.6610), Liberia's elections come at a
critical time for the subregion, with the recent crisis in
Cote d'Ivoire and the subsequent increase in security
and humanitarian concerns along the Ivorian border.
The past eight years have been the longest period of
unbroken peace for Liberia in the past three decades.
Most important, the elections are the first to be
organized and run by Liberians.

Now is not the moment to impose rigid timelines
on UNMIL. We hope and expect to be able to
drawdown UNMIL's military presence next year.
Indeed, we have drawn down UNMIL's authorized
military strength in the past from 15,000 to far fewer
than 8,000 today, but any further changes to UNMIL's
configuration must be a decision that is made based on
the facts on the ground, not on any artificial deadline.

With Liberia's elections only four weeks away,
now is the time to demonstrate unity - and we are
glad that the Council has. With this resolution, we are
expressing our solidarity with the people of Liberia and
the region, while committing to a serious review of
UNMIL's mandate, as conditions allow.
3

