Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to welcome and acknowledge your
presence, Sir, in presiding over today's meeting, as well
as the participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Libya, Mr. Mohamed Siala. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, and Ambassador Olof Skoog for
their committed work and comprehensive updates.

Kazakhstan welcomes the adoption of the new
United Nations action plan aimed at resolving the
protracted crisis in Libya, which was presented in
September on the margins of the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly at its seventy-second
session. We fully support the mediation efforts of
the international community, including those of the
neighbouring countries and the Middle East Quartet,
to advance political reconciliation in Libya. Those
measures of external support must be coordinated
in a comprehensive and strategic manner to resolve
the situation in Libya under the auspices of the
United Nations.

In that context, we highly commend the committed
efforts of Special Representative Salame to seek a
political settlement. The rounds of talks that were
envisaged by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and the joint drafting committee are critical, and
we therefore urge the Libyan political forces to cooperate
constructively with Special Representative Salame.

Post-conflict reconstruction, following the
settlement of the crisis in Libya through political and
diplomatic means and an inclusive inter-Libyan dialogue,
will be most critical. In that sense, we positively assess
the steps taken by the Special Representative to ensure
the return of the United Nations Mission to Libya. That
will mobilize more active work and engagement on the
ground, with various players from Libyan society.

Once again, we emphasize that the solution to
the conflict must be primarily and solely peaceful;
a political agreement is the only viable option for
reconciliation. At the same time, the initiative for
and ownership of political processes and solutions
must come from the Libyans themselves, who must
determine their own future. But this political process
will take hold only if there are measures to improve the
socioeconomic conditions that will positively impact
the political process and stability in the country. Those
measures must be accompanied by steps to unite all
Libyan parties under the legitimate and effectively
functioning institutions of power. Their absence would
create a vacuum and a fertile environment for the
activities of extremists and terrorist groups.

We are extremely concerned at the high level of
impunity and the widespread violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law being perpetrated
by the different parties to the conflict. As we heard
last week from the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (see S/PV.8091), the security situation
in Libya remains a matter of great concern and a threat
to international peace and security.

We are also concerned about the dire situation
of migrants. We share the concerns of the Special
Representative on the prevalence of irregular
migration and the revenue it generates for smuggler
networks. Such activities have proven to be a direct
threat to stability in several parts of Libya. Hundreds
of thousands of migrants and refugees often suffer
abuse and detention in inhumane conditions. It is clear
that we need to bring a halt to that by clamping down
on smugglers and having a concerted migration policy.
At tomorrow's debate, we will discuss the root causes
of migration flows that adversely affect the security
situation in the Mediterranean.

We believe that an early settlement of the situation
in Libya will reduce the level of migration flows across
the country. Of particular importance is the task of
providing humanitarian assistance to the population in
dire need, whose grave plight must not be overlooked in
our pursuit of a dialogue between the various political
forces in the country. In that vein, it is necessary to
emphasize the need to ensure respect for human rights
and prevent attempts of to illegally exploit migrants.
We therefore welcome the desire of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
expand its activities in Libya to ensure the protection
of the rights of refugees.

