The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Alemu for his briefing.

I shall now make some concluding remarks in my
capacity as the representative of France.

As this meeting draws to an end, and in full
agreement what has been said, I believe that I have
good reason for saying that the Security Council's
visit to the Sahel came at a particularly timely moment
in terms of its work with regard to the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and was
both useful and productive. For our part, we took away
three main lessons from the field visit. The first is
that the authorities of the three countries we visited
unanimously underscored their political commitment to
ensuring the quickest possible operationalization of the
Force, together with a strong and clear call for increased
international support, bilateral and multilateral.
That political mobilization has been accompanied by
significant progress on the Force's deployment on the
ground, as has been mentioned. It will be important
to ensure that in Mali it is accompanied by tangible
progress in implementing the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, as was conveyed to the Malians
during the visit.

The second lesson is that the our visit gave us an
opportunity to emphasize the unanimous support of
Council members to the Joint Force. The Force is seen as
an essential response to the transnational nature of the
security threat facing the States of the Sahel, but also as
a complement to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and Operation Barkhane that will enable them to create
an environment in which they can better execute their
mandates. What we pointed out - and the members of
the G-5 Sahel share our view - is that the Joint Force's
security response, however crucial, must absolutely
meet expectations in terms of respect for human rights
and must be complemented by development efforts on
the ground to ensure that it is not counterproductive.

The third lesson is that the real debate is no longer
about whether the Joint Force is relevant or even
whether we should be strengthening international
support for the Force, but about how that support
should be calibrated. Next Monday's Security Council
meeting, which will be presided over by Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, France's Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, is being convened to tackle that very question
through our discussion of the best way to strengthen
the international community's support for the Joint
Force of the G-5 Sahel. In our national capacity, we
will express our hope that we will be able to give the
Joint Force the support it needs right now while taking
account of the differing points of view of those around
the Council table.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Before we adjourn the meeting, on behalf of the
Council I should like to express our appreciation to
the authorities of Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso
for their very warm welcome to us. I would also like
to thank all of my colleagues on the Security Council,
especially those from Italy and Ethiopia, for the genuine
team spirit that was the hallmark of the mission.

Last but not least, I would especially like to thank
the entire Secretariat team who worked to organize
and ensure the success of the visit, both in New York
and on the ground. I refer in particular not only to the

Security Council Affairs Division,but also to thetcams everyone who was involved. Their work was truly
in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and exemplary, and they played a key TOIC l" the SUCCCSS Of
the Department of Political Affairs, MINUSMA, the this vtsit. On behalf of all of us, I am deeply grateful
Resident Coordinators in Mauritania and Burkina Faso, to them.

our interpreters and security officers 7 in other words, The meeting rose at 3.40 pm.
