Mr. Ipo (care d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), for his comprehensive and
informative briefing.

The hope engendered by the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan seems to be fading owing to
the uncertainties surround the peace process. While
the Agreement helped significantly reduce political
violence, facilitate the return of displaced persons
and improve conditions for access to humanitarian
assistance, it is now clear that the stalled political
process, persistent ethnic violence and a still-
alarming humanitarian situation have undermined the
positive momentum generated by the Agreement. It is
important to take urgent and concerted action to pull
the country out ofthis ongoing crisis, which has serious
repercussions on the civilian population, which wants
nothing more than peace, stability and development.

My country believes that the international
community should focus its efforts primarily on the
political, humanitarian and security fronts. On the
political front, the resumption of the peace process
remains the leading challenge to be tackled. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the first meeting
in two years in Juba on 9 and 10 September between
President Salva Kiir and Vice-President Riek Machar,
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.

In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire commends the
Ethiopian mediation for its efforts leading to the
holding of the meeting, which my country hopes will
catalyse the resolution of the pending issues, such as
the formation of a Government of national unity, the
cantonment of combatants and their reintegration into
the army. The question of the status of Vice-President
Riek Machar also requires special consideration.

Cote d'Ivoire believes that the Revitalized
Agreement of September 2018 remains, for the time
being, the appropriate framework for achieving a
lasting political solution, which is why we encourage
all stakeholders to engage meaningfully in the process
to give peace a Chance. In that context, it is undeniable
that the support of the international community is
urgently needed in terms of capacity-building and
support for implementing the Revitalized Agreement,
which suffers from a deficit of resources.

On the humanitarian front, deteriorating living
conditions for displaced persons, persistent sexual and
gender-based violence and impunity for such crimes
remain matters of concern for my delegation. In addition,
there is a lack of progress on the implementation of the
transitional justice mechanisms.

At the heart of these challenges, unfortunately, is the
crucial issue ofthe protection ofcivilians. In that regard,
my country fully supports the recommendations of the
report (S/2019/741) of the Secretary-General presented
today, particularly with regard to the obligations
incumbent on the South Sudanese authorities, the
responsibilities of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and those of various partners, to enhance the
protection of civilians.

The protection of civilians must also encompass
a strengthening of the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the implementation of the principle of
accountability for crimes committed. My country
therefore urges the South Sudanese authorities to create
conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary, secure and
dignified return of displaced persons and refugees.

In addition, we are concerned at the persistence of
ethnic violence and call for the necessary measures to
be taken to ensure the physical security of displaced
persons and refugees.

My delegation also welcomes the joint action taken
by the signatories to the Revitalized Agreement for
the establishment of the Humanitarian Coordination
Committee under the auspices of the National
Pre-Transitional Committee. The Committee remains a
valuable mechanism for improving access to populations
awaiting humanitarian aid and for protecting the
rights of vulnerable people. In addition, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the ratification by the Government of South
Sudan of the Kampala Convention - the African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa.

My country welcomes the excellent work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan in
providing assistance, strengthening its early-warning
capabilities and protecting civilians. I assure the
Special Representative of our full support and urge
him to continue his engagement, in coordination with
humanitarian agencies and development partners,
towards harmonized action in the areas of peacebuilding
and conflict resolution, security sector reform and
strengthening of the rule of law.
In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call
on the South Sudanese parties to step up their
engagement in the peace process, with the support of
the international community.

