The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

Today, we will vote on the draft resolution
submitted by the humanitarian troika of Kuwait,
Germany and Belgium (8/2019/756). First, we should
define what goals have been set and which are actually
being pursued by its authors. Since the beginning of
the discussion, they have said that they have been
guided exclusively by humanitarian considerations, are
not pursuing hidden objectives of any kind and do not
wish to undermine the unity of the Security Council. If
that were true, we would support the draft text without
hesitation. However, regrettably, the content of the draft
resolution and the course of its preparation are clear
indications of the real objectives of our colleagues - to
save the international terrorists who are entrenched in
Idlib from their final defeat and present Russia and
Syria as being guilty of creating the situation in Idlib.

I would like to emphasize from the start and in
particular the fact that the authors of the draft text have
ignored the need to combat terrorists is the very factor
that does not allow us to support the draft resolution
before us. In that way, the humanitarian penholders
have not taken into account the decisions that have
been coordinated in the Security Council. While
calling on us to comply with the Sochi memorandum
of understanding on Idlib of 17 September 2018, the
sponsors stubbornly refused to include in the draft
resolution the key provision that the ceasefire does not
cover terrorist groups.

We experienced de'ja vu throughout the work on
the draft resolution. Time and again, the humanitarian
work of our colleagues coincides with another area
falling into the hands of and under the control of
terrorists, as occurred in eastern Ghouta and Aleppo
and is now occurring in Idlib. It is strange - although
not strange to us - that they did not demonstrate their
humanitarian ideals when Raqqa was being razed to
the ground, which we have addressed dozens of times
in the Council. Each time, they sing the same song.
As the Syrian Government forces move closer to the
strongholds of the terrorists, those terrorists suddenly
become the representatives of the Syrian opposition
fighting against the regime of Mr. Al-Assad.

The representative of the United Kingdom
convinced us recently that there were more infants
than terrorists in Idlib. Improbable and unsubstantiated
statistics about mass movements ofpeople have emerged.
Where are those people going? Where will they live
afterwards? Various sources, including United Nations
sources, cite population statistics in Idlib that vary by
hundreds of thousands. Furthermore, we increasingly
hear that Hayat Tahrir AI-Sham has allegedly become
an emancipated responsible structure, a kind of civilian
administration that is striving to allow people to live
peacefully in those areas. We also heard that said
about Al-Nusra, its predecessor. We should underscore
that both groups are listed by the Security Council as
terrorist organizations.

Lastly, another important point to note is the fact
that the humanitarian troika hastily introduced the
draft resolution and did everything to accelerate its
negotiation because of the reported mass murder of
civilians in Idlib. However, the situation is very different.
First, no large-scale operations have been or are being
conducted in Idlib. The province is observing a ceasefire
that is periodically undermined by terrorists. It is the
terrorists alone who violate the ceasefire. Secondly,
the reliability of the data fed to the mass media and
later used by our colleagues in the Security Council is
dubious. On Monday, 16 September, we gave a detailed
press conference at which we provided irrefutable data
to demonstrate that the allegedly flagrant cases of air
strikes by Russia and Syria on civilian infrastructure in
Idlib were falsifications. The de-confliction mechanism
is being used for misinformation.

Today, the representative of the United States
began her statement by saying that, once again, we are
hearing about air strikes on hospitals. We, however,
did not hear Ms. Mueller make that claim. She noted
that the situation had changed since 31 August. With
regard to hospitals, I will provide two examples of that
issue, which we also mentioned at the press conference.
The Kafr Zeta hospital had allegedly been bombed but,
instead, we saw that the coordinates provided were for
a dugout shelter with a makeshift medical warehouse
four kilometres from the hospital itself. With regard
to the Maarat Al-Numan central hospital, which had
also allegedly been bombed, it was a police post 10
kilometres from the hospital itself, which was being
used as a weapons depot. The two hospitals had not
been damaged. The underground cell and the police
post had not been bombed either. That information had
been conveyed to us by the United Nations through the
de-confliction mechanism. The coordinates had been
provided to the Organization by reliable sources in Idlib
because, as is very well known, the United Nations is
not present on the ground in Idlib. It was only in July
that we received 12 sets of such false coordinates. We
showed photographs of before and after the alleged
bombings. The buildings and facilities, including
medical facilities, were untouched.

I understand that this situation is unpleasant and
uncomfortable for some members of the Council. It
is no coincidence that no Western media houses from
those present at my press conference had the courage to
provide any information on this matter. We agree that
there can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict,
but only a political one, as is the case with any conflict,
regardless of its location. However, to ease the process,
it might be a good idea to remove from Syria all foreign
armed groups whose presence in the country is illegal
if we wish to advance the political process.

We believe that we cannot be guided by lies and
misinformation when taking decisions in the Security
Council, even if such lies and misinformation are
beneficial to someone. It is unacceptable and immoral
to speculate about the suffering of civilians who are
hostages of the terrorists patronized by some of our
Western colleagues. Furthermore, we all understand
that a position taken by our Western colleagues that
was not constructive from the outset and did not change
during the course of work on the draft text demonstrates
that their genuine objective is to force Russia to use its
veto on the Syrian issue.

From the start, we warned the sponsors that in
its current form their draft resolution was doomed to
failure. They knew it and they know it. Despite that
warning, they will put the draft resolution to the vote in
order to deliberately undermine the unity of the Council.
I would like to ask the authors of the draft resolution a
few questions. What do they want to achieve and what
will they achieve by doing that? What signal will they
send to the international community? Do they wish to
see us veto a draft resolution during our presidency
of the Security Council, just before the beginning of
the high-level week? Is that their contribution to the
establishment of the constitutional committee?

I call on delegations that genuinely wish to see a
solution to the situation in Syria and to depoliticize
humanitarian issues to vote together with us against the
draft resolution submitted by the humanitarian troika.

I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolutions before it. I shall first put to the vote
the draft resolution contained in document S/2019/756,
submitted by Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, Cote d'Ivoire, Dominican Republic,
France, Germany, Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America

Against:
China, Russian Federation

Abstaining:
Equatorial Guinea

The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 12 votes in favour, two against
and one abstention. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.


