Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to the Spanish Ambassador for his briefing
on the quarterly activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

The Vienna agreement of 14 July between Iran and
the E3+3, and the adoption a week later of resolution
2231 (2015) by the Council were historic steps in
re-establishing confidence with regard to the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. For
12 years, this question has occupied and worried the
international community. The alarming expansion
of Iran's nuclear programme for over a decade led
us to establish a significant sanctions regime, while
keeping the door open to dialogue for starting serious
negotiations.

We support the Vienna agreement, as it attained all
the objectives that my country had set for itself during the
negotiations, namely, a 98 per cent reduction in Iranian
uranium stocks, a two-thirds reduction in the number of
centrifuges, a limit to the rate of uranium enrichment
and a ban on enrichment activities in the underground
site of Fordow. All of those things have significantly
lengthened the time necessary for Iran's swift access
to nuclear weapons. By obliging Iran to modify the
Arak reactor, we blocked access to a plutonium-based
nuclear bomb. Finally, by guaranteeing International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) oversight not only over
Iranian nuclear facilities and over the integrity of the
fuel cycle, but also, where appropriate, to non-declared
sites, we are ensuring that the agreement will be strictly
verified in the field.

This agreement is based on a thorough verification
on the ground of the commitments made by Iran. We
have also taken requisite steps to restore sanctions
should it be necessary ifthere are significant violations.
Everything has been done to deter any violation of the
agreement by the Iranian side.

We shall judge based on evidence: the success of
the agreement depends in large part on Iran, which
will have to implement all measures provided for.
In exchange, the nuclear-related sanctions will be
progressively eased as Iran concretely honours its
commitments and the IAEA is able to verify it.

The Security Council, having endorsed it, is
today the guarantor of the implementation of the
Vienna agreement. We will take part in this exercise
in good faith, of course, but also with necessary
vigilance - and for the entire duration of the agreement.
We will particularly ensure that the timetable set forth
by the Vienna agreement and the resolution will be
scrupulously upheld.

In that respect, I think it would probably be useful to
recall that just until implementation day - that is, until
the IAEA confirms to us that Iran has implemented all
the initial measures of the agreement - all existing
measures of Security Council resolutions remain fully
in force. The Vienna agreement and resolution 2231
(2015) explicitly state this. That means that the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts supporting it
must continue their activities, including as pertains to
incidents already reported as well as those that may be
reported by Member States.

Furthermore, I hope, as indicated by the
Ambassador of Spain, that the Committee, with the
Panel's support, can provide Member States with all the
necessary support for the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on Iran.

The Vienna agreement is the best demonstration
of what diplomacy is capable of today. While there
was an accumulation of uncertainties, the agreement
today provides a lasting foundation for a resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue. It is along those lines that we
hope that all the national procedures needed for the
full implementation of the agreement will be swiftly
concluded.

