Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the adoption of resolution 2507 (2020). Sanctions are indeed an imperfect tool, but among the basket of corrective options currently available, such measures are likely to yield some intended results, with minimal collateral effects. To be clear, our desire is not to punish the Central African Republic, but to support the State as it restores its own authority and fulfils its responsibility of protecting civilians. We consider the resolution to be robust enough to help combat the proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons while providing some flexibility to the legitimate authorities of the country, which have faced operational and logistical difficulties. Our delegation has taken note of the Central African Republic's repeated calls for a complete lifting of the arms component of the sanctions measures. While we do agree that there is some merit to that request, primarily as it relates to enabling the security forces to reclaim territory from armed groups, we do not believe that the time is ripe for a complete lifting of armsmeasures, as there still remain some shortcomings with weapons and ammunition management in the country. To that end, we emphasize that there is a great need for capacity-building and call on all of our friends in the international community to provide technical and development assistance in that regard. At this juncture, we wish to recognize that the Government of the Central African Republic, despite its many challenges, has committed to and made progress towards achieving the key benchmarks that guide our sanctions review process. We also offer our highest assurances that once those efforts continue, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will advocate for further easing of the arms embargo with a view to gradually and progressively lifting those restrictions. We therefore encourage the Central African Republic authorities to continue reforming its security sector and to maintain its efforts to disarm, demobilize, reintegrate and repatriate ex-combatants. Those structural reforms would help to build trust and ensure much-needed reconciliation among the people of the Central African Republic. After all, it is they who must lead their political process. The resolution embodies the spirit of compromise. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like to thank France, the penholder, and all members of the Security Council for their constructive efforts to reach a working consensus. As individual Member States, we may often have divergent views, but as a Council we must always remain objective and pragmatic. We should never allow narrow self-interest, ideological positions or strategic agendas to overshadow the needs of the Central African Republic. Finally, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will always stand in solidarity with our African brothers and sisters. When Africa speaks, we will listen.
