Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank France for organizing this public debate on
the plight of children in armed conflict and all those
who have taken the floor and shed light on the situation,
in particular Mr. Junior Nzita, a former child soldier
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

As it has been recalled, in 2014 15 million children
were directly affected by conflicts, including in Syria,
Iraq, Palestine, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and Ukraine, to cite only some examples. They
were subjected to irreparable violence and trauma,
which not only hurts each child on an individual basis,
but which undermines the strength of whole societies,
to quote the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF.

The "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, which
was launched one year ago by Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui in collaboration with UNICEF, plays
a key role in encouraging Governments to put an end
to the recruitment and use of children by armed forces
in conflict by 2016. I would like to pay tribute to the
progress that has been made because of the campaign,
which we will continue to support financially. But
Governments are not the only ones that recruit children
for combat. On the contrary, the vast majority of the
parties listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
annual report (S/2014/339) are non-State actors.

Despite the undeniable progress that has been
made and the conclusion of action plans with armed
groups, for example in Nepal and Sri Lanka, the current
situation requires more determined action. The abuses
committed against civilians, and children in particular,
by Daesh in Iraq and Syria and by Boko Haram in
Nigeria have reached unprecedented levels of violence.
Given the modus operandi of these groups, in particular
with regard to the abduction of children, it is time to
take further action. In our view, the addition of a new
trigger aimed at non-State armed groups guilty of child
abduction would be an appropriate response by the
international community.

I would like to mention four other specific measures
aimed at better protecting children against violations
and abuses committed by non-State actors.

First, States should be encouraged to facilitate
the access of the United Nations to armed groups in
order to put an end to the violations perpetrated by such
groups, particularly by concluding action plans.

Secondly, armed groups should be informed of their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
the relevant information about their situation, including
the conclusions of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, should be brought to their attention.

Thirdly, we must ensure that the protection of
children is taken into account in peace negotiations. To
that end, mediators must be made aware of the issues
and must have clear guidelines. The release of children
involved with armed groups and their reintegration
must be included in all the relevant peace agreements.

Fourthly, the collection of information on armed
groups should be improved in order to design tailored
incentives that are adapted to the military structure,
size, mode of operation and other characteristics of the
armed groups.

Moreover, national armed forces and forces acting
under international mandates should be better equipped
in order to better incorporate the protection of children
in their fight against armed groups. Three measures
would be useful in the context of the expansion of
resolution 2143 (2014): first, the development of
standard procedures for the transfer of children
associated with armed groups to child protection
actors; secondly, ensuring that the rules of military
engagement incorporate provisions for the protection
of children, including children associated with armed
groups; and, thirdly, requiring specific operational
training on child protection in accordance with the
training materials developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

I would like to conclude by recalling the particular
importance we attach to resolution 2143 (2014), adopted
by the Council a year ago. It is the imperative to prevent
the use of schools and hospitals for military purposes
and to prevent attacks against schools. In that respect,
Luxembourg fully supports the Lucens Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict. We take this opportunity to
encourage all Member States to do the same.

