Mr. Cohen (Israel): The situation in the region
today did not develop overnight. It is the consequence
of many choices - repeatedly the wrong choices -
made by the Palestinians, to adopt terrorism and
violence over peace and negotiations with Israel.

In contrast, Israel has shown that it understands
the consequences of making the right choices. More
than two years ago, Israel made the choice to withdraw
from the Gaza Strip, uproot families and remove all its
forces, in order to create a new horizon for peace in the
region. We chose to disengage, despite all the
difficulties, and despite the fact that the Road Map did
not require it at that stage.

Ever since then, Hamas has ruled the Gaza Strip,
first politically and now physically, using the area as
its personal base for launching rocket attacks against
Israel. The Palestinians in Gaza did not choose to
engage Israel in dialogue and reconciliation to advance
the two-State vision. Rather, they chose Hamas, which
uses terrorism and violence to advance its vision to
destroy Israel.

Since the year 2000, more than 7,000 rockets and
mortars have been fired at Israel by terrorists in the
Gaza Strip. Last year alone, that number was more than
2,000. And, since Hamas's violent takeover of Gaza in
June 2007, the frequency of rocket attacks has risen
150 percent, to more than 250 rockets and mortars a
month. That means that, on average, one rocket is fired
at Israel every three hours. Most of these rockets fall
on the southern city of Sderot. Normal life in Sderot is
a thing of the past. Not a day goes by when the red
alert warning system does not sound, which gives
children on playgrounds and in schools, and parents at
home and at work, less than 15 seconds to find the
nearest shelter before the next rocket comes slamming
into their lives.

Liora Fima, a Sderot mother and head of a local
elementary school, knows first-hand the traumatic
impact of these rockets on the young people of Sderot,
where up to 94 per cent of children suffer from post-
traumatic stress disorder, including sleep and
concentration problems and even bed-wetting. Listen
to her words: "For the children in Sderot, red is not the
colour of roses, but of blood and flames".

Why is the Security Council not concerned with
the safety and security of Israel's children, women and
elderly who live in the southern city of Sderot? Why is
the Council silent as they live in fear and panic each
and every day? With Hamas in control of the Gaza
Strip and with its rocket launchers pointed at Sderot,
Israel faces an impossible situation. Israel must and
will protect its civilian population from these rocket
attacks. It is the duty of all States to ensure the right to
life and safety of its people, especially from vicious
acts of violence and terrorism that are carried out with
the sole purpose of maiming, terrorizing and murdering
the innocent.

I ask each member of the Council: what would
you do if London, Moscow, Paris or Tripoli were to be
attacked and fired on? Would you sit back and do
nothing? I am certain that no Member State on the
Council - and certainly no country in the world -
would be silent. Israel is no different. It will act in
accordance with its inherent right under Article 51 of
the United Nations Charter to protect and defend its
people. That is the very obligation and right of all
States.

Hence, it is deeply disturbing that some falsely
equate Palestinian terrorism with Israel's actions taken
in self-defence. A clear distinction must be made
between Palestinian terrorism and Israeli defence -
not only in terms of practice and tactics, but also in
terms of their morality and legality.

Palestinian terrorists choose to directly target
Israeli civilians and even use their own civilians as
human shields. Hamas's brutality towards its own
people can also be seen in the daily violence on the
streets of Gaza, where attacks on civilians have
become routine. Terrorists produce, transport and
launch rockets and mortars from inside densely
populated Palestinian residential areas. By firing on
border crossings, the terrorists cynically force closures,
which hamper efforts to deliver humanitarian aid and
relief. Recently, we even saw humanitarian convoys
being used by terrorists to smuggle explosives and
weapon materials into Gaza - yet another cynical act
to harm their own people.

In this regard, Israel chooses to ensure the
humanitarian welfare of the Palestinians in Gaza, even
as Hamas chooses to abuse those efforts. Hamas
chooses to divert fuel from domestic generators for its
own terrorist purpose, including the production of
Qassam rockets. In contrast, Israel chooses to allow
electricity and fuel, as well as medicines, into Gaza
and works closely with humanitarian organizations and
relevant agencies on the ground to ensure that needs
are met. Since June 2007, my Government has allowed
more than 9,000 Palestinians to enter Israel to seek
medical treatment. Contrast this fact with the more
than 1,700 rockets and mortars Hamas has fired out of
the Gaza Strip at Israel during the same period of time.

While the rockets hit Sderot and other towns in
southern Israel, we must not forget that Gilad Shalit is
still held captive by the terrorists in the Gaza Strip.
More than 20 months have passed since his abduction,
and his whereabouts and condition remain unknown.

Hamas controls the fate of Gaza. If terrorism
ceases, life in Gaza will change. The Palestinians must
understand that they will not profit from terrorism.
Hamas does not represent the Palestinian national
vision. Hamas is the antithesis of the idea of two States
living side by side in peace and security. Hamas does
not recognize Israel's right to exist. There is no hope in
choosing terrorism and there is surely no hope in the
Hamas leadership. Abu Mazen himself said on Friday
that Hamas "destroyed and tries to destroy our dreams,
future and national aspirations".

There can be no moral equivalence made between
the choices of Israel and the choices of Hamas. Israel is
not only mindful of the humanitarian conditions in the
Gaza Strip; it is a neighbour interested in the well-
being of the population living next door, with whom it
wants to work in order to advance the vision of two
States.

The international community must make it clear
that Hamas's actions are unacceptable, and that
continuing to choose Hamas will only lead to
continued suffering for both Israelis and Palestinians. It
is up to the international community to tell those States

that initiated this debate, and those States that think
that singling out Israel and condemning it will bring
about change, that Israeli security cannot be sacrificed.
Guaranteeing the welfare of all Israelis and
Palestinians begins, first and foremost, with an end to
terrorism and violence.

It is the international community's choice to
make clear that the path of rejection, of violence and of
terrorism will not be tolerated by this Council. Those
who seek to subvert the bilateral process and use
violence to achieve their aims will not secure the
support of the international community.

Peace begins with the people and their choices.
Adrianna Katz, an Israeli doctor living in Sderot, was
recently asked what would make her life easier. Her
answer is an important reminder for all of us of what
needs to be done. She said, "We need all the help we
can get. But the best thing that can happen would be a
lasting peace".

Let us remember those words, and let us hope
that the right choices are made.

