Mr. Owada (Japan): The Security Council, at one of
its information consultations on 6 March 1998, concluded
the eighteenth review of the sanctions imposed on Libya in
accordance with paragraph 13 of resolution 748 (1992).
While it was concluded as a result of this review that there
was no agreement for modifying the sanctions regime on
Libya, it was at the same time decided that the Council
would hold a formal meeting today on the question of
Libya. Japan welcomes this formal meeting, which provides
an opportunity for Member States to express their basic
views on this question at this juncture.

As a starting point, the Government of Japan wishes
to restate its basic position regarding the cases of the
destruction of Pan Am flight 103 and of UTA flight 772
and then to proceed to present its views on the current
state of the problems in the context of the actions taken
by the Council, as well as of the recent decisions made
by the International Court of Justice.

On 21 December 1988, Pan Am flight 103 exploded
and crashed over Lockerbie in Scotland. There were 270
victims, which included a Japanese national. On 19
September 1989, another incident, in which UTA flight
772, flying over the Niger, was the victim, resulting in
the tragic deaths of 170 people. These cases have been
deemed to be the result of abominable criminal acts that
should deserve our strongest condemnation. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to express
its sincere condolences to the families of the victims of
these two tragedies.

The Government of Japan, through the official
spokesman of the Foreign Ministry on 3 December 1991,
made a public statement condemning these acts and called
upon the Libyan Government to cooperate fully with the
investigation of the destruction of Pan Am flight 103 in
response to requests from the Governments of the United
Kingdom and of the United States. The statement further
declared that Japan was absolutely opposed to any form
of terrorism and that if this tragedy were revealed to be
a result of terrorist acts, it must denounce such acts
strongly. On the same day the Government of Japan
conveyed this message on the case to the Libyan
Government through the representative of Libya in Tokyo.
Since then this call of the Japanese Government for
Libyan cooperation has repeatedly been conveyed to the
Libyan Government on a number of occasions, both prior
to and after the adoption of Security Council resolution
731 (1992) on 21 January 1992. These Japanese calls
upon the Libyan Government have been made in
compliance with paragraph 5 of that resolution.

In sum, the basic position of the Japanese
Government on this case is that the issues arising from
the two incidents have to be resolved through bringing the
culprits of these acts to justice and through intensified
efforts by the international community to eliminate
international terrorism.

Since the occurrence of these tragic incidents, the
Security Council has taken a series of actions on behalf
of the international community in an effort to tackle the
issues arising from these incidents in accordance with its
 

primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter. These actions are an
important part of the united effort of the international
community to suppress international terrorism and to pursue
justice. Thus, on 30 December 1988 the President of the
Security Council made a statement strongly condemning the
destruction of Pan Am flight 103 and calling on all States
to assist in the apprehension and prosecution of those
responsible for this criminal act. Then, on 21 January 1992,
the Council adopted resolution 731 (1992) expressing the
Council's deep concern over acts of international terrorism
and illegal activities directed against international civil
aviation, and urging the Libya Government

"immediately to provide a full and effective response"
[resolution 731 (1992), para. 3]

to its obligations under that resolution.

Unfortunately, the Libyan Government did not provide
a full and effective response to the requests in resolution
731 (1992). Under these circumstances, the Security
Council, in adopting resolution 748 (1992) of 31 March
1992 determined

"that the failure of the Libyan Government to
demonstrate by concrete actions its renunciation of
terrorism and in particular its continued failure to
respond fully and effectively to the requests of
resolution 731 (1992) constitute a threat to
international peace and security". [resolution 748
(1992), seventh preambular paragraph]

The Council decided to take sanction measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

The intention of the Council in adopting that
resolution was to try to encourage the full and effective
response of the Libyan Government to the requests in
resolution 731 (1992) so that international terrorism could
be suppressed and justice made to prevail. However, the
Libyan Government continued to fail to fulfil its
obligations, and the Security Council had to take further
measures by adopting resolution 883 (1993) of 11
November 1993.

It should the noted that the Council, by paragraph 13
of resolution 748 (1992), had taken steps to review the
situation every 120 days or sooner and has since faithfully
undertaken 18 sanction reviews. In this context, I wish to
note that some developments have taken place since the
adoption of resolution 731 (1992) to the extent that the
Libyan authorities have responded to the requests for
cooperation in the judicial inquiry regarding UTA flight
772. The Government of Japan hopes that the Libyan
Government will also respond fully and effectively to its
other obligations under resolutions 731 (1992) and 748
(1992).

The humanitarian need of the Libyan people is an
important factor to which it is appropriate for the Security
Council to give consideration in applying these sanctions.
In accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution 748 (1992),
the Committee of the Security Council on sanctions on
Libya has regularly authorized
flights for the travel of Libyan pilgrims. The Committee
has also authorized flights for medical evacuation on the
basis of the agreed guidelines. The Committee has
recently been considering requests from the Libyan
Government regarding the air-worthiness of the Libyan
aircraft designated to undertake medical-evacuation flights
as well as regarding additional destinations for medical-
evacuation flights. Furthermore, the Committee has been
considering the report of the fact-finding mission to Libya
headed by Mr. Vladimir Petrovsky, Director-General of
the United Nations Office at Geneva. As a member of
that Committee, Japan will continue to pay special
attention to the humanitarian dimensions of the sanctions
and to consider favourably requests for humanitarian
exceptions under resolution 748 (1992).

A new factor to be examined in the context of this
Libyan case is the recent decisions by the International
Court of Justice, delivered on 27 February 1998. These
are decisions of the Court on the preliminary objection to
its jurisdiction raised by the United Kingdom and the
United States in the case concerning Questions of
Interpretation and Application of the 197] Montreal
Convention arising from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie.
In these decisions the Court, in effect, rejected these
preliminary objections and found that it had
jurisdiction - on the basis of article 14, paragraph 1 of
the Montreal Convention - to hear the cases brought by
Libya against the United Kingdom and the United States
concerning the interpretation or application of the
provisions of that Convention. It must be clearly kept in
mind, however, that these judgments concern exclusively
the jurisdictional phase of the case and do not deal with
the merits of the case regarding the destruction of Pan
Am flight 103. In the light of the legal nature of these
decisions, it is the considered view of the Government of
Japan that they cannot prejudice the power of the Security
Council on an issue of which the Council has been
legitimately seized.
 

It is the earnest hope of the Government of Japan that
the Libyan Government will comply with the relevant
resolutions promptly so that the facts regarding the
destruction of Pan Am flight 103 can be established as soon
as possible. Such cooperation for compliance, together with
the definitive and concrete commitment by the Government
of Libya to the renunciation of terrorism, will go a long
way towards restoring the faith of the international
community in Libya and towards lifting the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council upon it.

