Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Ambassadors Mayr-Harting,
Apakan and Heller for their respective briefings on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), respectively. The Chinese delegation
appreciates the results achieved by the three
Committees and their respective teams.
The primary task before the 1267 Committee is to
complete the review of the sanctions list before the end
of June. Achieving practical results from the review
requires the active collaboration of the broad
membership. We also hope that the Committee will
conduct its work with a prudent and objective attitude
so as to safeguard sanctions mechanisms and its
preventive and deterrent role vis-a-vis terrorist
activities. Pursuant to resolution 1904 (2009), the
Committee summarized its experience over the past
years, improved and updated its working guidelines and
instituted the post of ombudsperson. All of these moves
are conducive to improving the working methods,
transparency and efficiency of the Committee.

With the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has improved its
working methods and stepped up its dialogue and
cooperation with international regional organizations.
China appreciates these measures. Over the past six
months, the CTC has carried out in-depth discussions
on important subjects covered by resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005), and set forth proposals for
dealing with problems and challenges remaining in
various areas. This lays a good foundation for the
CTC's implementation of the resolution. Meanwhile,
CTED has pushed ahead with the implementation of its
programme of work in a solid manner and has done
much effective work in reviewing the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments and conducting State
visits, as well as in rendering technical assistance.

China attaches great importance to the role of the
1540 Committee and has participated actively and
constructively in its work. Recently the 1540
Committee, with the assistance of the group of experts,
has taken a series of effective steps towards
international cooperation and assistance. We endorse
the efforts of the Committee to enhance dialogue and
cooperation with various Member States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004), exchanging
experiences and learning from each other's strengths.
We encourage those countries able to do so to provide
the necessary assistance to developing countries to ease
the latter's difficulties in implementation.

We note some new ideas and proposals made by
the members of the Committee and the group of
experts, which we will study closely. China will
continue to actively support the work of the Committee
and to work for the comprehensive and balanced
implementation of the programme of work of the 1540
Committee.

Violence and terror remain rampant throughout
the world. Terrorism still poses a potent threat to
international peace and security. The Security Council,
as the core of the international collective security
system, should continue to play an important role in
the international fight against terrorism. The Security
Council counter-terrorism mechanism, composed of the
three Committees, should continue to push for the
implementation of the relevant counter-terrorism
resolutions while heeding further the call of the broad
membership of the United Nations, and in particular
the developing countries, for the counter-terrorism
mechanism to better meet their needs. China
encourages the three Committees and their respective
bodies to continue to strengthen their coordination,
optimize resources and avoid duplication of work.
Later in the year, the General Assembly will carry out a
complete assessment of the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

China supports the participation of the three
Committees, within their respective mandates, in the
relevant work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and urges the
comprehensive and balanced development of the four
pillars of the counter-terrorism mechanism so that the
respective bodies will complement each other, act in
concert and continue to safeguard the United Nations
core role in the international fight against terrorism.

