Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I am aware of the
constraints on our time, Mr. President, so I shall try to
respond to your appeal and omit some portions of my
prepared statement.

My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, preside
over this important meeting of the Council on the
situation in Africa. We commend Mauritius for its
initiative in convening this meeting of the Council to
discuss this very important subject.

My delegation would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her succinct, focused and useful
remarks highlighting the work that has been done by
the United Nations in addressing the problems of
Africa, particularly as it relates to peacekeeping,
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
peace-building, in close cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and subregional
organizations in Africa.

We appreciate the contribution made by the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity, Mr. Amara Essy, in this debate. He has given us
the perspective of the African continent as seen from
the vantage point of the OAU secretariat, which
complements the views and perspectives given by
member States of that organization.

I think everyone agrees with the analysis of the
Secretary-General as to the root causes of conflict in
Africa contained in his 1998 report on the subject.
These include, inter alia, the legacies of colonialism;
internal factors such as inter-ethnic conflict; weak State
structures and institutions of governance; poverty and
economic backwardness; and external factors, such as
competition for political influence, especially during
the cold war, and economic exploitation, resulting in
the current parlous and marginalized State in which
African countries find themselves today.

However, all these analyses of the causes of
conflict in Africa should not be an academic exercise
to be resorted to from time to time in the Council as a
substitute for action. What is more important is for the
Council, and the United Nations in general, to seriously
and systematically address these root causes in ways
that will, if not remove them once and for all, at least
minimize their potential for further and more
protracted conflict and instability on the African
continent.

Many speakers have underscored the paramount
role and responsibility of the Council in dealing with
African conflicts. Malaysia, too, wishes to underscore
that important point. The Council, in fulfilling its
Charter-mandated responsibilities, must be at the
forefront of international efforts to manage and resolve
the various conflicts on the African continent through
its peacekeeping missions, which now includes the
very important components of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants
(DDR).
Having been closely associated with the DDR
initiative during Malaysia's membership in the
Council, I share the concern expressed by the Deputy
Secretary-General yesterday about the continuing
weakness of the DDR process, particularly as it relates
to the reintegration of ex-combatants. The success of
each and every component of the DDR process cannot
be overemphasized if we are to ensure that there is no
return to conflict. At the same time, the other relevant
organs and agencies of the United Nations must fully
partake in the post-conflict peace-building process,
whose success is vitally important to the peace process
as a whole.

Both Mr. Essy and Ms. Frechette had pointed to
the ongoing institutional linkages and mechanisms of
cooperation and coordination between the two
organizations, such as the regular high-level
consultations between officials of the United Nations
and the OAU, as well other important contacts and
dialogues at functional levels. The presence of United
Nations offices in a number of problem areas in Africa,
such as West Africa, and the field missions undertaken
by representatives of the Secretary-General and other
United Nations officials, also contribute to more
effective cooperation and coordination between the two
organizations.

We encourage these activities and urge that they
be further strengthened and given the necessary support
so as to ensure that the United Nations and the OAU
work together in tandem and in full appreciation of
each other's role and responsibility. Inasmuch as the
United Nations should not wash its hands of regional
conflicts, it should also not ignore the substantive
contributions that could be made by regional and
subregional organizations in the management or
resolution of these conflicts. We hope that this
partnership, which is essential, will be further
strengthened.

In the context of the Council, my delegation
strongly supports the practice of dispatching Council
missions to conflict areas, not only to supplement the
efforts undertaken by the Secretariat, but, more
importantly, to enable Council members better to
appreciate the situation on the ground and the
complexities of the problems they are dealing with. We
would also reiterate our earlier suggestion, made when
we were in the Council, for more frequent informal
exchanges of views between Council members and the
Secretary-General and his staff on sensitive issues dealt
with by the Council, including, of course, African
issues, away from the glare of publicity. While it is not
exactly the same thing, the idea of setting up a working
group of the Security Council on African issues is a
laudable proposal and should be supported.

Many speakers have drawn attention to the
initiatives that have been taken at the regional and
subregional levels in Africa and the modest successes
they have achieved. In particular, they have highlighted
the steps that have already been taken by Africa to
establish institutions and mechanisms for conflict
prevention and conflict management, and noted that
they looked forward to the strong backing of, and
partnership with, the United Nations as well as with the
other members of the international community and
their respective organizations.

We must commend and strongly support these
efforts, which have been pursued by Africa in spite of
the many constraints facing it. Inasmuch as African
States themselves recognize their own responsibilities
in dealing with African issues, including the
management of their conflicts, it is incumbent upon the
other members of the international community to do all
they can to support these efforts, as insecurity and
instability in Africa affect, directly or indirectly, the
entire global community. In the interdependent world
in which we live, the appeal by Africa must not only be
heard but also responded to positively by the
international community, including the United Nations
and other relevant international organizations that have
a role to play in helping out Africa, including the
influential G-8.

We all know what the problems basically are in
Africa, what ought to be done and where the
responsibilities lie. What is important is the need for
more serious follow-up actions on the part of all
concerned, including the Council and members of the
international community, to assist Africa in addressing
the problems afflicting it. The key to this is political
will on the part of members of the Council to take the
necessary measures and to follow up on them. This
political will to act and to deal with conflict situations
should be demonstrated in an even-handed fashion
regardless of where such conflicts occur, whether it be
in Africa or elsewhere. Unless the will exists to act
decisively, there is a real risk of inaction,
indecisiveness and paralysis in the Council.

This would only increase scepticism and cynicism
regarding the capacity of the Council to deal
meaningfully with African issues. Therefore, in
addressing such weighty issues as peace and security,
members of the Council - particularly the permanent
members, which can block a consensus - must put
aside narrow political interests for the sake of the
larger interests of the international community. Herein
lies the real challenge before the Council in the months
and years ahead as it continues to grapple with the
problems of Africa, along with the other problems on
its plate.

Of course, the political will within the Council
must be matched by a willingness on the part of
African States seriously to deal with the problems
besetting them, that is, to put their house in good order.
We are impressed with the incremental but tangible
steps that have already been taken by Africa towards
this end. The international community must play its
part in supporting all of the efforts made by the United
Nations and Africa in ways that will ensure their
effectiveness and success, through a willingness to
contribute troops or by giving financial and material
support in addition to their political support.

These are the challenges facing all of us:
members of the Council, the secretariats of both the
United Nations and the OAU, and the other subregional
organizations in Africa, as well as we members of the
international community, who have a vital interest in
seeing peace, security and prosperity in Africa. We
look forward to the Council's next full discussion on
Africa during the presidency of the United Kingdom in
July and in future sessions. We hope that future
discussions will be action-oriented, building on the
important ground we have covered at this Council
meeting.

The situation in Africa demands more than
platitudinous expressions of support and solidarity. We
must go beyond lip service, as one African ambassador
said yesterday. The message from Africa is clear and
unambiguous. The sense of impatience is palpable, as
we heard today from some African speakers. The
people of Africa expect our action to match our words.
We must not fail them, and in this regard, Mr.
President, we thank you for injecting a sense of
purpose and urgency into the debate on the African
situation. As always, Malaysia will play its role in the
process, within its capacity to do so.

