Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation warmly welcomes the head of the
Government of Spain, His Excellency Mr. Jose Maria
Aznar. His visit is proof of his country's commitment
in the fight against terrorism, and the message that he
has brought us reaffirms Spain's leadership in this
task - leadership that is now shown in Spain's
assumption of the chairmanship of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). Ambassador Innocencio
Arias's task is shared by us all. His vitality is yet
further proof of Spain's capacity to join in the efforts
of the Security Council to combat terrorism.

Today, it is more than ever evident that there is an
urgent need to strengthen the efforts of the
international community to combat and eradicate that
scourge and to keep it from endangering peaceful
coexistence among nations. Mexico reiterates its
condemnation of any act or manifestation of terrorism
and its rejection of any argument aimed at justifying it.
My country's delegation is also pleased to have the
opportunity today to celebrate the bonds of deep
friendship between our peoples and Governments, as
well as the close ties that have united us throughout
history.

The excellent cooperation that has characterized
our relations also extends to the campaign against
terrorism. Special circumstances have committed us on
that path. In recent times, Mexico and Spain have
strengthened their cooperation in this sphere. We have
the necessary political will to be effective. We share
purposes and objectives. Our communication is fluid.
We exchange information on a daily basis and there is
complete trust and respect between us.

Treaties between Mexico and Spain on
extradition and mutual legal assistance are the bases of
our understanding, but we recognize the magnitude of
the challenge. We are aware of the resources available
to the terrorists and our institutional and legal
mechanisms are therefore constantly evolving.
Bilateral cooperation between Mexico and Spain is
carried out in this sphere in tandem with the collective
efforts of the international community. This process is
sustained in a series of instruments, agreements and
treaties of the United Nations. One such instrument,
perhaps the most useful and the most important, is the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, currently chaired by
Spain, in compliance with resolution 1373 (2001).

Mexico reaffirms the priority role of the United
Nations as the forum that the community of nations has
created to do its work in meeting global challenges. My
country is convinced that we will be more effective in
combating terrorism to the extent that the will of States
is expressed in the context of multilateral agreements,
activities and endeavours, undertaken under
international law, as opposed to unilateral actions of
force.

Combating terrorism is also, in essence, a battle
for freedom and the preservation of the values of
human coexistence. The worst possible effect of
terrorism is the destruction of legal order and the
regime of democratic liberties. That is why Mexico,
within the General Assembly and, recently, in the
Commission on Human Rights, has promoted
resolutions emphasizing the need to protect human
rights in the struggle against terrorism. It has also
noted the role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
that important matter. Similarly, I would recall that, at
the 20 January ministerial meeting on terrorism, the
Council adopted resolution 1456 (2003), in which
States were requested fully to respect human rights in
all their anti-terrorism measures. Mexico will continue
to cooperate in this global effort, convinced that, in the
combat against terrorism, international law should be
seen not as an impediment, but as a valuable arm.

Spain is a vital ally of this Council in the fight
against terrorism. Mexico is well aware of the values of
Spain and its people, as well as of the commitment of
Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar to fighting terrorism.
Mexico knows what the Spanish people have suffered
at the hands of terrorism. Terrorism does not recognize
values, respect life or believe in dialogue. Terrorism
respects no one. Our responsibility is to combat it
together.

