Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their informative and
comprehensive briefings on the Residual Mechanism's
semi-annual progress report.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
our deep appreciation to the outgoing President of
the Mechanism, Judge Meron, for his outstanding
and invaluable work, and to wish him every success
in his future endeavours. We also want to commend
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra of Peru for his
able chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, as well as the Office of Legal
Affairs for its continued support.

Kazakhstan greatly appreciates the Mechanism's
role and place in the administrative system of
international justice, in helping to preserve our faith
in international law and ensuring that those guilty of
grave crimes will not go unpunished. My delegation
notes with satisfaction the successful continuation of
the Mechanism's core responsibilities inherited from
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
such as the enforcement of sentences, the protection of
Victims and witnesses and the management of archives.
We welcome the fact that despite the difficulties
the Mechanism has faced owing to constraints on
its resources, it has made significant progress in
establishing itself as a small, temporary and effective
structure. We are pleased to hear from Judge Meron that
the Mechanism benefited from the recommendations
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, thereby
ensuring the efficient and effective fulfilment of the
Mechanism's mandate.

Given the paramount importance of Member
States' cooperation with the Mechanism to ensure that
international justice is served, we call on all States to
fully engage with it and comply with its judgments.
We also encourage the Security Council to be united
in its support for the Mechanism. In the context of the
Mechanism's task of locating and arresting remaining
fugitives, we are pleased with the Prosecutor's more
proactive efforts in that regard and hope they will be
arrested and brought to justice as soon as possible.
We also welcome the Prosecutor's strengthened
cooperation with the Rwandan authorities, which will
improve access to evidence.

I would like to mention the work that the
Mechanism is doing with regard to the archives of both
Tribunals, which is truly priceless for both practical and
research purposes. We support its implementation of an
integrated system for managing archives and records.

In conclusion, we affirm our firm commitment
to upholding the principles of justice, accountability
and the rule of law around the world by supporting the
Mechanism in every aspect ofits work until it completes
its mandate.

