Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, I
wish to apologize to Her Excellency Ms. Dora
Bakoyannis, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece, for
the inability of my minister to be here due to the
meeting on Darfur of the African Union Peace and
Security Council. My minister really wanted to be here
personally, which is why he asked for Ghana's
speaking position to be changed from fifth to last. In
his absence, I have the honour to read out his statement
on his behalf.

"I congratulate the Foreign Minister of
Greece and the other members of the Greek
delegation on Greece's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September, and wish them every success in
their term of office. Our gratitude also goes to all
Council members for their cooperation and
support during Ghana's presidency in the month
of August, which had to grapple with the difficult
situations in Lebanon and the Sudan.

"Lately, we have observed some worrying
trends in the relations between the United Nations
and some African countries. We therefore
welcome the opportunity to revisit the issue of
cooperation between the United Nations and
regional entities, in order to determine how best
we can meet immediate and longer-term
challenges.

"Certainly, effective cooperation between
the United Nations and regional entities such as
the African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in the
promotion of peace and security can be achieved
only if those regional bodies use their leverage
with member States to further our shared
objectives. We believe regional entities have an
obligation to strengthen the hand of the United
Nations in peacemaking by ensuring, among
other things, that international peace efforts are
not obstructed.

"Indisputably, it has been the unwavering
commitment of ECOWAS to peace and its
determination to work with the United Nations
that has made the collaboration of the two entities
so productive, especially in Sierra Leone and
Liberia. The difference between token gestures of
cooperation and the meaningful regional-global
security partnership envisaged in Chapter VIII of
the Charter is clear for all to see. In stark contrast
to that is the lack of cooperation shown by a few
member States of the AU, which could unravel
the Union's role in the regional-global security
partnership.

"In that connection, it is our expectation
that the restrictions imposed on the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea will soon
be lifted. Similarly, the expansion of the United
Nations presence already in southern Sudan into
Darfur is a must, if the lives of millions of
displaced persons are to be saved.

"Last month, at the end of the open debate
initiated by Ghana on the subject of peace
consolidation in West Africa (see S/PV.5509), the
consensus in the Council was for an enhancement
of the highly productive cooperation that we have
witnessed between the United Nations and
ECOWAS in stabilizing our region after years of
conflict. We commend the Council for the
important initiatives it has undertaken in recent
years to enhance cooperation with the AU and
ECOWAS. In particular, we appreciate the work
of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the West
African Subregion, comprising representatives of
various departments in the Secretariat and the
specialized agencies, as well as the efforts of the
United Nations Office for West Africa, under its
leader Mr. Ahmed Ould Abdallah, in forging a

06-5287}
close working relationship between the world
body and its regional counterpart while
highlighting the importance of a comprehensive
and coordinated approach to peacemaking.

"We expect from those contacts the
development of a workable framework for further
cooperation, especially in the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the report
(8/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations, led by Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi in 2000. As the report rightly notes, both
AU and ECOWAS are very enthusiastic about
regionally-led peacekeeping operations but have
weaknesses in their planning and management
capabilities, which are aggravated by inadequate
financial resources.

"We support the proposals for cooperation
in the development of the required capacity in
those areas, in addition to others such as the
coordinated use of logistics sites, co-listing of
African standby forces' capacities in the United
Nations standby arrangements system, organizing
staff exchanges between their respective
headquarters, sharing lessons learned and
planning expertise and improving the use of
early-warning and analytical information in
Africa as well as harmonizing training and
teaching materials.

"At the same time, we must take into
account the other practical recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2006/590) on the regional-global security
partnership and related challenges and
opportunities. The report was the outcome of six
high-level meetings held between 1994 and 2005.
Of particular interest to us is the current United
Nations desk-to-desk consultations with the
European Union, the Council of Europe and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. That model could be adapted and used to
enhance dialogue between the United Nations and
both the AU and ECOWAS on conflict
prevention.

"Additionally, we could work together with
the United Nations and other intergovernmental
organizations to further implement the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects through the
promotion of technical assistance and
international cooperation programmes. Effective
use must be made of the practical lessons learned
from decades of experience in peacemaking, as
has been demanded by the Security Council in
various resolutions and presidential statements.

"We also intend to contribute towards the
elaboration of a general statement of principles,
as proposed in the Secretary-General's report,
which could provide a guiding mechanism for
future collaboration with and between all
signatories and the United Nations.

"One area of concern pertains to the need to
strengthen coordination between the AU and
regional organizations, most of which are only in
their formative stages and therefore lack well-
developed institutions. We also acknowledge the
need for the various regional entities, within their
regions, to rationalize their activities in order to
avoid wasteful duplication of effort.

"The best guarantee of peace and security
for all nations in the world today is a credible
multilateral system organized around the
principles and values enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Over the years, the United
Nations has invested sizeable resources in an
endeavour to create strong partnerships with
various regional bodies, in order to make use of
their unique advantages. We appreciate the
supportive role of NATO, the European Union
and several other intergovernmental bodies. We
believe that behind all those efforts there can be
no higher objective for the regional-global
security partnership we are building than working
together to extend to most of mankind the rights
and basic protections guaranteed by the Charter.

"Ghana, under the leadership of President of
the Republic, His Excellency General John
Agyekum Kufuor, is of the firm conviction that,
ultimately, the attainment of that happy state in
West Africa will be a function of twin
simultaneous developments - democratic
popular empowerment and rapid economic
growth - so that, in this generation, mass
poverty can be eradicated in West Africa, which
would enable the West African peoples to join in
the ever-broadening movement for global
progress and prosperity in conditions of greater
security and peace. That is the path on which the
West African people want to travel. The world
community, as a matter of our common humanity,
should give maximum support to that
determination."

Finally, Mr. President, my delegation supports the
draft presidential statement that your delegation has
prepared.

