Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his statement, and to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, Mr. Steiner, for his assessment.

Russia has always viewed combating global
climate change as a priority area for international
cooperation. We have consistently advocated, and
continue to advocate, the drafting and implementation
of a global instrument covering all countries,
particularly the largest emitters, and that greater
account be taken of the potential of Russian forests to
act as a carbon sink. The constructive nature of
Russia's policy in this area is reflected in its
announcement that it would reduce, by 2020,
greenhouse-gas emissions by 10 to 25 per cent
compared to 1990, within the framework of a new
universal climate agreement.

However, we also believe that a particular role in
humankind's transition to a non-carbon economy
should be played by nuclear energy, on whose
development Russia will continue to focus, while, of
course, improving safety systems at nuclear reactors
and power stations. We would suggest that the review
now under way within the United Nations on the issue
of climate change allows us to respond to emerging
threats in this area.

We are also convinced that the priority role in
this area lies, and should continue to lie, with the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, as the universal mechanism for combating
global climate change. The Convention has the
necessary and sufficient mechanisms to develop both
an effective international climate regime over the
longer term and specific measures to respond
effectively to new threats in this area.

We share the concern of small island developing
States, in particular those situated in the Pacific Ocean,
about the continuing rise in sea levels. We welcome the
participation in this meeting of the President of Nauru,
Mr. Stephen, whose country is faced with such a
challenge. We believe that in order to properly address
this problem, we must effectively use the existing
potential of the Convention on Climate Change, the
most fundamental area of which is that of adaptation,
including through the Adaptation Fund. We call on all
interested donor countries to consider the possibility of
providing, on an urgent and targeted basis, aid to the
countries concerned for the purpose of adaptation.

Given this, Russia is sceptical about the repeated
attempts that have been made to place on the agenda of
the Security Council the issue of the threat posed by
climate change to international peace and security. As a
compromise, we agreed to join the consensus when
General Assembly resolution 63/281, on climate
change and its possible security implications, was
adopted. While we recognize the Security Council's
prerogatives as the body that has primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
we believe that referring to that resolution to justify
consideration of this issue in the Council is not right.
The resolution was the outcome of months of difficult
negotiations in which all States Members of the United
Nations participated and reflects the fact that many
countries are not prepared to see the issue of climate
placed on the agenda of the Council.

We would also suggest that the report of the
General Assembly (A/64/350) bearing the same title
and drafted pursuant to that resolution does not contain

serious arguments to support the position of those
States advocating that this issue be placed on the
Council's agenda. The report refers only to
hypothetical impacts of climate change on security and
is not able to precisely predict them. It fails to provide
empirical data establishing any correlation between
these phenomena. Although it contains very balanced
conclusions and recommendations on further work in
this area, it is very telling that the Security Council is
not once referred to in the report.

On that basis, we believe that involving the
Security Council in a regular review of the issue of
climate change would bring no added value whatsoever
and would merely lead to a further politicization of the
issue and increased disagreements among countries,
which would be an extremely undesirable outcome,
particularly in the wake of the successful conclusion of
the Conference of Parties held in Cancun and before
the Durban Conference.

