Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, for his briefing. I wish also to welcome the
presence among us of Ambassador Duale.

Over the past year, fighting piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of the Horn of Africa has been a
focus of the international community, leading to the
implementation of a number of initiatives by States,
organizations and international naval forces. We
welcome those coordinated efforts. The number of
attacks has fallen, and there is relative stability along
this important economic route, which is also needed for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the region.

But we have some doubts about whether these
achievements can be sustained, given that this
phenomenon - which began as a low-level local
activity - has become a big business with sophisticated
equipment for attacks and multi-million-dollar profits. It
can thus be assumed that it is supported by complex
transnational structures. In our view it is important that
future reports the Secretary-General make reference to
that element and consider possible sources of support
and financing for piracy in the area.

Alongside initiatives to deal with maritime
attacks in the area, it is also important to build the
capacity to investigate and prosecute those suspected
of these acts. Combating impunity is without doubt a
deterrent for anyone who is thinking of carrying out
illegal activities. Here, we commend Kenya for its
action to put suspects on trial, and we urge other
countries, including Somalia, to strengthen their
legislation, procedures and capacities so that they can
hold such trials. Assistance from the United Nations
and other international organizations, along with the
implementation of legal instruments such as the
Djibouti Code of Conduct concerning the Repression
of Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in the
Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden, would
also be very important in achieving results.

As everyone knows, piracy and armed robbery in
Somalia are symptoms of a far deeper crisis in that
country. Hence, we should very carefully consider the
root causes of Somalia's problems. When we analyse
the situation there, we must do so in the framework of
a long-term strategy for the restoration of normality
that would include the humanitarian, political, security
and development dimensions.

In Costa Rica's view there are four interrelated
areas that demand the attention of this Council and the
international community.

First, we must continue to support the
Transitional Federal Government so that it can achieve
an effective framework for security, augment control of
the territory and of the means for cohesion and
promote an inclusive political process. The Djibouti
peace process offers an adequate setting for working
towards those goals.

Secondly, we have to intensify efforts to further
strengthen the rule of law and to provide proper
training for the Somali security forces. Costa Rica
recognizes the work being done by the Transitional
Federal Government and by AMISOM. with the support
of the United Nations. Strict compliance with the arms
embargo in Somalia is an indispensable instrument.
Also, we support the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and call for cooperation with it to help with compliance
with the obligations deriving from the resolutions
adopted by this Council.

Thirdly, we must maintain and strengthen efforts
to deal with the humanitarian situation in Somalia. It is
essential to ensure delivery of assistance for the fifty
per cent of the people who depend on it. Attacks on
humanitarian organs and their personnel must cease. In
parallel, we have to ensure that we promote
development assistance so that sustainable economic
activities can grow and dependence on humanitarian
aid can be reduced.

Lastly, financing the various initiatives to help
Somalia overcome the crisis must continue being one
of the main concerns of the international community.
Costa Rica urges States and donors to continue to
provide resources to the trust funds. In doing so, they
will confirm their commitment to peace and stability in
that region.

