Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I am grateful to Secretaries-General Guterres and Dato Lim Jock Hoi for their briefings. The United Kingdom has a strong and long- standing relationship with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We have been party to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia since 2012, and just last year we appointed our first dedicated ambassador to ASEAN, John Lambe. We work together closely on issues that matter to our mutual peace and security. The United Kingdom is an ASEANAPOL dialogue partner. We second United Kingdom staff to work on humanitarian assistance at the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management and on cybersecurity at the ASEAN Cyber Centre. We have bilateral defence relationships with nearly every ASEAN member, and the Royal Navy has maintained an almost unbroken presence in the region for the last two years. That is say nothing about our wider people-to- people links, partnerships on trade and investment, development, science and innovation. Since ASEAN's establishment, the organization has played a key role in maintaining peace and security in South-East Asia and the wider Asia-Pacific region. But ASEAN also makes a tangible and valuable contribution to global peace and security. I want to touch on three areas of particular relevance to the Council's work, namely, peacekeeping; women, peace and security; and, of course, climate change. On peacekeeping, we welcome the fact that ASEAN States contribute 5,000 peacekeepers currently serving in United Nations peace operations and that they have all endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative. We hope to work together more on future training partnerships, including through the A4P light coordination mechanism, to further develop peacekeepers' critical capabilities and implement all eight pillars of the A4P. Concerning women, peace and security, we welcome the establishment of the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry and ASEAN member States' efforts to ensure that women are at the negotiating tables during peace processes. At the nexus of those two issues - women in peacekeeping - we welcome in particular the commitment of Indonesian Minister for Foreign Affairs Marsudi to pursue reforms of national and United Nations policies that will increase the number of women in peacekeeping and strengthen their role. With regard to climate change, ASEAN States recognize that climate change increasingly poses threats to our individual and collective security. The United Kingdom and Italy, as the Chairs of the twenty- sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26) in Glasgow later this year, are looking forward to working with ASEAN partners to secure ambitious COP26 outcomes and to accelerate actions to reduce emissions, protect our environment and adapt to the consequences of climate change. I want to touch briefly on three specific issues facing ASEAN and its wider neighbourhood, namely, Myanmar, the South China Sea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. On Myanmar, the Council will soon discuss the accountability issue further, following the International Court of Justice order and the report of Myanmar's own independent commission of inquiry last week. For now, I reiterate that the United Kingdom encourages Myanmar to comply with the Court's legally-binding provisional measures and to implement the commission's recommendations. More broadly, the United Kingdom welcomes ASEAN's continued engagement on the Rohingya crisis, and we encourage ASEAN to focus on overseeing the implementation of the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State to help create conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of Rohingya and build trust between Myanmar and the refugees in Cox's Bazar. We urge the AHA Centre to work closely with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Rakhine and hope that there will be other opportunities for the Council and ASEAN to engage on how we make progress towards a lasting resolution to that crisis. Regarding the South China Sea, we call on all coastal States to take steps that reduce tensions and support maintaining and promoting peace, security, stability and safety in the region. We welcome ongoing negotiations between ASEAN members and China to achieve a rules-based, cooperative and effective codeof conduct in the South China Sea that is consistent with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). We underline the importance of States complying with their international law obligations, particularly UNCLOS. Finally, on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, we are concerned at Kim Jong Un's recent declaration that he no longer feels bound by the moratorium on nuclear and intercontinental ballistic missile tests. The international community, including ASEAN, must remain united on the need for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to return to negotiations with the United States and must continue upholding United Nations sanctions agreed by the Council on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea until that country delivers concrete steps towards de-nuclearization. In conclusion, ASEAN is a dynamic, growing region. Economically, it has been predicted that ASEAN will become collectively the fourth largest economy in the world by 2030. It is our hope that by 2030, ASEAN economic might and potential will be matched also by its contribution to regional and global peace and security. The United Kingdom, for our part, stands ready to work towards that goal in partnership.
