Let me begin by thanking Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for their comprehensive briefings. Indonesia joins the Secretary-General in condemning the attack on Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok's motorcade in Khartoum last month. The attack underlines the security challenges that exist in the Sudan. Furthermore, the situation in the country, which was already marred by a weak economy and locust attacks, among other challenges, has begun to worsen under the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We also concur with Under-Secretary-General Lacroix that COVID-19 has deeply affected the peace process. We hope that the progress achieved in the Sudan will not be derailed by a security vacuum. The drawdown plan needs to ensure that the Sudan's journey towards peace and stability will be even more robust after the closure of the African Union-United Nations Mission Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). As mentioned by the briefers, the Sudan remains fragile and therefore needs our help and joint efforts. We also take note of what Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo pointed out concerning the dire humanitarian situation amid the risk of COVID-19 and the need for the international community to assist the Sudan in that regard. Indonesia has consistently underlined the importance of a responsible drawdown of UNAMID. We also take note of the options presented in the special report (S/2020/202) regarding the drawdown and stand ready to discuss them with other Council members. After hearing South A frica's statement on behalf of the three African members of the Security Council plus Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, we share many of the important points. Allow me to highlight three important issues. First, with regard to the impact of COVID-19 on the transition, besides threatening the health of the Sudanese population, the spread of COVID-19 also poses a serious threat to the Sudan's transition. We are closely following the impact of the pandemic on the Sudan's economy, especially access to food in the country. We call for broadened access to health services and food in all parts of the Sudan during this pandemic. We once again call for the international community to assist in the economic recovery and capacity-building efforts. I share the belief that it is perhaps time for the Security Council to reconsider lifting the current sanctions regime, which affects the economy and the lives of the people of the Sudan. There is now a Government in place, and it is time for us to rethink those sanctions. At this trying time, we also emphasize the need to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers, as well as the other United Nations personnel in the Sudan in maintaining the protection of civilians and humanitarian operations, especially in the time of COVID-19. Secondly, with regard to sustaining the gains made in Darfur, the drawdown plan needs to ensure that those gains can be sustained and further advanced after UNAMID. Indonesia concurs with the assessment in the special report that national ownership and support are a precondition for a successful follow-on mechanism. To that end, we need an inclusive drawdown plan with the participation of all parties in the Sudan. This is especially important to support the ongoing peace negotiations between the Sudanese parties and further it through peacebuilding efforts. It is now clear in our mind that we need to ensure a safe, smooth and responsible drawdown. I would like to underline the word "responsible". The safety of peacekeepers as well as the protection of civilians are important. In this time of COVID-19, we must be rational, manage carefully and not to force ourselves to follow the former deadline, which may no longer be practical or realistic. What is important is to safeguard the peace dividends. The drawdown of UNAMID should not create anxiety and affect the vulnerability of the population. Otherwise, all the achievements of UNAMID would be in vain. Trust is an expensive commodity, and we do not want to see any relapse. We must be careful and responsible and take into account the limitations due to COVID-19 that might affect our plan. Thirdly, regarding international support for the follow-on presence, as the Government of the Sudan assumes a central role in the country post- UNAMID, the world needs to maintain its support to achieve the Government's priorities and tackle remaining challenges. Indonesia closely follows the increase in intercommunal violence in numerous parts of Darfur and remains cognizant of its impact on the Sudan's transition. We therefore believe that a limited number of peacekeepers to assist the Government of the Sudan is still necessary in the follow-on presence, particularly to enhance peacebuilding, capacity-building and the protection of civilians. The United Nations post-UNAMID presence should be flexible, effective, lean and tailor-made to the wish and needs of the host country and assist in the transition process. In short, it should support peacebuilding, economic recovery and sustainable development. In the end, the conclusion of UNAMID's operation in the Sudan does not mean that the country's journey towards peace and prosperity has ended. It is time for the Sudan to embark on a new phase towards peace. Rest assured that Indonesia stands ready to walk hand in hand with the Sudan on this journey.
