Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, on behalf of Argentina, 1 would like to express our
full solidarity with Serbia in the light of the regrettable
situation it is experiencing due to the recent floods,
which, as has been said, are the worst in the past 120
years. We would like to express our condolences to the
family members of the victims, to the Government of
Serbia and to the region as a whole at this difficult time.

I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting
the report (S/2014/305) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
would also like to welcome the participation of
President Tomislav Nikolie and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga.

Argentina, as is our tradition, would like to
emphasize the important role that the United Nations
is playing in Kosovo through UNMIK in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights as
well as in its cooperation with the Kosovo Force and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), which has maintained a neutral position
with regard to the status of Kosovo under the auspices
of the United Nations.

It is important to recall that Argentina voted in
favour of resolution 1244 (1999) when it was also a
member of the Security Council. Argentina believes
that the resolution continues to be the international legal
basis that applies in Kosovo to achieve a comprehensive
solution through a political process and through
negotiations. We reiterate once again the importance
of UNMIK, not only in assisting the process of local
elections that were held in November and December,
last year but also in supporting Belgrade and Pristina,
whose firm leadership has permitted the taking of the
measures necessary to the full establishment of new
municipal Governments in the north of Kosovo.

With regard to security, we welcome the fact that
crime rates dropped during the reporting period and
that the overall situation is stable. However, we are
concerned that attacks against Serb Kosovars continue,
especially in Peje/Pee and in the town of Istog/Istok.
We also condemn the repeated acts of vandalism against
cemeteries and property of the Serbian Orthodox
Church. It is up to the corresponding authorities to take
measures so that those acts are not repeated. Bearing
that in mind, we think that the response of the Kosovo
police with regard to crimes against ethnic minorities
has improved and that the increase in patrolling in
areas shared by different ethnic populations, as has
occurred in the municipality of Kline/Klina, could be
an important step forward.

We welcome the commitment of the parties to
continuing the high-level dialogue under the auspices
of the European Union and we highlight the important
progress achieved in implementing the historic First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. We urge the parties to
continue those efforts and consolidate the progress
achieved, in particular by reaching an agreement on
the establishment of the community or association of
Serbian municipalities. We underline the progress in
one area of the Agreement that is particularly sensitive,
namely, the incorporation of the personnel of the
Ministry of Interior of Serbia into the Kosovo police.
We urge the parties to continue on that path through
dialogue and the application of the Agreement in order
to make progress on the related issue of the judiciary
and other areas of the rule of law.

The Republic of Serbia, in particular, has continued
to show its genuine commitment to the process of
implementing the April 2013 Agreement. We would
therefore encourage all the international stakeholders
on the ground to continue working together in line with
their respective mandates in order to contribute towards
consolidating the achievements and the effective
resolution of pending issues.

While we are encouraged that the security situation
in Kosovo has been mostly calm, that does not mean
that we should not continue to focus on the security
situation in northern Mitrovica. In that regard, we
reiterate that the important work of UNMIK continues
to be essential in providing the greatest support to the
political processes, in particular giving special attention
to the implementation of the 19 April 2013 Agreement.

Argentina believes that it is very important to
achieve full respect for the human rights of displaced
persons and members ofminority groups so that they can
return to their places of origin and accede to substantive
rights and not be the victims of discrimination or
intimidation. While the adoption of a strategy for
communities and returns for 2014-2018, which
prioritizes housing construction, security, freedom of
movement, access to public services and employment
opportunities, and the fact that the situation of displaced
Kosovo Roma, Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptians
has improved are both positive, the report recognizes
that displaced Serbs continue to face difficulties. We
urge the authorities to redouble their efforts to promote
tolerance, respect and reconciliation and to confront all
forms of discrimination.

Argentina remains concerned by the relatively
low rate of voluntary returns of Kosovars to the region
since their displacement 15 years ago. We call on the
authorities to continue working to implement measures,
such as the aforementioned strategy, to address those
unresolved issues, which remain obstacles to facilitating
the return and definitive reintegration of internally
displaced persons.

It is also crucially important to continue to give
priority to the tasks of overcoming the traces and legacy
of the conflict, including the pending cases of 1,712
disappeared persons. We underscore the holding ofnew
meetings of the Working Group on Missing Persons in
Belgrade and Pristina, under the chairmanship of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. UNMIK
should continue to support and encourage efforts to
ascertain the fate of disappeared persons. We also call
for redoubled efforts and cooperation so that impunity
is the not the last word on serious violations of human
rights.

We highlight the work being done by UNMIK
to support the rule of law, especially its cooperation
with all the pertinent interested parties with regard
to the main problems on the ground. We think that it
is important for international presences to continue
strengthening mutual cooperation in order to establish
the appropriate conditions to implement the 19 April
2013 Agreement in the best way possible.

We conclude by highlighting the work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
promote security, stability and respect for human rights
in Kosovo in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

