The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of Syria has asked to speak a second
time. I give him the floor.

Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in 
Arabic): I regret that I have been compelled to speak
before the Council once again at this very late hour.

The representatives of Israel in all international
forums have yet to understand that the story of the
military occupation of Arab territory and the
deprivation of the Palestinian people of their usurped
inherent rights is one that is well known. It is so well
known, in fact, that even Israeli non-governmental
organizations have begun to contribute effectively to
bringing Israel's inhuman practices against the
unarmed Palestinian population to light.

The play of shedding crocodile tears in the
Security Council because of the violence of
Palestinians - who have nothing more than stones to
face the arsenal of Israeli aggression on Palestinian
territory - has become raw, boring, unnecessary and
incapable of allowing the light of truth to shine before
the members of the Council.

Israeli State terrorism in our region began with
the inception of Israel in historical Palestine in 1948.
This Israeli terrorism, as the Council knows, has fallen
on representatives of international legitimacy such as
Count Bernadotte, who was killed by a terrorist
explosion carried out by a previous Prime Minister of
Israel targeting him. That terrorist activity has
repeatedly fallen on the UNIFIL forces and has killed
thousands of children in massacres perpetrated by the
Israeli occupation forces for decades in Egypt, Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria and Palestine. On this occasion, I wish
to remind members of the Council that the first
hijacking of a civilian aircraft in the world was carried
out by Israel against a Syrian aircraft in 1954. I also
wish to remind members of the Council that Israel shot
down a Libyan civilian aircraft in 1971.
12

Peace will not prevail in the Middle East except
when the representatives of Israel understand that
peace is in their interest before it is in ours. Peace is
not of interest to the Arab world alone. When Israel
understands that peace is also an Israeli need, before it
is an Arab and a Palestinian need, then peace will
prevail. Then the Council's job will be much easier
than it is at present.

The Arab States have not invited millions of
Palestinian refugees to reside in the Arab States; those
millions of refugees, who live in dozens and hundreds
of refugee camps in Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Egypt and
inside Palestine itself, have been forcibly displaced
from their homeland. Syria did not invite Khaled
Meshal to come to Damascus. Lebanon did not invite
half a million refugees to live in its land. They all wish
to return today, before tomorrow, to their homeland, on
the basis of a resolution adopted by international
legitimacy, General Assembly resolution 194 (III) -
the resolution on the right of return.

Those millions of Palestinian refugees who live
in exile are waiting to return to their homeland. Their
homeland is Palestine. It is on the map, and everybody
knows where Palestine is. The representative of Israel
here, or in any other international forum, will not stop
us from seeing that truth: the terms of reference of
international law. This Council is here to protect and
defend the law not to allow Israel to become an
exception to international law and its provisions.

The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance with
the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I now invite members of the Council to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.

The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.
08-21448

