Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting the Philippines to participate
in this important debate, as this issue is a national
security priority for my country.

Due to its strategic location in South-East Asia
and its more than 36,000 kilometres of coastline, the
Philippines attaches paramount importance to maritime
security. The security of the seas surrounding the
country impacts our territorial integrity, the protection
of maritime ecosystems and aquatic resources, and the
welfare of our nationals. My country's location makes
it vulnerable to the activities of international crime
syndicates, including piracy, drug trafficking and
human trafficking.

The Philippines also has a stake in the security of
the seas beyond its surrounding waters. Our seafarers
constitute about 20 per cent of global seafarers,
servicing mainly international merchant ships. There is
one Filipino seafarer for every complement of four on
board a vessel at any time. It is therefore vital for my
country that threats to maritime security be addressed
and abated.

At the height of the piracy in the Horn of Africa
in 2008, more than 200 Filipino seafarers were in the
hands of pirates on any given day. During the period
from March 2006 to March 2009, 293 Filipino seafarers
were taken hostage by pirates while working on board
seagoing vessels. It was only in October 2016 that the last
group of hostages from the last fishing vessel hijacked
in the Gulf of Aden was released. Five Filipinos were
in that group; they had been held hostage for more than
four years.

The Philippines cooperates with the Government of
the flag of hijacked vessels, as well as with the vessels'
owners, to ensure the safety and return of the abducted
crew. In the case of the most recent release and recovery
of hostages, the Philippines worked with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in repatriating the
Filipinos as well as the Cambodian seafarers and in
providing them with medical and psychosocial services.
Financial assistance to the families of the released crew
was also provided by my Government, in keeping with
the third pillar of our foreign policy, to promote and
protect the welfare of overseas Filipinos.

Piracy in the Horn of Africa was stemmed by the
vigilant and efficient counter-piracy operations and
cooperation of many Governments and organizations.
However, piracy elsewhere continues. In September
last year alone, seven Filipino seafarers were abducted
in Nigerian waters. They were released in October, but
just a few days after that, 10 others were abducted in the
Gulf of Guinea.

The Philippines' southern maritime borders, which
are shared with Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) neighbours, are areas of concern owing to
the prevalence of high-seas piracy, terrorist activities
and other crimes. The Philippines joined Indonesia
and Malaysia in the trilateral cooperative agreement to
implement counterterrorism measures and strategies
and to effectively address existing and emerging
transnational challenges and threats. Joint air and sea
patrols were conducted on the three countries' common
borders to reinforce security and accelerate the capture
of armed elements, fugitives and those who are providing
assistance to extremists. That cooperation has also
enhanced intelligence- and information-sharing among
security and intelligence agencies.

The Philippines is also a member of the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP), a
multilateral mechanism involving 20 States aimed at
promoting and enhancing cooperation against piracy
and armed robbery against ships in Asia. In 2018, the
ReCAAP information-sharing centre reported a total of
76 incidents of piracy and armed robbery against ships
in Asia, a 25 per cent decrease from the 102 incidents
reported in 2017. The ReCAAP information-sharing
centre also conducts capacity-building for the focal
points of countries and provides links with the
International Maritime Organization, INTERPOL, the
Baltic and International Maritime Council and other
relevant organizations.

The Philippines is active in the ASEAN Maritime
Forum, a mechanism in ASEAN to enhance dialogue
and confidence-building in maritime cooperation and
maritime security in the region, including in countering
piracy, in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief,
and in the management and protection of maritime and
aquatic resources. The expanded ASEAN Maritime
Forum, which includes ASEAN dialogue partners,
also holds discussions on maritime security, safety and
environmental protection. The Philippines is likewise
active in the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East
Asia Summit, as well as the ASEAN Senior Officials
Meeting on Transnational Crime, which focuses on
maritime security and cooperation.

Organized crime at sea is a global problem that
threatens security, stability and the rule of law,
undermines economic prosperity and threatens the
environment. Thus international cooperation to
prevent and control it is essential. States have a shared
responsibility to counter the threat of maritime crime
through enhanced international cooperation, awareness-
raising, information-sharing, capacity-building, technical
assistance and strengthened law enforcement. We call
on all Member States to adhere to and implement the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its protocols, the relevant
resolutions and guidelines adopted by the International
Maritime Organization, and the relevant conventions
countering maritime piracy.

In my country's experience, the scourge of piracy
and robbery at sea is best addressed by an international
response through an intergovernmental approach. With
approximately 80 per cent of global trade taking place
by maritime transport, attaining maritime security is
vital to our shared prosperity.

The meeting rose at 1.05 pm.
