Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): Poland
joins other delegations in strongly condemning the
terrorist attacks in Paris on 13 November. Together
with the whole international community, we are deeply
shocked by that barbarous act, unprecedented in its
scale.

(spoke in French)

We offer our sincere condolences to the bereaved
families and express our solidarity with the people and
Government ofFrance. During this difficult period, our
thoughts are with the victims of this tragedy, with all
the women and men of Paris, as well as with the French
nation.

(spoke in English)

Turning to the subject of today's meeting, I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for once again
bringing to the Council the issue of the prevention
of conflicts, with special focus on the interlinkages
between development and peace and security. I also
thank the briefers for their contributions to the debate.
While Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union, allow me to
share with the Council a few additional thoughts from
the national perspective.

Our debate today has benefited greatly from a
number of important documents released this year.
I have in mind, in particular, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), which sets up the development framework for the
future. This year is also special in that three review
processes of the peacebuilding architecture, peace
operations and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) are under way. The Secretary-General's reports
and their recommendations provide a good basis for
further work towards achieving better complementary
in the United Nations security and development policies.

The changing nature of conflicts requires a
comprehensive approach to stopping them before they
put international peace and security at risk. Prevention
lies at the heart of the United Nations activities. That
is also the foundation of the Human Rights Up Front
initiative, which seeks to strengthen the early-warning
capacities of the Organization. The United Nations has
at its disposal the tools needed to strengthen national
protection mechanisms and help countries become
more resilient in the face of conflicts and human rights
crises.

The Security Council, for its part, could make
wider use of horizon-scanning briefings. We are also
in favour of strengthening cooperation between the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies,
including the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The
Council could benefit broadly from PBC's expertise
and advice, in particular when considering transitions
between various types of assistance. We hope that the
ongoing peacebuilding architecture review process will
contribute to that end.

Poland would also like to underline the importance
of effective national conflict-prevention policies,
such as strengthening transparent and accountable
State institutions, fighting corruption and promoting
human rights and good governance. We also see the
need for States to promote and maintain safe and
enabling environments for civil society actors, who
play an essential role in the prevention of human rights
violations, which too often result in conflicts.

The demand for conflict prevention, mediation
and good offices is growing rapidly. The good office
exchanges and the mutual reinforcement in mediation
efforts between the United Nations and European Union
should continue, and are most appreciated. Recent
examples also show the growing role played by regional
economic communities in Africa in mediation, such as
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
encourage the United Nations to intensify its efforts to
support regional organizations on other continents in
building their own mediation capacities.

Last but not least, the Department of Political
Affairs plays a central role in United Nations efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts around the world. We
hope that Poland's first contribution to the Department
of Political Affairs multi-year appeal last year will
strengthen the Department's capacity to detect crises,
allowing it to engage meaningfully in preventive
diplomacy and the strengthening of democratization
processes.

