Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to thank Mr. Eide for his briefing to the
Council today. Concurrent with Mr. Eide's
appointment, the Security Council took the crucial
decision to refine and expand the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). To implement the revised mandate, and
given the huge challenges that UNAMA faces
regarding civil-military coordination, the effectiveness
of humanitarian relief and election preparations, we
support an immediate increase, indeed a surge, in
UNAMA's capabilities, based on the proposals made
by Mr. Eide.

The United States is gravely concerned about the
humanitarian conditions in Afghanistan. The situation
is worsening and many lives are in jeopardy, both from
possible food shortages and from extreme cold
weather. The United States is the largest donor to
Afghanistan, both financially and in kind. We are
prepared to do more. We urge United Nations Member
States to respond to the appeals of the Afghan
Government, as well as of the United Nations, to avoid
a worsening humanitarian situation this winter.
Planning and preparations for winter should aim at
assisting needy Afghans in dealing with food
shortages, as well as with cold weather.

We concur with the Secretary-General's
conclusion that the security situation has become more
challenging as the number of anti-Government
incidents has increased and the extremist Taliban and
their terrorist allies have continued to wage deadly
attacks on Afghan security forces, the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the civilian
population. But success in Afghanistan is critical not
only for the Afghans, but also for the region and the
broader struggle against terror and extremism. Success
can be achieved despite the recent talk of doom and
gloom, as referred to by Mr. Eide. Success requires that
the Government in Afghanistan implement its national
development strategy, making tough decisions and
implementing the agreed policies, specifically in the
areas of local governance, combating corruption,
enforcing the rule of law, achieving economic
development, the pursuit of robust counter-narcotics
efforts and reform of the police forces.
We hope that the recent changes in the Cabinet
proposed by President Karzai can assist with making
progress with regard to those goals. We welcome the
Afghan security forces taking increasing responsibility
for protecting the Afghan people as their capabilities
grow and as conditions warrant; indeed we believe that
this is crucial.

President Karzai has committed his Government
to holding election in 2009. That is very important. We
welcome UNAMA's effort to support the Afghan
Government in preparing for those elections. It is
imperative that the international community redouble
efforts to ensure credible elections. We call on the
Afghan Government to maintain its commitment to
carry out those elections as scheduled to further instill
the culture of democratic and representative
Government in the country and to sustain international
support.

For Afghanistan's success, I would like to
underscore the importance of the role of the country's
neighbours. The recent election of a new Government
in Pakistan provides an opportunity for increased
cooperation between the two countries against
terrorists and extremists, who threaten Afghanistan,
Pakistan and, indeed, the world. The agenda for
regional cooperation is clear: no sanctuary for hostile
forces; no use of extremists and terrorists to advance
national interests; intelligence-sharing; precluding
regional geopolitical rivalry; encouraging
reconciliation; and integrating Afghanistan into
regional institutions and the regional economy.
Progress on those fronts is crucial to Afghanistan's
stability and development. Both Afghans and
Pakistanis need and deserve international support to
resist extremists and terrorists. The United States is
committed to doing its part.

The United Nations Secretariat has its own
critical role to play in facilitating and supporting
UNAMA's practical needs. As a top priority, we must
find ways to allow Mr. Eide to hire the people he needs
and get them on board immediately, not months from
now. We urge the Secretariat to do everything in its
power to make sure that Mr. Eide is given the support
and resources he needs to carry out his mission.
Mr. Eide, in turn, needs to use those capabilities and
the promising relationships he has built with the
Afghans and with the international community to
develop targets and plans with timelines for achieving
each of the major tasks in his mandate. The United

States and its partners are committed to success in
Afghanistan and will adjust our approach as necessary
to achieve our common goals. The United States
deeply regrets the accidental loss of civilian life and
we do not take this lightly. We share the Secretary-
General's grave concern over the issue of civilian
casualties. I want to assure the Council members that
we will do everything in our power to ensure that ISAF
and Operation Enduring Freedom take every precaution
to prevent civilian casualties. We have intensified our
efforts with the Government of Afghanistan to improve
coordination and communication in operations to
prevent future incidents. Our military central command
has issued guidance to United States forces to continue
to take steps to prevent civilian casualties and to
acknowledge them when they occur.

At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fundamental cause of the increasing casualties, clearly
spelled out in the Secretary-General's report. The
Taliban and other anti-Government elements are
waging a systematic campaign of violence and
intimidation against civilians. They deliberately target
civilians and use them as shields. As the report points
out, and as Mr. Eide mentioned in his remarks, the
Taliban are increasingly resorting to asymmetric
attacks on population centres, aid-related targets and
non-governmental organizations.

The challenging security situation highlights the
need for more forces and better civil-military
coordination. On the military side, the United States, in
consultation with our ISAF partners, has streamlined
its chain of command to make its forces better able to
carry out their mission. General McKiernan is now the
commander of both ISAF and United States forces in
Afghanistan and is working very closely with the
Afghan security forces. The United States and its
partners will send more forces to Afghanistan.

Civil-military coordination is important for
success and is a crucial part of UNAMA's mandate. We
expect Mr. Eide to partner with General McKiernan to
carry out that task as soon as possible. Furthermore,
UNAMA is at the centre of coordinating international
relief efforts.

Last June, the international community endorsed
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy, and
there was an unprecedented level of pledges. Those are
clear signs of our determination to help Afghans
succeed. As Afghans do their part, donors must also
follow through on their commitments.

In closing, the Secretary-General's report
accurately highlights the increasing difficulties and
challenges that the Government of Afghanistan and its
international partners are facing. Rather than cause
mutual recrimination, those challenges should serve to
reaffirm and renew mutual commitment to
Afghanistan's success. By making the necessary
changes and adjustments, the United States is
committed to doing so and remains firmly committed
to Afghanistan's success.

