Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, and in honour of the Chinese
presidency of the Council for this month and having
lived in Beijing for four years, I will try to express my
thanks in my best Chinese.

(spoke in Chinese)
I thank you, Mr. President.
(spoke in English)

At the outset, I would like to express our deep
appreciation to the People's Republic of China for
organizing this important open debate and for the
excellent concept note (S/2016/306, annex).

Today's debate is timely in our view, given the
terrorist attacks that continue to wreak havoc upon
societies around the world. We will not be silenced by
those attacks. We will continue to stand shoulder to
shoulder with the countries that have fallen victim to
those horrible acts. Together with our partners, we will
continue to combat terrorism in our countries, in our
cities and in our communities.

The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In my
national capacity, I would like to add a few remarks
on the need for cooperation, on the life cycle of
radicalization and on resources. In view of the time
constraints, I will read out a shortened version of my
statement, and my full statement will be available
through a link on my Twitter account.

On the importance of cooperation, the recent attacks
serve as a grim reminder ofthe need for such cooperation
and the need for the sharing of information. We must
work closely together at all levels, internationally, in
multilevel forums and international organizations like
INTERPOL, and at the United Nations, as well as
regionally through institutions like the European Union,
the African Union and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN). Allow me also to highlight,

quoting our Indonesian colleague, the importance of
the Regional Counter-Terrorism Centre, established in
Indonesia for that purpose. We must also work better
together on a bilateral basis, for even though we come
from diverse backgrounds, we face a common enemy in
terrorism. We are proud of the Centre just mentioned,
as the Netherlands worked together with Indonesia on a
bilateral basis to help set it up.

In our view, terrorism can be countered only by
working together on the basis of what we share. We
share the horror, we share the grief, we share the anger
about terrorist attacks, their cowardly perpetrators and
their tragic consequences. We need to do more than just
share information, however. We must also implement
the well-known resolutions adopted by the Council,
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 2178 (2014) and
2253 (2015). Now is truly the time for action rather than
words. Only by cooperating, sharing and implementing
the Council resolutions fully can we stop the terrorists
and secure our homelands. At the same time, we must
continue to reflect upon the tools at our disposal. We
should remember that those tools were devised to
defend our freedom, our human rights, our way of life.

My second point is the so-called life cycle of
radicalization. The efforts of the United Nations and
other forums should be focused on addressing the
entire life cycle of radicalization, from the first steps
on the road towards terrorism, where radicalization
manifests itself, all the way through to the final stages
of the cycle. Our approach must address the whole
cycle: prevention, protection and prosecution, but we
must do so appropriately. For example, the abuse of the
Internet by terrorists in order to target our youngest,
most vulnerable citizens with messages of hatred and
violence is a complex challenge. We need to address
that challenge firmly, while upholding the fundamental
human rights of the freedom of expression and the
freedom of information. The fact that those approaches
go hand in hand was aptly identified in the concept note
prepared for this debate, for which I already commended
you, Sir. Let us not forget that, at the end of the cycle,
reintegration is a key issue.

My third point is on resource mobilization.
Targeting the life cycle of radicalization requires
resources, and resources are not limited to financial
ones. The biggest resources we have are resilience of a
community, of a nation, of our youth and the combined
energy and courage of our whole communities to defend
our common values. We in the Netherlands are trying
to be active in fostering and promoting these resources
and this resilience. We are doing so as co-Chair of
the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF), together
with Morocco, our fellow co-Chair. We congratulate
Morocco on assuming this post earlier this week and we
thank Turkey as outgoing co-Chair for their hard work
during the past years and the excellent cooperation we
had together.

The GCTF has been active in helping to implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and our members have made available hundreds of
millions dollars for counter-terrorism capacity-building
in other countries. The GCTF supports activities like
the Border Security Initiative, which aims to assist
countries at risk in the Horn ofAfrica and the Sahel. The
GCTF presented this week its strategic plan of action
in The Hague. In this plan, the GCTF reiterates its
commitment to fighting terrorism in close cooperation
with the United Nations and its Member States.

Last week in Geneva we discussed the Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism and soon we will review
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I hope that my statement and those of others today will
contribute to the implementation of the Plan of Action
and provide valuable input for the debate on the review.
But only after the review has been completed will the
real work start. Like Confucius said, ifI may quote one
of China's biggest philosophers, it is in the details of
one's daily behaviour that true virtue is manifested. We
all have to make it happen in our daily lives.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, as a partner for peace, justice and
development, stands ready to act accordingly. We are
ready to work in partnership, for only through genuine
cooperation can we overcome the scourge of terrorism,
for peace, for we all long for a world free from
terrorism; for justice, which we owe to the victims of
terrorism; and for development, in order to contribute
to addressing the root causes conducive to terrorism.

