Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Yesterday, a Concorde
plane on its flight to New York crashed in Paris, killing
all passengers, the crew and four people on the ground.
I wish to express our deep condolences to the
Governments of France and Germany on this tragic
accident. Our hearts go out to the families of the
deceased in profound pain and sympathy.

Those most affected by this terrible disaster are
the innocent children of those who died in the inferno.
Many children have lost caring fathers and loving
mothers. They have been orphaned by that terrible
accident and now must face the sea of an uncertain
future.

In many conflict-torn places, it is commonplace
for children to be orphaned, maimed or killed as the
grown-ups deliberately use them to make a point or to
settle the score. It becomes even more horrendous
when innocent children are turned into murderers. At
an age when they should be carrying books in their
schoolbags, children are forced to carry guns they can
hardly hold, and must hide in the jungle. There are
shocking instances in which the victims of conflicts
turn into victimizers themselves.

This must change. Nepal is highly encouraged by
this public debate, the third of its kind following those
of June 1998 and August 1999. This debate is indeed a
manifestation of our collective conscience and
seriousness in addressing the issue of children and
conflict. I express Nepal's sincere appreciation to you,
Madam President, for promoting this useful
deliberation.

To be sure, the international community has
covered much ground in protecting children's rights
and enhancing their welfare. The Convention on the
Rights of the Child has already been ratified or acceded
to by 191 countries. The Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict has been
opened for signature. Security Council resolution 1261
(1999) should be praised highly as an appropriate
culmination of our collective will and effort to help
prevent the growing use of children as shields or as
child soldiers as internecine conflicts proliferate
around the world.

The Secretary-General's report presents heart-
wrenching cold facts on millions of refugee children,
on several thousand child soldiers and on children
killed, injured, traumatized, raped and orphaned by the
millions. No doubt, as the Secretary-General states,

"children are disproportionately affected by
armed conflict and their needs merit our
concerted attention". (S/2000/712, para. 4)

Even at the dawn of the third millennium, we are
witnessing much of the same. Clearly, what we have
done so far is not enough. We need to do more and do
it quickly. The peace and prosperity of tomorrow
largely depend on our children. We must act together to
provide our children with a normal, innocent childhood
and the opportunity to blossom to their fullest
potential. While we should redouble our endeavours to
implement the globally agreed compacts and decisions
for a quick turn-around in the plight of children,
additional measures, as necessary, should be put in
place, too. This debate contributes to that process. The
implementation of international law and United
Nations resolutions is always the hardest part. What we
have achieved on paper has yet to be translated into
concrete improvement in the lives of billions of
children.

Undoubtedly, the primary responsibility for
protecting children and promoting their rights rests
with the countries concerned. Prolonged armed
conflicts, however, are rarely sustained without outside
aiding and abetting. Nepal therefore believes in the
unity of purpose and in the pooling of our efforts for
complementarities and synergies to achieve our shared
goal.

The question of children in conflict is an involved
one. It has its political, economic and social
dimensions. The treatment of the symptoms of a deeper
ailment is not an appropriate response. We need to get
to the root of the problem. Political exclusion, poverty
and social injustice are at the root of most
contemporary conflicts. We believe that the issue of
children in conflict situations must be seen in its proper
perspective. To my delegation, measures at the global,
regional, national, community and civil-society levels
are essential to moving forward in this area.

At the international level, we must continue to
bridge the widening gap between the rich and the poor.
Only a world marked by sovereign equality, mutual
respect, non-interference and shared economic
prosperity will help narrow the gulf and promote
peaceful coexistence. Endeavours must also be made to
constantly follow up on the implementation of the
internationally agreed measures for protecting children
from conflict. Early-warning systems deployed to
detect signs of an evolving conflict and the prompt pre-
emptive response capability of the United Nations to
snuff it out before it flares up also need to be instituted.
This would obviate the necessity for and impulse
towards conflicts. Corollary regional efforts to promote
much of the same would definitely be helpful, as they
would be closer to the theatre of conflict.

Nationally, political participation and the
narrowing of differences between the haves and have-
nots are as called for as the imperative for social justice
in order to enhance mutual understanding across racial
and cultural fault lines. The implementation of
international agreements designed to protect children
from conflict should be the primary responsibility of
each country, while the international community should
exhibit its readiness to support those countries, which
have difficulty managing the necessary resources.

It is at the community level that harmonious
social relations can be fostered to aggregate competing
priorities and claims on resources. Community
organizations, together with civil society, which can
work as a bridge between Governments and rebels, as
well as across racial and cultural divides, should be the
most effective instrument to inculcate a new culture of
peace and prevention of conflicts in society. Inclusive
governance, together with an expanding economy, can
go a long way towards weaving together all people in
tolerant mosaics on the social landscape. The challenge
before us is to bring awareness to rebels and
revolutionaries of the need to respect the rights of
children. Civil society would be best suited to taking
up such a role.

Nepal was one of the first countries to sign and
ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Our
commitment to the provisions of the Convention is
fully reflected in the Constitution of the Kingdom of
Nepal and in the subsequent enabling legislation to
implement those provisions. The two Optional
Protocols to the Convention are under active
consideration for signing. The National Human Rights
Commission has been constituted.

Ours is a tolerant society where, so far, people of
different religion and ethnic origin have lived together
in harmony. The multi-party system of governance
offers equal opportunity to all for political
participation. Being a least developed country, we need
resources for both our social and economic
development and our efforts to protect as well as to
further promote children's rights.

I wish to share the fact that Nepal has a voluntary
recruitment policy in all its uniformed services and no
one under the age of 18 is sent to the front line.

Before I conclude, as I have taken the floor in the
Security Council for the first time since I assumed my
post as Permanent Representative of Nepal, let me
congratulate you, Madam President, for successfully
presiding over the Council in the month of July. I also
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his excellent report on children
and armed conflict. I also congratulate Ms. Carol
Bellamy for her insightful statement this morning. Mr.
Olara Otunnu's lucid presentation of the report to the
Council also deserves our appreciation and
commendation.
