Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to welcome Mr. Solana and to express
my deep appreciation for his briefing. I should like also
to thank the representative of Germany, who spoke on
behalf of the European Union, as well as Mr. Guehenno
and Mr. Gambari, for the very useful information that
they have provided us this morning. Above all, I should
like, as a neighbour of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and on behalf of the African Union, to thank the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR),
which made a significant contribution to the success of
the process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There is no doubt that this experience will prove useful
in the context of future theatres of operation, in Africa
in particular. I should like therefore to reiterate the
deep gratitude of my country and of Africa in particular
for that very valuable contribution.

Like the majority of those who spoke before me,
we welcome the smooth holding of the elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Credit is of course
due to the people and the leaders of that country, as
well as to the entire international community. When we
speak of the international community, let us not forget
that Africa itself played an active role in this process.
Indeed, proof of this is the role played by countries
such as South Africa in organizing the political dialogue
that led to the establishment of the transitional
institutions, and the role played by that country, as well
as by Angola, in the area of military training.

African involvement is also evident from the
continent's participation in the International Committee
for Support to the Transition (CIAT). Representatives
of the Chairman of the African Union and of the
Chairman of the African Union Commission have
taken part, along with other members, in CIAT
meetings. The subregion itself, the Economic
Community of Central African States, has set up, in
case of need, a reserve brigade.

However, even as we welcome the success of this
process, I would like to stress the need for the
international community to continue its efforts. I
greatly appreciated the commitment made here by the
European Union to continue to support the efforts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, because there
could be very serious consequences if we let up our
vigilance.

The elections, as noted earlier, are indeed an
important stage, but they are only a stage. That is
because most of the major problems still remain to be
solved. One was mentioned in particular: that of
security sector reform, which will be crucial.

In assessing the situation, we also take account of
the results of the second Summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, which just took
place at Nairobi. We must from now on consider the
process as a whole within the framework of that
Conference's outcome. Indeed, the Great Lakes region
has been declared a special development zone. The
international community is expected to make its
contribution, and, in that respect, Europe is a leading
partner. We must therefore take into account the
regional dimension of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in our discussions in the days to
come on the future of MONUC's mandate.

I should like once again to thank the Security
Council, the European Union and all of our partners for
the great interest they have shown in the electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I
urge them to continue their efforts.

