Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): We appreciate
the timely scheduling of today's debate on the annual
report of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2009/444).
Let me begin by placing on record our appreciation of
the good work being done by Ambassador Heraldo
Munoz, Chair of the Commission, who brings a wealth
of experience to this assignment, the new Chairs of the
country-specific configurations and the Chair of the
Working Group on Lessons Learned. I also wish to
congratulate Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins on her
appointment as the head of the Peacebuilding Support
Office. My delegation will remain constructively
engaged in the process and assures them our fullest
cooperation and support.
The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304)
rightly acknowledges the imperatives of national
ownership and of anchoring peacebuilding efforts at
the country level. Equally significant is the fact that the
Peacebuilding Commission is trying to cooperate and
coordinate with other United Nations agencies as well
as other international institutions and is trying to
expand the web of stakeholders as well as their
involvement in the peacebuilding process.

As a contributor to the Peacebuilding Fund and as
a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, India has
remained actively engaged in the critical task of
peacebuilding. We will continue our active association
with both the Commission and the Fund with a view to
enabling those institutions to fulfil in their entirety the
tasks assigned to them by the General Assembly and
the Security Council. India has always held the view
that the setting up of the Peacebuilding Commission
filled an important institutional gap and that the
Commission can and should make an important
contribution to the recovery, reconstruction and
development of countries emerging from conflict,
wherever it agrees to act upon a request for advice and
assistance by any such Member State.

It was with this conviction that India has been
proactively engaged in revising the terms of reference
for the Peacebuilding Fund and sponsored General
Assembly draft resolution A/64/L.72 in that regard in
May. We are happy to note that the Secretary-General's
annual report on the Peacebuilding Fund observes that
its revised terms of reference have enabled the Fund
"to serve as a fast-disbursing, agile, responsive and
risk-taking peacebuilding instrument" (S/2009/419, para. 55). In all our endeavours, it is important that the
relationship with the Peacebuilding Commission and
all donors be managed creatively, so as to utilize
synergies in existing peacebuilding strategies.

In its own unique experience of nation-building,
India has developed multifaceted capacities relevant to
peacebuilding and development. We have shared this
experience and expertise in a number of countries
transiting from conflict to peace. We are very happy to
continue to make our capabilities in nation-building
available to countries in post-conflict situations, and to
cooperate with the United Nations in its peacebuilding
activities, including those in the areas of development,
social sector reform, and the rule of law and security.

Let me conclude by stressing two important
imperatives. First, we must always strive to ensure that
there is an effective two-way dialogue at all stages
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
countries on its agenda. Secondly, we need to
constantly improve the governance structures of the
peacebuilding architecture. It should be in a position to
respond swiftly and with greater efficiency so that all
available resources geared towards peacebuilding in
post-conflict situations are properly harnessed in the
shortest possible time.

