Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame for his briefing on the situation in Libya. South Africa commends the United Nations Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr. Salame, for their tireless efforts to bring together all the international players to the Libyan conflict at the Berlin conference that took place on 19 January, with the aim of finding a lasting solution to the Libyan crisis. My delegation also thanks Mr. Mathias Licharz, speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), for his briefing on the work of the Committee. The protracted nature of the conflict in Libya requires the Council to be frank about its genesis and the reasons why it has taken on a proxy dimension. The fragmentation of State control and security has resulted in the proliferation of a multitude of armed groups vying for control of the country and its resources, which has resulted in one of the worst humanitarian crises on our continent, given the effects of the conflict on Libyan civilians, migrants and refugees. South Africa reiterates that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Libya. All Libyan parties, community leaders and non-governmental organizations should commit to political dialogue and refrain from military confrontation. The parties must urgently commit to a ceasefire and work towards a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process. Additionally, we call for an end to foreign interference in Libya. Allow me to focus on three issues. First, the insecurity seen in the Sahel region today is a direct result of the instability in Libya. The arms flowing into Libya also flow into the hands of the armed groups operating in the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin. The spillover effects are seen today in armed groups operating in the Niger, Chad, Mauritania, Mali and Burkina Faso. More than a million people have been displaced in the aforementioned countries as a result of the jihadist insurgency that is rapidly spreading into sub-Saharan Africa. As we endeavour to realize the African Union's aspirational goal to silence the guns by 2020, the endemic insecurity poses a threat to the legitimacy and stability of the Governments of the region. Even worse, the limited resources are now being diverted from socioeconomic-development programmes to security-related programmes, causing setbacks to the region's achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. In this regard, South Africa wishes to reiterate the statement made by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, that the various threats of political and military interference in the internal affairs of Libya increase the risk of a confrontation and undermine the fundamental interests of the Libyan people in their aspirations for freedom, peace, democracy and development.Secondly, the impact of the conflict on migrants and refugees in Libya, including those in detention centres, warrants the Council's continued attention. South Africa is concerned that the air strikes have even targeted refugee camps and detention centres, resulting in casualties. Most troubling is the dire impact that the protracted conflict has had on civilians, particularly women and children. Thirdly, South Africa commends the efforts of Germany as the host of the Berlin conference in support of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) three-step process. We also note UNSMIL's operationalization action plan from the Berlin process. We further call for greater cooperation with the African Union (AU), as lasting peace and stability in Libya can come only from an inclusive political solution. We emphasize a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process without the interference of external actors. In that regard, South Africa fully supports the goals of unifying the country's institutions, holding national elections and enhancing the security, stability and living conditions of the Libyan people, including the unification and integration of the Libyan armed forces. The African Union is engaged in efforts to resolve the Libyan conflict through its Peace and Security Council and the AU High-Level Committee on Libya, chaired by the President of the Republic of the Congo, as well as the work of the AU Special Envoy for Libya. The AU High-Level Committee on Libya is meeting today in Brazzaville to further consider the African Union's initiatives in that regard. Finally, South Africa supports the observation of the Secretary-General that there should be strict adherence to the arms embargo, in accordance with resolution 2473 (2019), to prevent further violent escalations so as to enable all parties to agree to a ceasefire. The arms embargo measure must be fully implemented without exception. South Africa wishes to remind the international community of its commitments to end military support to all parties to the conflict and to uphold the existing arms embargo as a foundation for political negotiations and the implementation of a ceasefire. It is time to synergize all efforts to the attainment of that goal for the sake of the Libyan people and the achievement of peace and stability in Libya and the sub-Saharan region.
