The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Croatia for convening this timely meeting and I
welcome His Excellency President Mesie, President of
Croatia, chairing this meeting in person.

Terrorism is a global scourge. The carnage it
inflicts is appalling and morally reprehensible. It seeks
to foment distrust between States and peoples. It tries to
tear societies apart, undermine institutions and weaken
the bonds that tie communities together. The awful attacks
in Mumbai two weeks ago are only the most recent
example of mad, misguided individuals run amok.

Terrorism is a leading threat to international
peace and security. Combating it must be one of the
main priorities of the international community. Those
armed with planes and guns today could well arrive
with more potent force tomorrow. So, those who
believe that terror is a means by which they can
achieve their goals must be shown that they will fail.

The best response to a caustic and malevolent
ideology is a strong assertion of collective resistance.
We need to defend the human rights that terrorism so
brutally violates. We need to defend the values enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
sixtieth anniversary of which we commemorate
tomorrow.

The United Nations has a responsibility to lead
the international community's efforts to confront this
menace, which no cause or grievance can justify. As a
universal organization, with independent and impartial
standing, the United Nations is uniquely placed to play
that role. Indeed, the Security Council and the General
Assembly have strongly condemned terrorism time and
08-63699
again. They have sought to promote the universal norm
that terrorism is never acceptable. They have adopted
important legal instruments and law-enforcement
measures and addressed the economic and social
dimensions of terrorism. The Assembly's adoption of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in 2006 was a landmark decision that demonstrated the
unanimous and unequivocal commitment of the
international community.

United Nations mechanisms, such as the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council, are also important parts
of the picture. United Nations agencies, such as the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Maritime Organization, provide advice
and technical assistance. In some countries, the United
Nations might be the only acceptable source for
political reasons. In others, the United Nations may
add value simply by giving legitimacy to bilateral or
regional programmes, because the United Nations has
determined that they meet international norms and
standards.

We are also using the convening power of the
United Nations in this struggle. At last month's High-
level meeting on the culture of peace, leaders and
senior officials from more than 70 Member States,
representing diverse faiths and communities, rejected
the use of religion to justify the killing of innocent
people and acts of terrorism, violence and coercion. In
September, I convened a symposium here at United
Nations Headquarters that placed a much-needed
spotlight on the plight of victims. The awful paradox is
that the voices of terrorists often garner more attention
than those of the people who bear the brunt of their
cruelty. This is only the beginning of our efforts to
correct that imbalance, give a human face to the
victims of terrorism and thereby build a culture that
rejects terrorism.

In closing, Sir, let me remind you that we meet
just two days shy of the first anniversary of the
bombing of the United Nations offices in Algeria. That
horrendous attack took the lives of 17 of our colleagues
and injured some 40 more. It was all too reminiscent of
the attack on the United Nations compound in Baghdad
more than five years ago. Just a few weeks ago, a
suicide bomber attacked the United Nations compound
in Hargeisa, Somalia, killing two staffers.
08-63699
It is more apparent than ever that the United
Nations, too, has become a deliberate target. Yet, those
tragedies have deterred neither our will nor our ability
to serve the international community. The United
Nations will continue its vital work wherever and
whenever needed.

