Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): We would
first of all like to welcome President Obama's initiative
in organizing this high-level open debate on terrorism.
Senegal is a sponsor of resolution 2178 (2014), just
adopted. We would like to take this opportunity to
firmly condemn the cowardly murder of French citizen
Herve Gourdel and express our deepest condolences
to the people and the Government of France and to
Mr. Gourdel's family.

During the Fourth Review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy held last June, we
expressed our deep concern about the recruitment
in Syria of skilled foreign fighters by terrorist
organizations, including Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
That phenomenon continues to grow and is a source
of major worry for the international community. In
that regard, I commend the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre's initiative to implement a project
to improve the understanding of the phenomenon and
develop best practices for putting an end to it. Indeed,
the return of foreign fighters to their countries of origin
is not without consequences. The implementation by
the international community of an appropriate and
efficient strategy is imperative to ending this new
threat to global security.

Despite our efforts, terrorism continues to rage in
new and more sophisticated forms, particularly in the
Sahel and West Africa, where the situation is beyond
disturbing, where Boko Haram and various concealed
and clandestine networks are operating. The world's
political evolution, the development of new information
and communication technologies as well as the
existence of new, more complex and multidimensional
conflicts have encouraged terrorist movements to
refine their methods of action. To that may be added
their often erroneous interpretation of religion and an
abusive use of religious vocabulary. Furthermore, the
increase in hostage-taking by terrorist groups in order
to obtain funds and political concessions is worthy of
our full attention. These kidnappings for the purpose of
extorting funds to finance terrorism must be dealt with
impartially, objectively, technically and apolitically.

Combating all these threats undoubtedly requires
concerted actions that the United Nations has the
responsibility to coordinate, harmonize and facilitate. It
is a question of encouraging initiatives and programmes
that favour dialogue, tolerance and understanding
among civilizations, cultures, peoples and religions.
It is also a question of promoting mutual respect and
prevention of defamation of religion, religious values,
beliefs and cultures.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Senegal's
staunch determination and unwavering commitment to
collaborating with the United Nations and all concerned
actors in the fight against this pernicious threat to
international peace and security. On behalf of Senegal,
I welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2178
(2014), which is a decisive step on the path towards
finding a lasting solution to the phenomenon and which
at the same time embodies the political will to bring a
collective response to the terrorist threat.

