Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland aligns itself with
the statement made earlier by representative of the
European Union.

I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom for his briefing, as well as Secretary-General
for his report containing a comprehensive and realistic
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan (S/2014/876).
I would also like to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, for his briefing, as well as my
colleague, Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.

Our common goal is a self-reliant Afghanistan able
to shape its own future based on a successful transition.
That requires renewed efforts, cooperation and hard
work. Regional cooperation in promoting security and
development is of key importance in building a peaceful
and prosperous future. I would therefore like to recall
the importance and responsibilities of neighbours and
regional partners in that regard.

The United Nations will remain a key partner in
Afghanistan after the transition. The biggest United
Nations special political mission, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, plays a critical
role in advancing human rights and coordinating
international assistance in Afghanistan. To continue
to effectively deliver on its mandate in the future,
adequate resources need to be ensured.

Since 2001, Afghanistan has made real progress in
nation-building, fostering economic growth, improving
health and education, and rebuilding infrastructure.
However, formidable challenges remain in security,
poverty reduction, job creation and service delivery.
As we all know, these challenges are interconnected.
Post-transition development will depend on reforms
in key sectors. The ownership of Afghanistan remains
the foundation for Finland's support. We therefore
welcome the National Unity Government's "Realizing
self-reliance: Commitment to reforms and renewed
partnership" paper, which spells out a clear vision of
the way forward.

Sustainable progress in Afghanistan is not only
about convincing the international community. It is first
and foremost about convincing the Afghan people - all
people, women and men. It is about restoring their faith
in their own Government and about offering them
a future. The full and equal participation of women
at all levels of society is not only a prerequisite for
democracy and human rights, but it is also the key to
economic success and social stability. Afghan women
must have a prominent role in the society. We welcome
the leadership role fulfilled by President Ghani and
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah in this regard and
encourage them to continue in these efforts.

We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Afghanistan for demonstrating a
remarkable sense of ownership in drafting a national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) through
countrywide consultations and by Afghans themselves.
The national action plan soon to be launched is clearly
an Afghan product. For several years, Finland has
supported this process in Afghanistan, and we will
maintain our support and continue to respect the
Afghan-led implementation.

During the past 13 years, Finland has been
contributing to the reconstruction and stabilization
of Afghanistan through our participation in the
International Security Assistance Force and various
forms of civilian crisis management. Our development
and humanitarian aid amounts to over €220 million.
Our annual support now stands at 630 million. We are
ready to continue this long-term assistance and retain
its current level. We are also preparing to take part with
some 80 troops in the Resolute Support Mission, which
was welcomed by the Security Council on 12 December.
The Finnish Parliament recently approved the
Government's white paper on Afghanistan, outlining
our future contribution.

As the transition process draws to the end, it is
important that the international community maintain
its support to Afghanistan and its people. I assure the
Council that Finland is ready to do its part.

