Mr. Fendrick (United States of America): As a
general rule, my delegation is somewhat sceptical of
the value of holding general thematic debates in the
Security Council, preferring instead to focus the
Council's attention where it is likely to have the
greatest immediate impact on specific situations that
represent threats to the maintenance of international
peace and security. That said, there have been thematic
debates in the past - such as those focused on the
threat posed by the HIV/AIDS pandemic, those related
to women, peace and security and those related to the
rule of law - that have been time truly well spent for
the Council. My delegation hopes that today's debate
will be remembered as another that was genuinely
worth holding.

Africa commands a disproportionate amount of
the Security Council's time and attention. The
peacekeeping missions that the Council has mandated
for that continent consume the bulk of the United
Nations funds made available under the peacekeeping
assessment. It is manifestly in the interest of the United
Nations membership - both the African States hosting
peacekeeping operations and the other States that are
providing the funding and personnel for those
operations - that we, as members of the Security
Council, do everything possible to ensure that all
resources, human and financial, are budgeted wisely
and used effectively.

The challenges Africa faces are
multidimensional, requiring multidimensional
responses. In the African States where the United
Nations is most heavily engaged and invested -
Liberia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, C6te
d'Ivoire and, increasingly, the Sudan - the norm is
severely limited or crumbling infrastructure; crippling
humanitarian problems involving refugees, internally
displaced persons and other vulnerable populations;
weakened or collapsed governance mechanisms; and,
far too often, a culture of impunity.

In the face of those daunting realities, the greatest
strength of those States is the resilience of their
peoples and their collective desire for peace,
sustainable development and access to democratic
political processes, reconciliation and justice. Helping
the peoples of those troubled States achieve their
political and economic goals should be the guiding
principle of the Council's work.

There are a number of ways in which the Security
Council is currently addressing the challenges facing
Africa. Our efforts will always be a combination of
sticks and carrots. Sometimes the threat of imposing
sanctions is enough to change the behaviour of
individuals or entities acting against the cause of
peace. Too often, however, individuals do not take
advantage of the opportunity to reverse sanctionable
behaviour. In those cases, the Council must be willing
to impose sanctions promptly and to bring sufficient
political pressure to bear on all relevant States and
parties to make the sanctions effective. To date, the
Council's record in that area is mixed, at best.

Our experiences in Africa, particularly in West
Africa and in the Great Lakes region, have consistently
highlighted the regional dimension of many of the
ongoing conflicts on the continent. The Council and
the Secretariat have been exploring ways to tackle
regional problems more coherently. If we are able to
develop regional strategies, we may be able to reverse
the disturbing flows of people, weapons, conflict and
misery across international borders.

Effective regional strategies could result in
genuine good-neighbourliness, with positive flows of
legitimate trade replacing illicit exploitation of
resources. We clearly have much work to do in this
regard, both in the Council itself and in cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations.

Engaging regional and subregional organizations
will help the international community intervene in
Africa in a fashion that makes local buy-in and
ownership much more probable. With that local
ownership comes a greater likelihood of mission
success - our shared objective. The importance of
developing the capacities of regional and subregional
organizations to deploy both civilian and military
assets quickly cannot be overstated. My own country
has been involved in a number of such programmes,
including the African Contingency Operations Training
Assistance (ACOTA) programme, the African Regional
Peacekeeping programme, and the Global
Peacekeeping Operations Initiative (GPOI). Training
regional and subregional organizations is a wise
investment that will allow those organizations to
become force multipliers in an era when demands on
finite resources will continue to grow.

Another area where the Council and other United
Nations and other international bodies need to focus
attention is the problem of preventing national
recidivism, where States emerge from conflict only to
fall back again as the attention of the international
community shifts elsewhere. The High-level Panel's
recommendation to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission deserves careful study. Peacekeeping is
simply too expensive and too dangerous an undertaking
to be done without a well-thought-out and carefully
structured process for determining what comes next
when the peacekeepers successfully complete their
mandates.

The immediate post-conflict period in any State is
the period that holds both the greatest promise and the
greatest risk. States emerging from conflict typically
have a surplus of combatants and weapons and a
critical shortage of opportunities for education and
normal economic activity. Successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
are the single most critical element of the post-conflict
period. The Council, the donor community, the United
Nations specialized funds and programmes, and the
seeds of civil society in post-conflict States need to
harmonize their efforts if DDR is to replace fighting
with learning, thievery with gainful employment, and
political chaos with constitutional order.

The challenges facing Africa remain enormous,
but I think that our work this month on the Sudan, Cote
d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea-Bissau, Ethiopia and Eritrea, Liberia and
Somalia - under your skilful leadership,
Mr. President - has demonstrated that the Council's
willingness to tackle these challenges is also enormous.
The people of Africa deserve no less.

