Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate, to which
Croatia attaches great importance. We also recognize
the important role that the Peacebuilding Support
Office has to play in our deliberations.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Swedish presidency of the European
Union later in our debate, and we also thank the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) under the capable
leadership of its Chair, Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz,
for the comprehensive report on the respective areas of
its competence (S/2009/444).

In light of the increasing complexity of conflicts
and their aftermaths, as well as of new emerging
challenges to peacebuilding efforts, focus on this topic
not only deserves the sustained attention of the
Security Council, but also needs to be approached in a
coherent and coordinated manner. Therefore, we
particularly welcome its commensurate review by the
Security Council in the wake of the recent General
Assembly debate. It is the firm belief of Croatia that,
besides conflict prevention and peace-related activities
undertaken during a conflict, peacebuilding is a key
element of peace operations, whose ultimate objective
is the establishment of self-sustainable security and
prosperity for affected populations.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out,
countries in post-conflict situations are, as a rule,
fragile and can over time re-enter the spiral of
violence. That is why utmost attention needs to be
invested in building solid foundations to establish
sustainable peace. For Croatia, the cornerstone of
international peacebuilding efforts continues to be
found in the United Nations architecture, notably the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Peacebuilding Fund, which together
represent the core mechanisms to guide future
peacebuilding and development efforts. Furthermore,
they have proved to be important conduits for
enhancing the coordination and coherence of
international support to the peace-consolidation efforts
of countries.

In taking stock of respective PBC mandates over
the past three years, it is appropriate that we recognize
notable outcomes in its third year of operation. As the
principal organ for maintaining peace and security, the
Security Council should consider how to further
advance the peacebuilding agenda in the United
Nations and beyond so that, collectively, the
international community can effectively support
countries emerging from conflict as they advance on
the path towards sustainable peace, reconstruction,
economic recovery and development.

There needs to be a recognition that
peacebuilding efforts are highly complex and that a
plethora of actors is often operating at any one time,

notwithstanding the leadership role played by the
United Nations and its personnel in the field. Every
effort must be made to coordinate the activities of these
actors and others operating in the theatre so as to avoid
duplication or blurring and to achieve a synergy of
efforts. The Secretary-General's report (S/2009/304)
itself notes that the existence of a single peacebuilding
strategy, developed through a consultative process of
all relevant partners on the ground, will significantly
help to facilitate coordination efforts.

It is our view that the United Nations should
continue to play the role of umbrella organization,
providing the groundwork for various organizations to
meet, discuss and coordinate plans and projects, while
similarly respecting their independence and their own
approaches and responsibilities. It has been our
conviction that the establishment of a system of
feedback and lessons learned, whereby present
activities will be inspired by the effects of those
undertaken in the past, would provide the best way
forward, and it is for that reason that we welcome the
work being done by the PBC's Working Group on
Lessons Learned. We are especially supportive of its
focus on key lessons learned by experts on their
respective issues - for example, rule of law issues,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
developing national capacities and coordinating PBC
efforts with regional and subregional organizations.

National ownership must also be a central tenet
of any peacekeeping effort. Our own experiences from
the 1990s have demonstrated that, despite the altruistic
goals set by United Nations missions and agencies in
the field, external actors are often unable to fully
comprehend the real needs of a domestic population. In
other words, external actors are often ill-equipped to
rebuild the institutions of a war-torn State by
themselves. National actors need to be a part of the
earned peace dividend. International support should
build on existing structures and capacities.

Croatia would like to reiterate its support for the
Secretary-General's report and his recommendations to
strengthen peacebuilding efforts. We welcome the
improved interaction between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council, although it
should be noted that there is still room for
improvement to ensure a natural progression from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. We would like to stress
that, in its presidential statement of 5 August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24) the Council itself re-emphasized the

need for coherence between, and integration of,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development. It also pointed out the need for progress
in achieving a coordinated United Nations approach in-
country in order to address, among other things, the
critical gaps in achieving peacebuilding objectives.

Before I conclude, allow me to touch upon the
issue of challenges in financing peacebuilding efforts,
especially as in times of global financial constraints the
effects of crises are most exacerbated in areas of
vulnerability. It is therefore understandable that
successful peacebuilding efforts require predictable,
sustained and well-coordinated funding. As stated by
the Secretary-General, funding for peacebuilding
should be seen as an early investment in sustainable
peace and development. As the Peacebuilding Fund can
only provide a limited share of the resources required,
we support the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission to engage other non-traditional donors
and partners, such as diasporas and private
foundations. For their part, donor mechanisms need to
be more adaptable to changing needs on the ground.
We also look to other quick-response mechanisms,
such as the Central Emergency Response Fund, which
has been very successful in the four years since its
inception.

