Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy
for his comprehensive briefing. I welcome the presence
and participation of Mr. Mikhail Margelov, Special
Representative of the Russian President, in the
Council's meeting today.

More than a year and a half have elapsed since
the inception of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and its
deployment in Darfur. In the face of enormous
challenges, UNAMID has managed to attain 68 per
cent of its authorized strength and has played an
indispensable role in improving the security situation
and facilitating humanitarian assistance in Darfur.
Through its confidence-building patrols, human rights
monitoring missions and humanitarian projects,
UNAMID has made commendable contributions to the
protection of the civilian population. The Joint Special
Representative's remarks during his recent briefing of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
to the effect that the security situation in Darfur had
considerably improved since the transition of authority
from the African Union Mission in Sudan to UNAMID,
testify to the viability of the international community's
biggest investment in peacekeeping operations to date.

The increasing effectiveness of UNAMID
operations is largely attributable to the Tripartite
Mechanism of cooperation between the Sudanese
Government, the United Nations and the African
Union. It is essential to further promote cooperation
and dialogue between the parties, not only in the field
of peacekeeping, but also in humanitarian activities
aimed at redressing the adverse impact of the departure
of 13 international non-governmental organizations
early last March.

UNAMID's mandated operations continue to be
hampered by resource constraints, as well as by the
recalcitrant attitude of many armed groups. We call
upon all able donor countries and troop-contributing
countries to extend the necessary resources to
UNAMID, especially its urgent needs in air mobility
and force enablers, in order to expedite full deployment
of the mission. Actions against the rebel groups that
sabotage and obstruct UNAMID operations must also
be strengthened.

The current situation in Darfur and the subregion
underlines the importance of UNAMID's continued
presence. We welcome the decision on 21 July by the
African Union's Peace and Security Council to extend
the mandate of UNAMID for another year and to
appoint a new commander for UNAMID. As the
Security Council is expected to renew UNAMID's
mandate later this month, Viet Nam reiterates its strong
support for an early and full deployment of the
mission. It is our deep conviction that, once fully
deployed, UNAMID will contribute more effectively to
the consolidation of the security environment in its
areas of operation, as well as to the Darfur peace
process. We thank the United Kingdom delegation for
preparing a draft resolution on this matter, and look
forward to contributing to its consensus.

There is no military solution to the Darfur
conflict. Viet Nam has consistently reaffirmed its full
support for a comprehensive political solution to the
issue of Darfur. The recent resumption of talks between
the Sudanese Government and the Justice and Equality
Movement on implementing the Doha Agreement is a
step in the right direction, albeit with limited success
due conditions imposed by the Sudanese Government.
All parties concerned, especially the rebel movements,
must demonstrate goodwill and fully engage in
constructive dialogue and peace talks without
preconditions under the auspices of the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Djibrill Bassole.

Tension in the Chad-Sudan border areas continues
to threaten regional peace and security, as well as
UNAMID's operations. We call upon all parties
concerned and regional States to exercise the utmost
restraint, resolve their differences peacefully and engage
fully in dialogue to defuse the current crisis in Darfur.

Conscious of the organic relationship between
peace and justice in Darfur, we would like to reiterate
our concern, also expressed by the African Union, the
League of Arab Nations and the Non-Aligned
Movement, about the International Criminal Court's
arrest warrant issued against the President of the
Sudan, and call for further caution in this connection.

To succeed, mediation efforts must be better
coordinated and concerted. We highly appreciate the
close cooperation and consultations between
Mr. Bassole and Qatar, Libya and the African Union's
High-Level Panel on Darfur in their common search
for a satisfactory solution to the Darfur conflict. Given
the indivisibility of peace in the Sudan and the critical
thresholds of the 2010 elections and 2011 referendum,
further and closer coordination of efforts between
UNAMID and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
is crucial to both the Darfur peace process and the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, and thus to restoring lasting peace and
stability to Darfur and the Sudan at large.

