Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having expressed sympathy to China in connection
with the earthquake that caused material and human
losses. I will convey to the Government of China the
sympathy expressed by the President and other
speakers.

I would also like to thank Mr. Hans Dahlgren,
State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, for his
briefing about the Stockholm Process, and Assistant
Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk for the briefing he
made.

The Stockholm Process represents a useful
exploration of issues pertaining to sanctions in all their
aspects. We also take note of the recommendations
made by the Stockholm Process on the role and
relevance of the United Nations with respect to
targeted sanctions and on the Organization's capacity
to implement such sanctions and deal with the evasion
of sanctions. We thank the Government of Sweden and
the participants in the Process for their efforts.

Sanctions are one of the means of enforcement
tools that the Charter provides to the Security Council
in its maintenance of international peace and security.
Judging from the implementation of Council sanctions
in some regions during recent years - particularly in
Africa: in Angola, Sierra Leone and Liberia -
sanctions have played an active role in easing and
resolving armed conflicts and in promoting regional
peace. At the same time, the grave humanitarian
situations resulting from sanctions, and from
comprehensive sanctions in particular, have led to
general concern in the international community.
Among the practical questions facing the Council and
the international community are how the Council
should use sanctions when deciding to impose such
measures, how better to tailor sanctions, how efforts
can be made to reduce the impact on civilians and on
third countries, and how sanctions should be
implemented and their effectiveness enhanced.

First, the Chinese delegation believes that, in the
light of the possible impact of sanctions on innocent
civilians and on third countries, care must be exercised
when a decision to impose sanctions is taken. Specific
arrangements must be made in accordance with the
situation at hand and exit strategies must be considered
in order to limit the duration of sanctions and to avoid
or reduce negative impacts as much as possible before
a decision to impose sanctions is taken. The Council
must also fully assess the possible humanitarian impact
of the measures to be taken. Regular assessments
relating to humanitarian impact must be carried out in
the implementation of sanctions in order that sanctions
may be adjusted and improved.

Secondly, in addition to political will among
countries, monitoring mechanisms are necessary for
sanctions to be effective. Sanctions imposed by the
Council against UNITA were relatively successful, in
part because a reasonably effective monitoring
mechanism was put in place. This could serve as a
reference for the effective implementation of other
sanctions imposed by the Council. Of course, the
Council must provide guidance to the relevant
sanctions committees, monitoring mechanisms and
groups of experts. At the same time, there must also be
greater communication and coordination among those
bodies.

Thirdly, any decision to implement sanctions
must be based on the overall requirement to ease and
resolve conflicts. In that way, sanctions can more
effectively and accurately target those responsible for
undermining peace and security.

