Mr. Otunnu: It is wonderful to see you, Sir, a
devoted advocate of the protection of children,
presiding over this meeting. And it is very good to
have the Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with us this morning as well.

I have just concluded a mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The purpose of my visit was to
assess firsthand the impact of the wars on children. In
the context of my mandate and pursuant to the request
of the Security Council in resolution 1341 (2001), I
was able to visit different parts of the country,
including several of the provinces. Everywhere I went I
held discussions with political and military authorities,
local and international humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and, of course, United Nations agencies
and civil society. But above all, throughout the country
I was able to meet and hear directly from different
groups of war-affected children and their families.

I have to tell the Council that the direct and
indirect impact of the wars has taken a very heavy toll
on the children. In a country in which somewhere close
to 50 per cent of a population of 49 million people are
children under 16 years of age, consider the following.
The vast majority of some 2 million people displaced
within the country by the wars are children and women.
Hundreds of thousands of children suffer or have died
from severe malnutrition and preventable diseases
because of the conditions created by the wars.
According to a non-governmental organization, the
International Rescue Committee, since the outbreak of
hostilities in August 1998 there have been no less than
2.5 million so-called excess deaths - meaning, above
the number usually expected - in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone. The majority
of these victims have been children.

Most families in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo today subsist on $1 a day. Forty per cent of the
country's children are systematically and seriously
malnourished. In the past 10 years, infant mortality has
doubled. More than half of the children of school age
in the country are not attending school, and the
incidence of child labour - especially at mining
sites - child prostitution and street children has
sharply increased. There is the particular and silent
trauma of girls exposed to sexual abuse and HIV/AIDS
and forced to become concubines by soldiers of various
affiliations. Everywhere I went I received consistent
reports of the massive recruitment and use of child
soldiers throughout the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

All these categories of war-affected children need
our urgent attention and support. In the light of my
visit I would like to put forward the following
recommendations for the Council's consideration.
There is an urgent need for a plan of action to address
the grave situation of war-affected children in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Their protection
and rehabilitation must become a national and political
priority. This should figure prominently on the agenda
of the inter-Congolese dialogue and in the peace
process in general.

A word about the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). The arrival of the military contingent and
military observers has had a striking impact on the
local populations. Three elements seem to have
particular meaning for the local communities. The
sheer presence of these personnel is bringing much-
needed confidence and reassurance to the local
populations, allowing them to pick up pieces of their
shattered lives. These personnel are facilitating and
engaging in humanitarian activities and are closely
associated with the protection of children. I would
strongly recommend the expansion and strengthening
of these elements of the role of MONUC. This will
benefit the local populations and enhance further the
considerable credibility of the United Nations.
The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which has gained a new lease on life, needs
to be accompanied by parallel efforts to gain access
and to provide serious humanitarian assistance to
populations in distress - particularly children and
women. The priority responsibility for ensuring the
well-being of the children - and, therefore, the future
of the country - naturally rests with the Congolese
leaders. I have urged them to fully assume their
responsibility in this regard.

But today I appeal to the international community
to do its part to reach out to the Congolese children and
offer concrete assistance, focusing in particular on the
rehabilitation of schools and health-care centres at the
primary and local levels and providing much-needed
resources for the demobilization of child soldiers.
These measures are necessary to break the present
cycle of despair and exploitation. They will also serve
as means to protect and rehabilitate children and
prevent their being caught back up in that cycle.

The massive recruitment and use of children as
child soldiers has become nothing short of a plague
that is steadily destroying the fabric and the future of
the Congo and of that entire zone of Africa. The place
of children is in schools, with their families and with
their communities - not in battlefields.

I have therefore proposed the following five-point
programme of action, which has been accepted by the
political and military leaders of all groups. The
programme is a complete stop - a definitive, complete
stop to all recruitment of young persons below the age
of 18 and the establishment of a mechanism to monitor
and report on the application of that commitment; the
organization of a major public-awareness campaign to
sensitize the military, civil society and local
communities; the undertaking of joint visits by
MONUC, the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and military authorities to military camps
and barracks where children are suspected of being
housed; and the establishment of the necessary capacity
and structures on the ground for the demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers.

In this connection, may I warmly welcome and
congratulate the Government and the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the recent
ratification of the Optional Protocol that was
announced during my visit to the country.

These important commitments and measures need
to be translated into concrete action that can make a
difference to the lives of children on the ground. I am
counting on the political and military leaders to
demonstrate the necessary political will and to deliver
on their commitments.

But in the meantime, we of the international
community, working closely with local and civil
society organizations, need to establish a framework -
a network - to monitor the conduct of the parties in
conflict relative to their obligations and commitments
for the protection of children.

Child soldiering has also become a cross-border
and subregional activity. Children are being recruited
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, taken to
neighbouring countries for training, and then brought
back to fight in the Congo. Similarly, children of
neighbouring countries are being recruited and taken to
fight in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
therefore need a neighbour with the initiative to
promote protection, control and advocacy with respect
to this damaging practice at the subregional level.

I referred earlier to the particular vulnerability of
girls exposed to sexual abuse and HIV/AIDS by
soldiers of various groups. There is a need for a special
programme to address the special needs of this
category of victims. This is all the more important
because of the social stigma and the reticence that
prevails, which makes it difficult to address these
issues within the communities.

We also must be very vigilant in taking measures
to ensure that there is no impunity, now or later, for
crimes committed against children. I urge and
encourage troop-contributing countries - and I know
that our colleagues in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations are doing everything in their power - to
provide more systematic training for troops who are
serving with MONUC.

What I saw in the Congo encouraged me
enormously at other levels. I was very encouraged by
the vigour and commitment of civil society throughout
the Congo. I urge the United Nations and other actors
of the international community to link our efforts much
more closely with those of local civil society
organizations. This is the best way, in the long term, to
make our efforts sustainable and to build local capacity
for protection and advocacy.

Everywhere I went, children and their parents
called for an end to the war - the Congolese children
have suffered far too much - and an end to the looting
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I have to say that the widespread and
systematic looting of diamonds, gold, coltan, timber
and coffee from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by all concerned is entirely unacceptable. This is
robbing the Congolese children of their birthright, of
resources that should be used for their education,
health care and development. Moreover, it has become
the surest way to fuel the continuation of the war. The
children of the Congo are looking to the Council to
take decisive action to bring this practice to a halt.

In conclusion, I should like to say that I was
particularly impressed and encouraged by the
commitment of all sectors and of Congolese people of
all persuasions to preserve their national unity; by the
strength and engagement of civil society throughout the
country; and by the resilience and determination of
local communities and the youth.

A united, peaceful and vigorous Congo is good
for Congolese children. It is good for the development
and future of Africa, and it is good for international
peace and security. I look forward to working very
closely with you in the Council, Mr. President, as well
as with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
MONUC, the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and other agencies and non-governmental
organizations to follow up on these issues and on the
recommendations which I have brought to the
Council's attention.

