Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over today's meeting
on the question of particular importance for the entire
United Nations membership, and for my delegation in
particular. I want also to welcome the Minister of
International Development of Norway, who spoke
today. I would like to join other speakers in expressing
our appreciation for the briefings by Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno and Dr. Peter Piot and for their information
on the implementation of the Security Council
resolution 1308 (2000) and on the steps undertaken
within the framework of the United Nations system and
worldwide to address the problem of HIV/AIDS.

We regard this meeting as an important review
stage in the ongoing work in the United Nations in this
field. A year has passed since the Security Council held
its first open discussion on the issue of HIV/AIDS.
Now there is a need to assess how much has been done
and how effectively the bodies and agencies of the
United Nations system have worked in carrying out the
tasks entrusted to them.

Today, one can hardly dispute the fact that the
problem of AIDS has become one of the key issues on
the agenda of the United Nations, as well as of the
work of many other international and regional
organizations. The representatives of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) have
provided us with detailed information regarding these
developments and the efforts that are being undertaken
within their respective agencies.

I want to join my colleagues in paying tribute to
Ambassador Holbrooke, specifically for his
outstanding role and his tremendous efforts in
promoting the effective consideration of the issue of
HIV/AIDS in the United Nations and in the Security
Council. Undoubtedly, the issue of HIV/AIDS on the
Council's agenda will remain as one of the most
important accomplishments in Ambassador's
Holbrooke rich United Nations diplomatic heritage. We
are thankful to him and wish him every success in his
future endeavours.

On the whole, we consider that the past year was
rather productive and demonstrated significant progress
in tackling the problem of HIV/AIDS. I wish, in this
connection, to address such an important aspect as
coordination within the United Nations. We have heard
quite often the criticism regarding the absence of
effective coordination between various bodies of the
United Nations system - in particular DPKO and
UNAIDS, field missions and Headquarters - and we
should recognize that a substantial part of that criticism
was justified. Still, we see that the situation in this area
is improving.

Today's signing, as we have just heard from Dr.
Peter Piot, of a cooperation framework agreement
between UNAIDS and DPKO is, of course, a welcome
development. We hope that the adequate
implementation of this document will also strengthen
the effective realization of Security Council resolution
1308 (2000) and improve the capacity of peacekeepers
to become advocates of and actors for the awareness
and prevention of HIV transmission. I cannot but agree
that it is incumbent on the United Nations to set the
highest possible standards for the conduct of troops
deployed under its flag, and we welcome further efforts
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAIDS in fulfilling this task.

At the same time, it should be pointed out that
awareness-raising and prevention of HIV/AIDS is not
only the task of these two bodies. All other sectors and
United Nations bodies dealing with the problem should
be involved in this work. My delegation is convinced
that the key role and responsibility for coordinating
these efforts lies within the General Assembly. The
delegation of Ukraine made every effort to advance the
idea of convening a special session on the problem of
AIDS, which is expected to elaborate a comprehensive
agenda for mutual action against the pandemic and to
become a coordinator of further efforts of the United
Nations and the world community in this direction.

I would also like to commend the work done by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations during the
past six months in implementing resolution 1308
(2000). Taking into account the significant constraints,
including the absence of adequate resources and
staffing, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
has managed to accomplish most of what could be
realistically expected of it. We are grateful for that, and
we hope that its work in this field will continue to
improve.

The success of our undertaking should be
measured by the results achieved. Unfortunately, as we
have just been informed by Dr. Peter Piot, despite all
the efforts made, the HIV pandemic continues to
advance. During the past year alone over 5 million
people were infected with HIV worldwide and 3
million people died of AIDS - more annual deaths
than ever before. These facts confirm that the scourge
of HIV/AIDS will continue to be a serious challenge
for humankind for many years to come. The results of
the work, which is being undertaken on a large scale,
will not be seen immediately. That is why it is critically
important to accelerate the coordinated efforts of the
international community in fighting the disease. Let me
echo what has been said by a number of speakers
before me: we need real commitments to accomplish
what we are aiming at, and only when those
commitments become a reality will we be able to
respond adequately to this epidemic.

