Mr. de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on a very important issue.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
as well as Special Representative Leila Zerrougui,
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Yoka Brandt,
Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita for their
enlightening briefings.

Deliberate abuses committed against boys and
girls in the context of armed conflicts have been under
discussion by the Security Council for 16 years now.
Over the years we have developed an increasingly
effective framework to tackle the issue. Yet the
situation has recently been exacerbated by the rise of
extremist non-State armed groups with little regard
for international humanitarian and human rights law.
Some of those movements have reportedly engaged in
raping, abducting, recruiting, maiming or murdering
girls and boys, while denying them their basic rights
and needs, including the right to education. Brazil
strongly condemns those violations and expects that
those responsible will be brought to justice.

The international community must join forces in
tackling these challenges with the utmost seriousness.
Brazil has endorsed the Paris Commitments and Paris
Principles on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups. During its most recent mandates as
a member of the Security Council, Brazil supported
the adoption of milestone documents on the matter,
including resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1998 (2011).
Likewise, Brazil fully supports the "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign to end the recruitment of children
by Government forces by 2016.

While acknowledging the magnitude of the atrocities
committed by certain non-State actors, we should keep
in mind that abuses against boys and girls also result
from unilateral Governmental military intervention
and illegal occupation. Let us also not forget that the
protection of children in armed conflicts is closely
linked to the promotion of development. While social
inequality impacts all groups, children are particularly
vulnerable to its negative consequences. According to
UNICEF, the poorest 20 per cent of children around the
globe are twice as likely as the richest 20 per cent to
be stunted by poor nutrition, or to die before their fifth
birthday.

In debating the situation of children victims of
non-State armed groups, it is ofthe essence to highlight
and uphold the basic political and legal distinction
between armed conflicts and situations of domestic
law enforcement. While both categories are currently
within the mandate of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, they obviously pose
entirely different challenges and must be addressed
through different policies. On the one hand, armed
conflicts being examined by the Council are subject to
the rules and regulations of international humanitarian
law, such as the obligation by all parties - including
non-State actors - to protect children and other
civilians. In these cases, diplomatic and legal measures
to prevent further violence and to ensure accountability
for serious violations all have a role to play. The
International Criminal Court in particular is an
appropriate mechanism to tackle impunity and to
dissuade would-be perpetrators from committing
atrocities against children and other vulnerable groups.

On the otherhand, cases ofdomestic law enforcement
that do not represent a threat to international peace and
security, and therefore fall outside the mandate of the
Security Council, should be handled by Governments
through national legislation. A different set of standards
applies to those circumstances - that of international
human rights law, including the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and other instruments. International
cooperation is of course not to be excluded in this
domain.

The imperative to ensure their social reintegration
and their psychological rehabilitation is a vital aspect of
our efforts to protect children formerly associated with
armed groups. Sports and cultural initiatives can be
instrumental in that regard. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Brazil has partnered with UNICEF, the
United Nations Development Programme and civil
society organizations in a project that has allowed
hundreds of children formerly linked to armed groups
in North Kivu to socialize and to develop new personal
identities through the practice of Afro-Brazilian
capoeira. This is a successful instance ofpeacebuilding
in practice.

Another approach to shield children from the
consequences of war is the granting of refuge. Since
2013, Brazil has adopted policies specifically aimed at
welcoming and integrating Syrian refugees and their
families. We have granted humanitarian visas to over
6,000 asylum-seekers who were affected by the lasting
conflict in Syria, many of whom are boys and girls
whose very survival was at risk.

In conclusion, allow me to once again underscore
Brazil's firm commitment to the protection of children
in armed conflict, both at the multilateral level and
through bilateral initiatives. We will remain engaged
with the United Nations system and our international
partners to promote the safety, the security and the well-
being of boys and girls affected by violence around the
world.

