Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
detailed presentation by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, complementing the Secretary-
General's report, demonstrates the extent of the task
carried out by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in all
areas since the summer of 1999. Mr. Bernard Kouchner
has also described very precisely the provisions made
by UNMIK a month before the municipal elections of
28 October to create the necessary conditions for the
proper development ofthis important phase.

Since its creation, the work of UNMIK, persistent
and methodical, has given good results. My delegation
pays a warm tribute to it and to Mr. Bernard Kouchner
and his entire team. The United Nations Mission has
struggled relentlessly, particularly against acts of
ethnic violence, discrimination and violations of human
rights; unacceptable traps by extremists to delay the
necessary reconciliation within Kosovar society. The
European Union has clearly condemned them. But
thanks to the efforts of the United Nations and the
dialogue conducted by the Special Representative with
community leaders, as well as the many proximity
initiatives launched throughout the province, the wall
of mistrust is beginning to crack.

The return of representatives of the Serb
community to the mixed administrative structures
following the signing of the agreement between
Mr. Kouchner and Bishop Artemije on the security of
the Serb populations is an indication of this. The
adoption of the Airlie Declaration and the unanimous
support the interim authorities have given it is another
indication. The "pact for Kosovo society" is also
promising. Patience and determination are thus
beginning to be slowly rewarded.

I emphasize that, here in this Chamber, because
we do not have good news to celebrate every day. The
success ofthe United Nations team in Kosovo is a good
example of what the United Nations can accomplish.

Methodical work has been necessary for more
than a year. Everything has had to be rebuilt in every
sector, even from scratch. Administrations have been
set in motion again, people have been trained, sources
of finance have been established. UNMIK's
humanitarian activities have been successful.
Reconstruction and development are now high on the
international agenda. The European Union, by far the
main donor of funds to Kosovo and the Balkans, plays
an essential role. Its total contribution to Kosovo in
1999 and 2000 is nearly 8 billion euros, or nearly $7
billion. Recently the European Union, as well as
France at the national level, has made a more specific
contribution to combat the environmental and public
health risks arising from the Trepka complex and the
Zvecan factory.

I also wish to underscore the special importance
of the municipal elections to be held on 28 October in
the province. This will be a landmark election with the
passage of Kosovo to a genuine autonomy, whose
contours, as Mr. Kouchner has said, have yet to be
defined. The elections are being actively prepared by
UNMIK; with the assistance of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
process of registering approximately 1 million
Kosovars was conducted under exemplary conditions,
even if we must regret that the pressures of the
Belgrade regime drove the members of the Serb
community to remain outside this process. Moreover,
every effort has been made to ensure a genuine
democratic debate, sheltered from the provocations of
the enemies of freedom. The United Nations is mindful
of these and is vigilant to ensure by persuasion and
when necessary firmness, respect for the rules of the
game. We encourage UNMIK and the Special
Representative ofthe Secretary-General to persevere in
this direction.

In the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, on 24
September, despite the gross falsifications of those in
power, the Serbian people turned out en masse and
pronounced themselves unequivocally in favour of
democratic change.

We welcome the security measures taken In
Kosovo by UNMIK and KFOR to make it possible for
those who wished to vote to do so freely. Let us all
hope that in a month's time the voters of Kosovo will
have overwhelmingly made an equally clear choice -
peaceful rejection of hatred, of political manipulation,
of attacks on freedom and of contempt for
minorities- the choice of democracy, reconciliation
and the participation of all in the conduct of civil
affairs; in other words, the choice of Europe and the
future. Let us together ensure that that choice is not
thwarted.

