The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic.

First, I would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his excellent briefing. I am also pleased to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, whose presence
demonstrates the high degree of commitment of the
Colombian authorities to every detail of this process. I
would also like to welcome Her Excellency Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, and
to acknowledge the work of Mr. Jean Arnault, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Columbia/Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.

We take this opportunity to reiterate the interest
of the Dominican Republic in, and support for, the
peace process in Colombia, and would like to express
our condemnation of the very serious terrorist attack
perpetrated last week against the police academy in
Bogota, as well as our solidarity with the families of
the victims and the Colombian people.

Since the establishment ofthe Verification Mission,
we have contributed Dominican human resources to
form part of the team of experts involved its work, and
today we continue to be committed to the success of the
initiatives launched under the historic peace agreement
between the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP).

On the occasion of its second anniversary, there is
no question that the peace process has shown tangible
progress. We commend the efforts of the Government
of President Ivan Duque Marquez to reach a national
consensus on the path to be followed, which is clearly
seen as a new phase. The second anniversary of the
signing of the peace agreement on 24 November
provided a space for reflection on its achievements,
which have already transformed Colombian society, as
well as the road that must still be travelled to achieve a
sustainable and irreversible peace.

Much has been achieved in those two years: a
definitive ceasefire between the Government and the
FARC-EP, the laying down of weapons, a significant
reduction in the levels of violence and the beginning
of a new national political dynamic. However, a
conflict that lasted so long and is so deeply rooted also
requires comprehensive and sustained measures to
bring about genuine reconciliation among all parties.
That is why we welcome the implementation of the
work of the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and
Non-Repetition. We urge the Government of President
Duque Marquez to continue its determined efforts to
unite Colombian society.

The holding of regional and local elections this
year, with the participation for the first time of the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comi'in party,
will be a very important step on the road to the
consolidation of the political process that underpins
this broad national agreement. A peaceful and inclusive
process, in which the rights of the entire population are
fully respected, will demonstrate the importance of
the political dimension of the peace agreement and its
transformative effect.

We are aware that the consolidation of peace will
depend on the transformative economic development
of the whole country. We note as positive the steps
taken to effectively link development programmes
with a territorial focus, together with voluntary
crop-substitution programmes, and more broadly to
link those programmes with initiatives to promote
rural development, which are all important for
reintegration and especially critical for the well-being
of citizens in areas previously affected by instability
and violence. We cannot avoid noting that this is an
exemplary process that shines a light for us to follow
at a time when other conflicts in the world seem to
be becoming more entrenched and long-lasting. The
experiences and lessons learned we are discussing
here today can in many ways serve as models for the
efforts of the Security Council to promote and support
transitions from armed conflict to political processes.

Two years after the signing of the peace agreement,
we commend the presentation by the High Counsellor
for Post-Conflict, Mr. Emilio Jose' Archila Pefialosa,
of the policy entitled "Peace with legality" as a clear
indication of the will to consolidate the achievement
of peace with a consistent vision of the future. That
milestone marks the transition to a new phase of the
process in Colombia. We welcome the plan's objective,
which consists of stabilizing the areas most affected by
the conflict and eradicating violence from the places
that have endured it for decades. It is a long-term cross-
cutting policy anchored in the principles of justice
and national security, which involves the coordination
of development initiatives, reintegration, voluntary
substitution and a commitment to the victims.

We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Agency
for Reintegration and Normalization of Colombia to
reduce inequalities observed within the 24 territorial
areas for training and reintegration and indicated by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. It is
crucial that ex-combatants enjoy equal opportunities
in this process. In that connection, we note President
Duque's visit, on 12 October, to one of those areas,
which shows that the authorities are committed to
the process.

As President Duque pointed out during his visit,
the international community must maintain its
support for reintegration projects in order to increase
their viability. The territorial areas for training and
reintegration and the monthly stipend granted to ex-
combatants are scheduled to continue until 15 August
2019. We trust that any decision regarding the
continuance of those measures beyond that date will
be based on an assessment of their positive effects thus
far, the challenges that remain and respect for the views
of all parties.

It is essential that projects aimed at the reintegration
of ex-combatants and other initiatives launched within
the framework of the peace agreement be sustainable.
The success of the process is intimately linked to the
ability of any Colombian citizens committed to peace
to improve their living conditions and economic
prospects. We also welcome the measures taken by
the Government to strengthen the institutional and
legal basis for those processes. We also encourage an
open line of communication among the main actors
responsible for initiatives within the Government, with
a View to achieving more effective results, starting with
the splitting up of competencies and responsibilities.

It is critical to consider the gender provisions of
the peace agreement, particularly the issue of women's
reintegration and security guarantees. We share the
concerns expressed by the international verification
component for gender established in the peace
agreement, and we welcome the commitment of the
Vice-President of Colombia, who undertook to examine
that report.

We welcome the adoption by the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia of a strategy for
the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018), with a focus on the role of young people
in reintegration and security guarantees. It is formal
recognition of the role of youth in promoting peace.
We welcome President Duque's signing by decree in
November ofthe Action Plan for the Protection of Social
and Community Leaders, Human Rights Defenders
and Journalists. The development and promulgation of
the plan reflects the attention given by the authorities
to the concerns of the Verification Mission about the
high number of leaders murdered since the signing
of the peace agreement in November 2016 and the
continuation of the violence to date.

One of the benefits of the peace process should be
the restoration of the rule of law and security for all
citizens throughout Colombia. The achievement of that
objective and the definitive reduction of insecurity will
depend on the effective implementation of the plan.
Security guarantees should be extended, under the
terms of the agreement, to former FARC-EP members.
We recognize the work carried out by the Colombian
Government in that regard and see the preparation of
a security plan for ex-combatants in the face of the
upcoming state and local elections as a step forward.

With regard to the dialogue between the Government
and the National Liberation Army, we recognize the
current obstacles. However, we urge both parties to
consider the possible reinitiation of peace negotiations
with the necessary flexibility to achieve the desired
objective. The achievements of the process that led
to the signing of the peace agreement between the
FARC-EP and the Colombian Government confirm the
possibility of conflict resolution through negotiations
on the basis of trust between the actors.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize four points.

First, we reiterate our support for and recognition
of the work of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia.

Secondly, we stress the importance of maintaining
the commitment of all parties involved to the successful
implementation of a complex and delicate process that
is still beset by controversy in some of its phases.

Thirdly, the support of the United Nations
Verification Mission will remain essential for some
time, given that it is the greatest guarantee that
the international community will fully support an
agreement that required the investment of so much
effort and sacrifice.

Finally, Colombia can count on the solidarity of the
Dominican Republic throughout the process to achieve
lasting peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.

