Mr. Arancibia Fernandez (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, who updated
us on the situation in the Middle East, particularly
with reference to the situation involving illegal Israeli
settlements on Palestinian territory.

Bolivia has occupied a seat on the Security
Council for more than a month now and has witnessed
the ongoing violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights that the Israeli Government is
committing on a regular and continuing basis. On
22 January, we learned that the Israeli municipality of
Jerusalem authorized the construction of 566 units in
East Jerusalem, a Palestinian-maj ority neighbourhood of
the city, occupied and annexed by Israel. Subsequently,
on 24 January, the Israeli Government approved a plan
to build 2,500 housing units in settlement blocs in the
West Bank.

On 7 February, through a letter contained in
document S/2017/115, the Permanent Observer of the
State of Palestine to the United Nations condemned
the approval by the Israeli Parliament of the so-called
regularization bill, which would allow the occupying
Power to legalize more than 5,500 settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The so-called
regularization bill, according to an article published by
The New York Times on 6 February, is a bill through
which the State of Israel retroactively regularizes
Jewish settlements in Palestinian territory, including
those located in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. The
bill retroactively legalizes thousands of settlements in
16 neighbourhoods covering 2,000 hectares of land
belonging to the Palestinians.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia believes that
the approval of this regularization bill by the Israeli
Government is an act of provocation to the international
community and constitutes a blatant violation of
resolution 2334 (2016), of 23 December 2016. It is
vital to recall that the aforementioned resolution
was approved by the majority of the members of the
Security Council, there having been only one abstention
and no vote against. The resolution reiterates the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force
and of all measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, character or status of the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967.

Moreover, it calls on the parties to refrain from
any provocative actions, incitement or inflammatory
rhetoric, with the aim of de-escalating the situation on
the ground, rebuilding trust and creating the conditions
necessary for promoting peace.

I should like also to remind the Security Council
that inaction on our part in the face of Israel's
expansionist zeal would signify an acceptance of Israel's
transfer of its civilian population onto Palestinian
land, which represents a blatant violation of the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection
of Civilians in Time of War, which is applicable to
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and in line with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 70/89, ofDecember 2015, and other
relevant resolutions. It would also mean repudiating
the fact that the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, were
established in contravention of international law, as the
International Court of Justice has concluded.

Israel's decisions and activities with respect to the
settlements will have detrimental effects on regional and
international peace initiatives and reduce the likelihood
of a two-State solution. On a previous occasion in this
same Chamber (see S/PV.7863), we strongly expressed
our repudiation of the fact that the Government of Israel
disregards the international community and refuses to

guarantee the implementation of each and every one
of the resolutions that emanate from this organ of the
United Nations and especially resolution 2334 (2016).

In the same way, it is important to remember that
some members of the Council, on several occasions and
in different thematic contexts, have reiterated that the
decisions of the Council must be implemented and that
it is Council's responsibility to see to it that they are.
In this regard, we urge the entire membership of the
Security Council to assume the responsibility assigned

to us by the Charter of the United Nations to enforce
resolutions effectively and without delay, demonstrating
that the decisions of this organ of the United Nations
are a priority that frames our daily work in favour of
peace and security in the world.

