Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely
meeting. Let me join others in thanking the Foreign
Ministers of Guinea-Bissau, Angola and Portugal, as
well as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mutaboba, for their statements and briefings on
Guinea-Bissau today. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire for his statement on
behalf of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and we appreciate the useful
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Brazil in her capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission country configuration on Guinea-Bissau.

I will be brief in adding our voice in stating our
position on this African issue before us today.

The military coup in Guinea-Bissau that took
place on 12 April has created a serious setback in terms
of the progress made by the legitimate Government in
establishing democracy and ensuring stability over the
past few years. That unlawful act poses a threat to
peace and security. It completely undermines
international law and the principles enshrined in the
Constitutive Act of the African Union and the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance,
which rejects any use of force or unconstitutional acts
to assume power. It is critical that all efforts to address
the situation in Guinea-Bissau be conducted in a
manner that is coordinated, integrated and harmonized.
Such efforts must ensure that the interests of the
country and its people remain paramount. Only a return
to constitutional order and the release of
democratically elected leaders will guarantee the
respect of the will of the people of Guinea-Bissau, as
expressed in the 2008 elections. The international
community must convey a strong message that it will
not tolerate disruptive military coups with impunity. In
that regard, the collective efforts of the international
community must further encourage, not weaken, the
notable gains made by the Government of Guinea-
Bissau in recent years in consolidating democracy and
good governance.

The African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of West African States, joined by the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
and the International Organization of la Francophonie,
have all suspended Guinea-Bissau's membership in
their organizations pending the restoration of
constitutional order in the country. By its swift
decision, the AU has demonstrated clear resolve on the
part of African leaders to condemn and reject any acts
of forced or unconstitutional change of Government on
the continent. Its decision is a strong expression of its
commitment to respecting and preserving democratic
principles, human rights, the rule of law and good
governance in Africa. Furthermore, it rejects impunity,
assassinations and other subversive acts.

South Africa therefore firmly rejects any further
attempt to undermine the constitutional framework and
the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau, and underscores the
AU's call on its international partners to force the
perpetrators of the coup d'etat and their supporters to
12-30011

accept the restoration of constitutional order. In that
regard, we call for the unconditional and immediate
release of the interim President of the country and all
other detained leaders. That should be followed by the
conclusion of the process for electing a new President
of the Government of Guinea-Bissau, in accordance
with the ruling of the country's Supreme Court.

We support the coordinated efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the CPLP and bilateral partners aimed at
restoring constitutional rule and returning peace and
stability to Guinea-Bissau. The focus should turn
firmly towards the key challenges facing the country,
including the development of good governance, the
deepening of democracy and the implementation of
security and defence sector reform, as well as
combating drug trafficking and related activities. We
encourage the United Nations not only to support such
efforts but to ensure that they are conducted in a
coordinated and coherent manner. The perpetrators of
the coup d'etat, as well as their supporters, are
ultimately responsible for the well-being and security
of the political stakeholders and leaders who have been
detained, the missing and captive ministers and the
Guinean people, and must be held accountable for their
deeds.

