Mr. Cardi (Italy): As a sponsor that voted in
favour of today's draft resolution (S/2017/172), Italy
regrets that the Security Council was unable to adopt
the text submitted by France, the United Kingdom
and the United States. We thank those delegations for
their efforts.

Ofcourse, we had hoped that the unity ofthe Council
would be preserved in support of the draft resolution,
and my delegation had worked in that direction during
negotiations and consultations. The initiative is about
ensuring a meaningful follow-up to the reports of an
impartial instrument that the Council established,
supported and renewed unanimously, thereby clearly
backing its methodology, professionalism and
impartiality. Looking ahead, we are encouraged that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
is about to resume its activities. We remain strongly
committed to supporting it and upholding the findings
of its future. Investigations. Italy voted in favour of the
draft resolution for three main reasons.

First, in the light of our long-standing position
on non-proliferation issues, which must be kept
separate from other more political considerations, we
strongly condemn the use of any chemical weapon or
toxic chemical anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstance, whether by State or non-State actors.
Today more than ever, we must uphold the values and
principles of international law and of the international
non-proliferation regime and avoid its weakening,
which would encourage anyone willing to resort to a
barbaric form of warfare and aggression.

Secondly, we voted in favour of the draft resolution
to show our credibility and the deterrence role of the
JIM. We continue to support the work of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and its staff, whom we
commend for their dedication and professionalism. It
is an essential instrument in attributing responsibility
for such heinous attacks. The Council established the
JIM. because it felt the need to see the responsibility
for chemical-weapon attacks attributed to those behind
such horrific attacks. As its reports indicate, the JIM
has done just what the Council had asked it to do, while
abiding by the standards that the Security Council had
set out. Its task was to identify to greatest extent feasible
those who were perpetrators of chemical-weapon
attacks. Today's draft resolution was meant to ensure
meaningful follow-up to work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism.

The third, and final, reason that we voted in favour
relates to accountability. Simply identifying which
party is responsible is not enoug; those who planned,
ordered and executed the attacks must face justice. The
Council has a shared responsibility to uphold the work
of the JIM. and ensure meaningful follow-up in terms of
holding individuals and/or entities accountable for their
unacceptable and criminal acts.

