Mr. Duclos (Peru) (Spoke in Spanish): My
delegation expresses its gratitude for the convening
of this meeting and the important briefing by
Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas.

Peru is deeply concerned about the violence,
the insecurity, the presence of terrorist groups and
criminal organizations, and the grave humanitarian
crises affecting tens of millions of people in the Sahel
and Lake Chad basin. We note that the root causes of
the threats to international peace and security in those
regions include poverty, the lack of development,
climate change and insufficient State presence and
capacity, among other factors, which fuel one another
and are exploited by actors whose interests lie in
fostering conflicts. We express our appreciation to and
support for the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) in its efforts to prevent a
deterioration of the situation and in offering its good
offices to various parties to the conflict. In particular,
we would highlight three areas of work in which we
believe that its efforts are essential to promoting
sustainable peace in West Africa.

First, with regard to the political sphere, UNOWAS
is called on to support the holding of free, fair and
inclusive elections in Mali, Mauritania and Nigeria,
which will depend to a great extent on fostering a
stable environment to achieve the broad participation
of citizens, especially women, young people and all
political entities. UNOWAS is also playing a key role
in post-electoral situations in The Gambia, Guinea and
Sierra Leone, where reducing tensions and preventing
the emergence or worsening of political crises are
necessary. The same applies to Liberia, where it has
also been called on to support the transition following
the closure of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.

Secondly, concerning security, we underscore the
support that UNOWAS provides to the countries ofWest
Africa in terms of security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for
former combatants; promoting dialogue; and conflict
prevention and resolution relating to the control of
land at the local level.

Thirdly, with regard to development, addressing
the root causes of conflict requires fostering
sustainable development in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which entails
eradicating poverty, encouraging economic growth,
justice and the rule of law, empowering women and
addressing the effects of climate change, among other
goals. To that end, UNOWAS is called on to play a
key role in ensuring that various efforts, initiatives
and actors, particularly those deployed on the ground,
maintain political and operational coherence, while
reflecting and responding to the circumstances, needs
and priorities of every particular case. UNOWAS
cooperation with the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as with
other relevant United Nations agencies and subregional
organizations, is also important. In that regard, we
highlight its support for the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.

In conclusion, while expressing our support for
the vital role played by UNOWAS, we emphasize
the need to provide it with the political and financial
support that it requires to fulfil its important functions
and mandates.

