Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important debate.

At the outset, New Zealand recognizes those brave
military, civilian and police personnel who risk their
lives in United Nations peacekeeping operations, and
we pay particular tribute to those who have been killed
in those operations.

United Nations peacekeeping is a global partnership,
and New Zealand regards peacekeeping as one of the
greatest achievements of the United Nations. The
blue beret is a powerful symbol of the international
community's commitment to peace and security.
However, right now, that same United Nations
peacekeeping is under very serious stress due to
unprecedented demand, the complexity of new security
threats, undiagnosed root causes, lack of effective early
warning from the field, insufficient inclusion of troop-
contributing countries and other major stakeholders
and, not least, the risks of premature transitions
out of peacekeeping mode. All of that suggests that
the Security Council, as the legal decision maker on
peacekeeping, must do a lot better.

However, responsibility for the stress runs wider,
as does responsibility for the solutions. The Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General
Assembly has too often been locked in an unproductive
struggle, and that has been a lost opportunity for
delivering the policy support that peacekeeping needs.
In addition, the Fifth Committee must find an equitable
and fair solution to the issue of troop reimbursements
for troop-contributing countries.

Peacekeeping must continue to evolve to meet
changing circumstances and new challenges. New
Zealand supports the evolution, over recent years, of
multidimensional mandates. When designed sensibly,
with good oversight, quick impact projects, adequate
resources and a strategy for progressive transition to
peacebuilding, such operations can be a very positive
United Nations contribution to restoring international
peace and security.

New Zealand fully understands the concerns
expressed about the difficulties inherent in the robust
mandates that have recently been approved by the
Council. However, the solution is not to simply retreat
to the peacekeeping of the past. Neutral observer
missions still have their rightful and important place.
Many others in this debate have already pointed out that
the Brahimi Report reminded us that there are times
when the United Nations cannot stand aside. There are
times when it must act, and we should never forget that
the Charter recognizes that collective action is a central
role of the United Nations. It is not correct to suggest
that the recent robust mandates in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and the Central African
Republic are entirely new. Indeed, for over a decade,
robust civilian protection mandates have been a reality
for most peacekeeping missions.

Fortunately, force rarely needs to be used, but
the capacity and the authority to act are important
deterrents. We saw limited robust United Nations action
in Cote d'Ivoire in 2011 and, much more recently, we
have seen how robust United Nations capacity can save
lives in South Sudan. Those new peacekeeping trends
also mean that the Council must do better in recognizing
the role and competence of regional and subregional
organizations. New Zealand has seen and learned the
value of regional involvement in peacekeeping from
within its own region.

Supporting and working more effectively with
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the African Union is an important challenge that must
be addressed.

New Zealand acknowledges, and is sensitive to, the
concerns of troop- and police-contributing countries
in respect of the recent peacekeeping developments.
Significant changes in peacekeeping, whether they be
broad trends on the enhanced use of technology, robust
mandates or significant changes in mission mandates,
must only be made with consultations with troop-
and police-contributing countries. There are already
general undertakings from the Council regarding
that engagement with troop- and police-contributing
countries, and the future challenge for Council members
is to implement those undertakings in a consistent and
satisfactory manner.

