Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. I
also thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.

I begin by expressing profound sorrow over the
loss of innocent life in the recent escalation of violence
in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel. The death of a
16-year-old Israeli boy in an attack on a school bus and
the killings of civilians - including children - as a
result of Israeli reprisals against militants in the Gaza
Strip are appalling. We were also dismayed by the
killing of Italian peace activist Vittorio Arrigoni by
extremists in Gaza. Brazil condemns these heinous
attacks in the strongest terms. Violence by settlers and
against settlers has reached shocking levels. All
involved in such acts must be brought to justice. All
parties must respect and ensure respect for
international humanitarian law and protect civilians.

All this has occurred as the stalemate in the peace
process regrettably persists in spite of broad consensus
on the urgent need for concrete decisions. Brazil was
deeply disappointed at the new postponement of the
Quartet's meeting. Unfortunately, this lack of
movement creates a void in which radicals thrive.

That is why we continue to advocate that this
Council should play a greater role in support of the
peace process. We also welcome the proposal for a
Security Council mission to the region. Twenty years
after Madrid, 18 years after Oslo, and eight years since
the Road Map, the painful cost of the absence of
progress is more visible than ever. It is time for bold
decisions that set forth the well-known parameters of
an agreement on all final status issues.

It is unfortunate that illegal settlement activity is
continuing. This logic further distances the political
discourse from reality as regards the two-State solution.
We fail to see how such a policy can advance the
security concerns of Israel and its citizens, whose
legitimacy we fully recognize and seek to advance.
Settlement activity in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
is illegal and an obstacle to peace. It has become the
single most serious threat to the two-State solution and
to the prospects for peace. It stands in defiance of
international law and the very set of international norms
and institutions that serve the purpose of protecting
civilians, including in Israel. It runs counter to the
decisions of the Security Council and threatens the
viability of the future Palestinian State.

We welcome the report submitted to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee last week by the Special
Coordinator for the Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry,
on the progress of the State-building efforts carried out
by the Palestinian Authority. We commend the
Palestinian Authority on the remarkable achievements
in all areas of its State-building programme in a
manner consistent with the goal of establishing the
functioning institutions of the Palestinian State by this
fall. Such achievement must be reinforced with
concrete steps in the peace negotiations.

The situation in Gaza remains a source of grave
concern. We welcome the implementation of measures
by Israel aimed at alleviating the suffering of the
population, specially the approval of United Nations
projects at a higher rate. These are positives steps,
although access to basic goods and services remains
vastly insufficient. The lifting of the blockade is
urgently required, as called for in resolution 1860
(2009).
The historic events and changes taking place in
the broader Middle East are a natural expression of
legitimate aspirations for political and economic
progress and social justice. We support those
aspirations. It is also natural that those events, coming
from within, run different courses in different national
contexts. Principles and values, nevertheless, apply
across the board. As a matter of coherence, the
international community cannot tolerate violence
against unarmed civilians, regardless of where it is
committed.

At the same time, we call on leaders facing
peaceful demonstrations to uphold basic freedoms and
to engage in meaningful dialogue towards needed
reforms. Statesmanship, broad vision and political will
are essential to addressing the legitimate demands of
the respective populations in an environment of peace
and stability.

Let me say a word on the situation in Lebanon.
We look forward to the formation of a new
Government in a process that runs its course in a
peaceful manner and in line with the constitutional
framework. A democratic, prosperous, stable and
sovereign Lebanon will continue to be a fundamental
dimension of peace and stability in the Middle East.

