Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I should like briefly
to share with the Council the reasoning behind our
abstention in the voting on resolution 2089 (2013).

We would like to express our gratitude to the
delegation of the United Kingdom for its leadership and
efforts in facilitating the negotiations on the resolution.
Azerbaijan fully supports the six-month mandate
renewal of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus.

The year 2013 marks the fiftieth since the
emergence of the Cyprus problem. A just and lasting
political settlement without further delay is the hope
and expectation of the international community.
Needless to say, finding a solution as soon as possible
would be in the interests of both sides and of the entire
region. Azerbaijan believes that achieving a settlement
of the Cyprus problem within the established United
Nations parameters is possible, and we reiterate our full
support for the Secretary-General's efforts to that end.
It is clear that a settlement can be attained only through
a results-oriented process and continued support to the
Secretary-General's good offices mission.

While the resolution had to be a technical roll-over,
it nevertheless contains a number of elements that are
outdated. In fact, the language ofresolution 2089 (2013)
in regard to negotiations is repeated from resolution
2058 (2012) without duly reflecting the situation during
the six-month reporting period. Thus, calls throughout
the text to move towards more intensive negotiations
are obsolete, as the substantive talks came to a halt in
July 2012.

Moreover, the resolution just adopted contains
apparent factual inaccuracies, such as the reference in
paragraph 5 to the military areas in the north, which are
no longer an issue. Futhermore, the resolution ignores
a number of concerns raised by the Secretary-General
in his January report (S/2013/7). Except for some minor
amendments, many ofthe important issues raised by our
delegation based on the aforementioned considerations
were not taken into account during the negotiations.

For the reasons I havejust cited, Azerbaijan decided
to abstain in the voting on resolution 2089 (2013).

