Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Mr. John Ging for
his briefing this afternoon. I would also like to thank
the United Nations agencies that are already working
on the ground in Ukraine for their efforts.

The continuing conflict in eastern Ukraine has
inevitably produced a humanitarian situation that is
worsening. There has been further displacement of
civilians and disruption of the provision of essential
services. Advice from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs that the conflict has resulted
in displacing 117,000 persons and that a further 163,000
have fled Ukraine is troubling. Reports of armed
groups deliberately targeting civilian facilities such
as electricity and water plants, roads and bridges are
alarming. Such attacks on facilities that are necessary in
order to sustain the well-being - indeed, the lives - of
civilians must cease. Civilian infrastructure must be
protected and respected. All parties to the conflict must
comply with international humanitarian law.

We commend the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors for their efforts to respond to the
needs of displaced people and host communities. We
welcome the determination of the Ukrainian authorities
to ensure that the needs of the Ukrainian people who
have been displaced or affected by violence are met.
We endorse calls for a systematic registration system to
facilite that. Continued cooperation between the United
Nations and the Ukrainian authorities is essential in
planning and implementing the humanitarian response.
In that regard, we look forward to the preliminary
response plan developed by the humanitarian
community, which we understand is to be released
this week. Obviously, to restore essential services and
protect civilians caught up in the conflict, it is necessary
that all violence cease and that all parties commit to and
embark on genuine dialogue. We commend the efforts
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) to promote dialogue, including through
the trilateral contact group, We welcome the start of the
Minsk talks, but they must deliver. In order for them to
do so, it is essential that all support for armed groups
operating in eastern Ukraine stop.

As we know only too well, it is just slightly less
than three weeks ago that Malaysia Airlines Flight 17
was downed over separatist-held territory in eastern
Ukraine, with the terrible loss of 298 lives. Their deaths
were a direct consequence of this needless violence
in eastern Ukraine. The Council, through resolution
2166 (2014), rightly demanded a full, thorough and
independent international investigation into the MH-17
incident. It also demanded immediate and unrestricted
access to the site to allow for the investigation and
recovery of the bodies, prohibited any actions that
could compromise the integrity of the site, most
notably by local armed groups, and insisted that those
responsible be held accountable. Two weeks later, we
still need the full and urgent implementation of that
resolution. Although some access to the crash site has
been secured, we still do not have the unimpeded and
complete access to the whole of the site that is essential.

Last Friday, on 1 August, the Netherlands informed
the Council of the establishment of the international
mission to protect the investigation, led by the
Netherlands, with the participation of Australia and
Malaysia. Unarmed Dutch, Australian and Malaysian
personnel have been assisting with the investigation and
the removal of the remaining bodies and belongings, as
well as securing the wreckage and physical evidence.
This is an unarmed operation of limited scope and
duration. Personnel have been working closely and
meticulously through the OSCE, which is negotiating
site access and local ceasefires on their behalf. But that
has not always enabled the access required to complete
the essential tasks. The area around the site remains
contested. Although today we had the cooperation of
the Ukrainian authorities, armed separatists restricted
access to several areas of the crash site, hampering
the investigation and the recovery of remains and
personal effects. Urgent, unrestricted access to every
area of the site, in accordance with the unambiguous,
plain provisions of resolution 2166 (2014), remains
imperative. The unarmed personnel on the ground
need the Council's own demands to be met in order to
undertake their work. The sooner they can achieve full,
free access, the sooner they will be able to complete
their work.

To conclude, a lasting solution to the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine self-evidently requires an
end to the conflict. The Council has repeatedly urged
that, and the information we have received today only
reaffirms for us the importance of bringing to an end
the impact of the violence and destabilizing activities
in the east of Ukraine.

