Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, I would like to

thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate

and for again drawing our attention to a central issue

that, as the Permanent Representative of South Africa
has said, is an absolute priority.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Portugal on behalf
of the European Union. I will just add a few remarks.

We warmly welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2007/643) and the briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Holmes. We welcome them because
they are extremely focused and action-oriented. The
presence of the Secretary-General among us, his very
lucid and passionate statement and the quality of the
report are a clear demonstration of the primary
importance of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in the agenda and of the personal commitment
of the Secretary-General on behalf of all of us.

The Security Council has no doubt made
substantial progress on this issue. I will not repeat what
previous speakers have said about the progress made; it
is enough to read paragraph 10 of the report of the
Secretary-General. But, shifting our attention from the
Security Council to the field, I wonder whether we
could say that there has been substantial progress in the
situation on the ground. I think that, as previous
speakers have said, if we read the report of the
Secretary-General closely, some doubts emerge as to
whether there has been progress. Indeed, as I in fact
believe, there may have been some steps backward. I
think that in the future we will have to take what I
would call a less Security Council-centred approach for
identifying benchmarks and a more ground-centred
approach for assessing whether or not benchmarks
have been met.

There is no doubt that the protection agenda has
gained momentum. We now have to build on the
progress made, and we need to do so through - I
repeat - an operational approach. Let us address the
remaining strong concerns through effective and
sustainable proposals. The report of the Secretary
General is a road map for action for all of us. As stated
by the Secretary-General, the report provides a
framework for action, with a series of five very precise
and focused recommendations. Under-Secretary-
General Holmes has also been very clear about which
actions we should embark upon in the following weeks
and months. Let us deliver on those proposed actions.
Once again, what is at stake is our credibility.

The report paints a troubling picture of conflict
situations throughout the world - negative
developments in the conduct of hostilities, constraints
on or denials of access for humanitarian personnel to
vulnerable people caught in conflict and the use of
sexual violence as a calculated method of warfare. As
has been said, it is a very powerful reminder to all of
us that we must never lose sight of the fact that what
matters most at the end of the day is whether and how
we are able to deliver and to have an impact on the
ground in providing relief for those who suffer. We
must never lose sight of the wider picture.

In that connection, and mindful of what Under-
Secretary-General Holmes has told us with regard to
his views as to its potential as a regular forum for
timely consultations, we also strongly favour the
proposal by the Secretary-General to establish a
working group. I would like to add a bit more to what
Ambassador Holmes has said. I think the working
group should also be a tool for an enhanced ground-
centred operational approach. The working group will
make a difference if it adds value to the ground-centred
approach. We very much appreciate what Ambassador
Holmes has said about an enhanced monitoring and
reporting mechanism. If I may, I would just like to add
that I feel, think and hope that what he means is what
we understand as proactive monitoring - not just a
listing of what has happened.

In operational terms, let us concentrate on
developing a framework to move the process forward.
We need appropriate tools with regard to different
points.

First, on peacekeeping, United Nations operations
must be clearly mandated to ensure the protection of
civilians and subsequently to report on it. We take this
opportunity to welcome the joint study being
conducted by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations referred to in the report of
the Secretary-General.

Secondly, on access, there is a need for more
systematic and timely reports, as necessary, by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator to the Council on
serious constraints on access. As I said before, we also
need an effective system of proactive monitoring and
prevention. The attention of the Council must be drawn
to situations of constraint on access as soon as they
arise. We will then have to react and find ways to be
effective in operational terms, and not just in words. In
that regard, as other speakers have done, we reaffirm
the principle that those who are deemed responsible for
denial of access by humanitarian personnel to civilian
populations could be prosecuted by the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

With regard to sexual violence, we recall the
ICC's role in punishing those responsible for atrocious
crimes such as rape.

