Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): At the outset,
Madam President, let me express our gratitude to the
presidency of the Republic of Lithuania for organizing
today's open debate, and personally to His Excellency
Mr. Linas Linkevieius, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Lithuania, for his statement, which
has significantly contributed to the constructive and
comprehensive nature of our deliberations today.

Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union earlier
today. In addition, I would like to make some comments
in my national capacity.

We consider regular open debates on the rule of law
in the Security Council an essential part of the United
Nations work to advance and strengthen the unique
role of the Organization, as recognized by the States
Members of the United Nations in the Declaration
of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/ 1), adopted on
24 September 2012.

As that Declaration so rightly underlines, the rule
of law is of fundamental importance for strengthening
the three main pillars upon which the United Nations
is built - international peace and security, human
rights and development. The rule of law is indeed a key
element of conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding, with justice as a critical
element for achieving peace and security in countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In that regard, we
fully share the position of the European Union, which
supports an effective and efficient interplay between
national justice systems and the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity, in accordance with
the principles enshrined in the Rome Statute.

In that connection, my Government has been
working to adapt Georgian legislation to the best
international standards and intends to further its work
in that direction. Georgia is party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, and the Parliament
of Georgia has adopted a law on cooperation with the
Court.

We would also like to stress that strengthening
the rule of law, as a long-term process, presupposes
the sovereign right and primary responsibility of the
country concerned to determine its national approach
and priorities. We fully share the view expressed in the
presidency's concept note for today's debate (S/2014/75, annex) that it should be a nationally owned process
rooted in the particular needs and conditions, culture
and traditions of the country in question. The successful
coordination of efforts to promote the rule of law must
be based on national consensus and driven by political
leadership and political will.

With that in mind, we welcome the attribution of
the strategic leadership role on the matter to the Rule
of Law Coordination and Resource Group, and we
support its greater engagement with Member States
and other key rule-of-law actors, including regional
organizations, with the aim of continuing to enhance
policy coherence within the United Nations system.

Reiterating that a holistic and coherent United
Nations approach to security sector reform is vital,
Georgia supports the development of a comprehensive
United Nations strategy on the rule of law, taking into
account its multidisciplinary nature. As one of the
important elements, close thematic links to security
sector reform should be further studied and reflected in
our work on the rule-of-law strategy. Georgia is ready
to work closely with the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group, as well as with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme, which serve as the joint
global focal point for the police, justice and corrections
areas in the promotion of the rule oflaw in post-conflict
and other crisis situations, with the aim of equipping
the Organization with common principles and high
standards, a system-wide approach, the requisite
resources and, in some cases, with the capacities to
deliver efficient support to national authorities.

We believe that the United Nations strategy on the
rule of law should be developed in close cooperation
with all stakeholders, including individual Member
States and regional organizations. That would be
useful for sharing experience and developing practical
guidelines to be encompassed by the strategy and would
represent a good platform for the provision of adequate
human resources and expertise as needed to support
States in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In our view, the process should also include the
development of a strategy for evaluating the concept of
the rule of law. We fully agree with the recommendation
of the Secretary-General contained in his report of
11 June 2013 (S/2013/341) that such a strategy should
be a goal of the United Nations system, supported by
Member States.

In the meantime, we share the concern expressed
by the Secretary-General that, although a culture of
measurement is gradually taking root in the United
Nations, it still falls short of providing systematic
baseline data on the rule of law. We are mindful of
the significant challenges that exist in measuring and
evaluating the impact of rule-of-law activities, as reliable
rule-of-law data continue not to be available owing to
the lack of access in many conflict-affected countries.
We would support drawing up additional measures to
cover such shortcomings in data collection, which are
often caused by a lack of political will on the part of
the actors in control of conflict areas. Such measures
should be in line with and reinforce the capacities of
United Nations field missions in their efforts to support
national data collection and analysis.

