Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): My delegation
welcomes you, Mr. Minister, to this meeting and would
like to express its appreciation to the Belgian
presidency for organizing this debate. My delegation
also associates itself with the statement to be made by
the representative of Tunisia on behalf of the African
Group.

Over the ages, natural resources and their
exploitation have been a factor contributing to tensions
and conflicts within States and between States. In
recent years, while inter-State wrangling over natural
resources has been managed relatively well through
mechanisms put in place by the international
community, such as mediation and international
judicial bodies, intra-State rivalry and claims for such
resources have been causes of brutal conflicts and civil
wars in some regions of the globe.

In the discharge of its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, it is only appropriate
that the Security Council should focus on natural
resources as one of the root causes of conflict.

In theory, natural resources provide an
opportunity for enhanced economic growth and
development. However, in various instances, those
same resources have provided a motive for conflict
and, in several cases, have fuelled and prolonged
conflicts.

In discussing this issue, it may be helpful to
consider it from the following perspectives: conflict
prevention, conflict situations and post-conflict
situations.

With regard to conflict prevention, it is
imperative that natural resources be managed
responsibly for the benefit of the population. Such a
good-governance approach should be aimed at
promoting human security and economic development.
The nexus between human security and development
should be the basis of such a policy.
It is the responsibility of Government to ensure
the protection and survival of the constitutional order
by creating the conditions necessary for human
security, which will reinforce efforts towards
development. In sum, the critical factor is equitable
distribution of the returns from natural resources to
provide, inter alia, health care, education, poverty
alleviation programmes and systems to entrench the
rule of law. This inclusive approach removes the
sources of tension and disaffection from society.

In conflict situations, short of intervention, the
challenge for the international community is to devise
means to prevent the misuse of profits derived from
natural resources from fuelling and prolonging the war.
The United Nations and the international community as
a whole have resorted to commodity sanctions and
certification as means of confronting the problem. The
question is: how effective are the sanctions and the
certification process?

It must be stated that the Kimberley Process of
certification for diamonds has achieved quite
significant success in stemming the trade in diamonds
from conflict areas. However, there is there is evidence
that in some cases greedy businessmen have found
ingenious means to trade in such diamonds through
unwitting third-party countries, thus obscuring the
origin of the diamonds. Sanctions-busting also has
become a fine art, with the prohibited items finding
their way into the world market. Clearly, there is a
need to strengthen the sanctions regime and the
certification process. That cannot be done without
vigilance and active cooperation on the part of all
Members.

Another aspect of the illegal exploitation of
natural resources in conflict situations is its impact on
the environment. In the absence of a responsible
governance system, it is unlikely that safety and
environmental standards will be complied with.

With regard to post-conflict situations, the
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play in facilitating the rebuilding of institutions of
governance to ensure competent and responsible
management of natural resources. Once a freely elected
and accountable Government is in place, the sanctions
may be lifted.

In discussing the link between natural resources
and conflict, we cannot overlook the most precious of
all natural resources: water. Water is life itself. Even
though water is a renewable resource, supplies have
been affected by pollution, overpopulation and climate
change. Those factors have combined to increase
pressure on water resources in terms of both quantity
and quality. The result is a looming global water crisis,
with which the international community will have to
contend in the future.

A 1999 World Bank report indicated that 40 per
cent of the world's population - approximately
2billion people - has no access to safe drinking
water. Various studies indicate that water is likely to
replace energy as the most critical natural resource and
is also likely to be a source of tensions and conflicts
within and between nations. To avert this looming
crisis, the international community must institute a
comprehensive coordinated programme of action on
the management of water resources, population policy
and climate change.

Finally, my delegation wishes to stress that the
issue of natural resources and conflict must be
examined in all its multifaceted aspects if we are to
make any progress.

