Mr. Ladsous (Spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for giving me the opportunity to
brief the Council on Mali at a time that I think it is fair
to call a key moment in the political process. I would
like to complement the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2015/219) by focusing on three points: the dialogue
process, the security situation and the strengthening
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

Concerning the political process, as the Secretary-
General explains in his report, in February the Malian
parties held a fifth session of the inter-Malian dialogue
in Algiers. On 1 March, two of the three parties
initialled the draft peace agreement submitted to them
by the mediators in indication of their agreement with
it. The third party, known as the Coordination, asked
for more time to consult its base, while negotiations
continued between it and the mediators. This past
week, the head of the mediation, the representative of
Algeria, and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Hamdi met with the Coordination leadership in
Algiers. At that time, the Coordination indicated that it
would be initialing the agreement next week. However,
that is just an statement of intent; it has not actually
happened yet.

What we can gather from all this is that the crisis
in Mali can be resolved only through an inclusive
and Viable political agreement that can be effectively
implemented. The draft currently on the table provides
a good basis for the resolution of many issues that have
been at the heart of the Malian conflict for so many
years. An agreement is only one step in a long process,
and it is important that all parties fully commit to
following through with the process to its conclusion.
I therefore think that, more than ever, it is important
to urge the Malian parties to continue their dialogue to
address outstanding issues and to commit to the process
that will follow the signing of the agreement, which
we all hope to see. In that context, the international
community has an important role to play in facilitating
and supporting the dialogue. However, allow me to say
that, ultimately, the people of Mali are responsible for
ensuring peace.

I therefore believe this is a historic opportunity to
reach a political settlement. It is historic because, with
regard to previous efforts to resolve the Malian crisis,
this is the first time that the international community
has mobilized to provide its support. There is really
an alignment of the stars, ifI may use the expression,
which is a first in the history of Mali, and there is a
desire to support Mali. I therefore think that this
message must continue to be conveyed. All Malians
must take ownership of this process, and that is how we
will be able to move forward.

Of course, one of the crucial aspects now will be
the establishment of a precise and detailed framework
and timeline for the implementation of the peace
process. Clear and robust implementation mechanisms
are also necessary because there is a lack of confidence
among the Malian parties. I think peace is attainable,
and intensive efforts to that end should be undertaken
in the upcoming weeks.

Unfortunately, the security situation is
fragile - not only in northern Mali, but also in other
parts of the country. This insecurity has a direct impact
on civilians' safety and hinders the re-establishment of
State authority, humanitarian access and stabilization
programmes.

While preparations for the fifth round of talks in
Algiers were under way in January, there were violations
ofthe ceasefire on the ground by the parties and serious
security threats for civilians. On 19 February, parties
recommitted to upholding the ceasefire, which has
generally been respected. However, I must take this
opportunity to reaffirm that no party should seek to
gain ground by military means. It is essential to comply
with the ceasefire. Peace in Mali will be achieved only
through negotiations, not through military means.

The lack of constructive participation by some of
the Malian parties in the ceasefire management bodies
is an area of concern. In that regard, I am thinking
in particular of the Mixed Technical Commission on
Security and the joint observation and verification
teams. I think it is very important that all parties uphold
their ceasefire commitments and participate in those
bodies, as that is how we will eventually be able to cover
additional ground and gain a better understanding and
a deterrent effect on those who violate the ceasefire.

As I stated, there were serious incidents, not just
in the north of Mali but also in Bamako on 7 March
and in other areas south of the Niger River. Those
incidents demonstrate how extremist and criminal
elements exploit vacuums of law and order in order to
perpetrate their crimes. It is therefore critical that all
Malian parties clearly distance themselves from violent
and illegal activities. That is the reason that last year
we established a cell in MINUSMA tasked with dealing
with issues of transnational crime and helping the
Malian Government develop its action in that regard. I
think that the Security Council's attention and support
to issues related to illicit trafficking and criminality
are extremely important. It is also important for
the countries of the region and all Mali's partners to
continue to support MINUSMA and its personnel to
enable the Mission to carry out its tasks, including
with regard to MINUSMA's supply routes through the
territories of neighbouring countries, which are quite
helpful to the Mission.
With regard to the situation on the ground, there
continue to be attacks. Since our last meeting, three
peacekeepers lost their lives. I would like to pay tribute
to them and to the police- and troop-contributing
countries that sent them to Mali.

With regard to MINUSMA, efforts are ongoing to
expand the Mission's presence and operations in the
northern regions, pursuant to resolution 2164 (2014). As
detailed in the report, the deployment of the Mission's
military component has reached 80 per cent, and we
are hoping to conclude its deployment with the arrival
in next two months of the two battalions that we have
been awaiting for so long, but who are now almost fully
equipped. I think that the figure of 80 per cent will rise
significantly in the two months to come. At the same
time, the construction of infrastructure continues, but
not under the best conditions because of the ongoing
security challenges. This is therefore a work in progress.

We have also continued and strengthened our
outreach efforts with local populations, who have often
long been polarized as the legacy of intercommunal
tensions and political and criminal violence. In this
regard, since February we have had a tool that, I believe,
will prove to be very useful, and that is MINUSMA
radio, whose broadcasts will be expanded in local
languages.

We will continue to require financial and technical
support from Member States. As discussions on the
MINUSMA budget begin in the relevant committees,
I believe that a strong signal from the Security Council
would have an inf luence on those upcoming discussions.

In conclusion, I would like to express how much we
appreciate the efforts of our partners in the mediation
team: Algeria, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other countries.
Their efforts have been commendable.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Hamdi, and all of our colleagues in
MINUSMA are carrying out their duties in very
difficult conditions. I would like to briefly express
my great appreciation of the work of Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General David Gressly,
who is concluding his service as Resident Coordinator
and Humanitarian Coordinator and moving on
elsewhere, having accomplished a great deal in his two
and a half years in Mali.
Last but not least, I would like to congratulate
Force Commander Major General Lollesgaard, who
took up his functions 10 days ago, taking over from
General Bikimo of Chad, who had served as Acting
Force Commander for several months with great skill.

