I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. I welcome the Permanent Representatives of Venezuela and Colombia to our meeting today. I received the letter from the Permanent Representative of Venezuela, and today I have followed closely the briefing of Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and the statements of previous speakers. I feel deeply concerned over recent reports of armed incursions into Venezuela. Viet Nam strongly opposes the use of force or threat of use of force against the sovereignty and independence of any State or interference of any form in its internal affairs, which violate the Charter of the United Nations and run counter to international law. In this regard, we would like to stress the following points. First, we call on parties related to the situation in Venezuela to exercise self- restraint and refrain from the threat or use of force or actions that may escalate tension and destabilize the situation in Venezuela. It is the Council's responsibility to uphold the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, and abide by internationally agreed norms in the conduct of international relations among States. Secondly, we support the constitutional Government and relevant parties in Venezuela in engaging in dialogue, with a view to achieving a long-term solution by peaceful means. The way forward for Venezuela should be led and decided by Venezuelans, in line with its Constitution and its people's aspirations, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Thirdly, as the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic has further exacerbated the situation in Venezuela, the most important task now is to combat the pandemic and provide humanitarian assistance for Venezuelans to overcome current difficulties. In this connection, we would like to welcome further United Nations-led efforts to help the people of Venezuela, in accordance with the principles of humanitarian assistance and the needs of Venezuelans. We also strongly support the appeal by the Secretary-General to waive sanctions that may undermine the capacity of States to respond to the pandemic.
