Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
anticipate other colleagues in thanking High
Commissioner Ruud Lubbers for his informative
briefing on a most important issue. I also wish to offer
a few comments and to ask a question.
We are most appreciative of the efforts of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in its dedicated humanitarian work
to protect refugees and to find durable solutions for
them: repatriation, local reintegration or resettlement.
The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and its 1967 Protocol constitute the bedrock of refugee
protection. We strongly support the strict observance
by all countries of the principles contained therein.

In this respect, it is to be noted with grave
concern that the fundamental provision - the so-called
principle of non-refoulement - is not always
respected. Voluntary repatriation and reintegration are
sometimes not feasible. To make matters more
complicated, public perception of refugee problems has
been affected worldwide by incidents of trafficking and
smuggling of people, as well as by the recurring waves
of economic migrants.

It is important that countries adopting more
restrictive immigration and anti-terrorist measures
continue to keep their borders open to refugees. On the
one hand, terrorists must be prevented from gaining
admission to countries by illegally abusing their
asylum status. Provisions of the Convention shall not
apply to people who have committed serious crimes.
On the other hand, we fully concur with Mr. Lubbers
statement, made the last time he briefed the Council in
February 2002, that we cannot allow the global efforts
to combat terrorism to weaken the international refugee
regime. In other words, counter-terrorism measures
cannot hinder the right to seek refuge. Of course,
refugees and internally displaced persons are victims of
human rights violations and the international
community must help them to resume their lives in an
environment where their security and dignity are
guaranteed.

I would like to invite Mr. Lubbers to expand his
comments on the question of the resettlement of
refugees at this particular point in time.

