Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to hold a public
briefing on combating drug trafficking in the Sahel
and West Africa. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Executive Director Yury Fedotov of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Said Djinnit
for their very comprehensive and insightful briefings.

We are all acutely aware of the enormity and gravity
of the problem of drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime in West Africa and their impact on
regional and international security and stability. What
is more, illicit narcotics ruin the lives and security of
millions of people across the globe. The drug industry
is strong, and its estimated worth is hundreds ofbillions
of dollars. Countries and regions of origin, transit
and consumption are all suffering from the harmful
consequences of the cultivation, manufacturing,
distribution and sale of drugs.

Facing numerous capacity and governance
challenges, the West African and Sahel regions are
particularly vulnerable to the destabilizing impact of
the entire cycle of drug production, trafficking and
consumption. For instance, as the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) told us today, in 2010 alone 18 tons of
cocaine, amounting to $1.25 billion, transited through
West Africa. This is staggering. The region is a transit
route for drugs headed to the Mediterranean coasts, the
Middle East, Europe, Latin America and East Asia. In
addition to being a major transit hub, the region, which
is also a major producer of synthetic drugs, has seen an
increase in drug consumption.

Drug trafficking breeds corruption and undermines
State institutions and authority. In some instances, it
has undermined the constitutional order. The strong
nexus of drug trafficking with terrorism fuels and
finances conflicts and asymmetric warfare. It also
undermines or reverses the tentative gains made in
ongoing peacebuilding efforts in several countries. In
short, drug trafficking poses a direct threat to peace
and security in West Africa and the Sahel.

Against that backdrop, the enhanced focus of
the Council on this issue is important and timely.
Discussions of this problem, however, should continue
to move forward from the normative aspects to practical
and tangible initiatives to address both the problem
and its root causes. The frameworks to respond to this
threat must be based on a comprehensive and integrated
approach that gives due weight to development,
governance and capacity-building. Measures to
respond to drug trafficking should be integrated into
the national, regional and United Nations development
agendas.

Dealing with the fallout of the drug problem in
the Sahel and West Africa is a shared responsibility.
National actions should be buttressed by increased
cooperation, coordination support and resource
mobilization at the regional and international levels.
To combat illicit drug trafficking, the countries of the
region need to especially focus on institution-building
in order to strengthen judicial systems, security sectors
and police institutions. Steps must also be taken to
fight impunity and corruption and promote respect for
human rights and the rule of law.

That all boils down to addressing capacity deficits,
and they are huge. In this area, the international
community's assistance is essential. Cooperation among
regions and subregions, in line with the principle of
common and shared responsibility for the simultaneous
reduction of supply and demand will guarantee the
success of strategies to root out the illicit drug trade.
More effective and results-oriented coordination is
therefore required amongst the countries in the Sahel
and West Africa for effective border management and
harmonization of legal and judicial responses to drug
trafficking and to the problems created by its illicit
proceeds. Cooperation and coordination among all
United Nations entities and peacekeeping missions
in the Sahel and West Africa should also be further
strengthened and streamlined.

Pakistan recognizes and welcomes the many steps
taken by regional countries and organizations to fight
drug trafficking. We also recognize the crucial role
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in this regard. Thankfully, we are not starting from
scratch. Strategic thinking and planning have already
done, culminating in the finalization of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. We support
the strategy's objective of assisting the Sahelian
countries and regional mechanisms to enhance national
capacities for effective border management and
economic governance. In that regard, the roles of the
African Union, the Economic Commission for Africa,
the Economic Community of West African States,
UNODC, the United Nations Development Programme,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission are extremely important.
Pakistan has chaired the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 985 (1995) concerning Liberia
for the past two years. The United Nations Office
for West Africa is developing a regional strategy, in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and regional organizations, such as the Mano
River Union, to curtail transnational organized crime,
including arms and drug trafficking. In this context,
I want to bring to the Council's attention the Panel of
Experts' recommendation that Member States reinforce
the capacity of UNODC in Liberia.

We express our full support for the presidential
statement on this subject (S/PRST/2013/22).

Finally, I would like to say very briefly that the past
two years have been very productive and rewarding for
Pakistan as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. We thank other Council members, the general
membership and the Secretariat for their cooperation
and for their guidance.

