Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
There has been an empty seat in the General Assembly for
several years, the seat of Somalia. The people of Somalia
is not represented and cannot make its voice heard in the
United Nations system due to the failure of its leaders to
agree. This is also the reason why it is not present at this
debate. This situation reflects what is occurring on the
ground itself. Somalia is a country divided into factions in
which not even the United Nations can keep a resident
office and in which humanitarian agencies frequently face
serious problems in carrying out their assistance
programmes. These, as we all know, include their personnel
being the victims of incidents and violence.

A little over a year ago, in March 1996, we were
meeting in this Chamber in an open debate on the situation
in Somalia. At that time the tone of the statements was
generally one of pessimism and uncertainty. However,
beginning at the end of last year we began to receive
somewhat more encouraging news. A process of
consultations which began in Nairobi and continued in
Sodere has been bearing fruit. The Sodere declarations of
January 1997 established the National Salvation Council. If
all goes well, there will be a conference on Somali national
reconciliation in June.

This entire process is obviously affected by the
reluctance of two leaders, Mr. Hussein Aidid and
Mr. Mohamed Ibrahim Egal, to join it. Despite this, the
members of the National Salvation Council met recently
in Cairo with representatives of the League of Arab
States, which stands ready to help in convening the June
conference.

From Europe, Italy has for a long time been
concerned about the situation in Somalia, and the work of
its representative in Mogadishu has had its successes. For
all these reasons, we would like to pay tribute to the
Governments of Kenya, Ethiopia, Egypt and Italy and to
the League of Arab States and the European Union. We
should include the efforts of the Organization of African
Unity and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
among those that have been carried out by the
international community to promote the future of the
Somali people.

We also underscore the work carried out by the
Secretary-General and by the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia in Nairobi. But above all we
congratulate those in Somalia who have decided to work
together to ensure that Somalia will again become a
respected nation at peace. These are positive signs that we
did not have before us a year ago.
We must reiterate that responsibility in the search for
a solution to the political crisis in Somalia rests with
Somalis themselves, and particularly with the leaders of
the various factions. Most of these leaders are trying to
find a way to resolve the situation in their country and are
taking steps in that direction with the assistance of
friendly countries. However, there are still some who are
recalcitrant. Some political leaders are unable to go
beyond their personal interests and quest for power to
subjugate themselves to the interests of the people whom
they claim to represent. These very few leaders should
heed the voice of their people, who seek peace and
reconciliation. On this occasion they should also heed the
voice of the international community, which is willing to
support that peace.

Looking at this in historical terms, the Somali
political leadership was a victim of the cold war. It tried
to play super- Power off against super-Power, switching
alliances and loyalties and ultimately finding itself with a
destroyed and underdeveloped country in which few took
notice at the international level. In playing cold-war
roulette, the country was bankrupted.

Despite the indifference of many, the international
community took action. It decided to help restore a
degree of order and in particular to avert a massive

 

humanitarian tragedy. The Security Council approved the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM), and the
humanitarian community set out to alleviate the crisis.

Once again, however, infighting among the leaders
stood in the way of a stable United Nations presence,
causing a peace mission to be aborted, and the country was
left to its own devices.

Once again, we find that the leaders of certain factions
are refusing to cooperate in the search for a joint solution.
But they are, as always, leading a comfortable existence,
while the people who live in the territories that they control
are suffering the consequences of their leaders' political
intransigence. The leaders' recalcitrant attitude seems to say
"Somalia as a country interests me only if I can control it."

The Somalis themselves must determine how to
resolve their internal problems. What is important is for the
Somalis to be able to coexist peacefully among themselves
and with their neighbours by means of a legitimate
democratic political organization.

The structures of such an organization must
correspond to the characteristics and interests of the
Somalis themselves. Whether they wish a centralized
government, or one with limited central power, a
confederation or a system of clans and subclans, this is a
domestic matter that they should be able to resolve among
themselves. In other words, the international community is
not necessarily pushing a classically Western state model.

In describing possible political organization
alternatives, I should like to emphasize a limitation that we
believe the United Nations system has in tackling conflicts
such as Somalia in a structural way. The Charter of the
United Nations emphasizes the role of preventive diplomacy
in reaching an agreement among the parties to a conflict.
The drafters of the Charter understood that the parties to
the conflict would normally be nation-States - in other
words, these would be inter-State conflicts.

However, the reality today is that most conflicts that
appear on the agenda of the Security Council, such as the
one in Somalia, are domestic, and are more like civil wars
than conflicts between nations. We have found that, as a
result, the instruments of traditional diplomacy are not as
effective in such situations. We believe that in the future
the Security Council, in order to be truly modern and
contemporary, will increasingly have to resort to other
sources of experience in settling conflicts. I refer here to
experiences that are related more to interpersonal conflicts,
to problems of coexistence among different religions or
races in the same city or territory, to experiences relating
to participation in and the easing of tensions within a
community, and to confidence-building among different
peoples and groups, rather than among States. There is a
great deal of experience available in these areas. Using it
is the challenge facing the Council.

Those who still refuse to participate in the peace
process must understand that they have a unique
opportunity today: to let it be known what type of society
they desire. Otherwise, even though many obstacles stand
in the way, if, as we hope, the majority of the Somali
leaders continue to pursue the peace process, it will move
forward with the support of the international community,
despite those who oppose it.

Having said this, I should like to express our special
concern about the humanitarian situation of the Somalis.
This people, and those who wish to help them, must not
be subjected to violence and must enjoy security so that
they can develop as human beings. This is a point on
which the international community cannot compromise. In
this connection, we would like to reiterate what we said
last year in the Council's debate on Somalia.

Finally, Mr. President, I should like to thank you for
your initiative in convening this formal Security Council
meeting on the situation in Somalia. This reflects
Portugal's interest in expanding public debates, which
Chile fully shares. This provides an excellent opportunity
to hear delegations that are not members of the Council
speak on an item that has long concerned us.

