Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Listening to Ambassador
Nebenzia, I was left with the impression that it was
Ukraine that had invaded Russia, not Russia that
invaded Ukraine.
At the outset, I would like to thank all the
briefers - Mr. Jenea, Ms. Mueller, Ambassador Apakan
and Ambassador Sajdik. I would particularly like to
thank Mr. Apakan for his five years or more of work
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. What
the monitors have accomplished in extremely difficult
circumstances over those years is incredible. I would
also like to thank Mr. Sajdik, who once again expressed
his commitment to the Minsk process, the Trilateral
Contact Group and the working groups.

I would like to remind Mr. Nebenzia that direct
meetings are actually taking place in those working
groups, and that is where the discussions with the
different parties to the conflict are being held, or
should be. When I heard that our Russian friends had put
this subject on the agenda, I did not feel uncomfortable
either, in fact quite the contrary. Exactly four years
after the signing of the Minsk agreements, I believe it
is quite right that we should discuss the situation. But
that is not the only anniversary of note right now. In
particular, this year we are marking the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Budapest Memorandum. For those
who do not know what that is, it was signed in 1994.
At the time Ukraine still had nuclear weapons, and
it gave them up in exchange for Russia's guarantee
of its territorial integrity and sovereignty. We have
seen what has happened since then with regard to its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and what that
means for disarmament worldwide and for the rules-
based international order and international law.

Our Russian partners continue to violate
international law. The Treaty between the Russian
Federation and Ukraine on Cooperation in the Use of the
Sea of Azov is the most recent text in which it is clear
that the freedom of navigation is guaranteed. Ukrainian
soldiers - marines - who relied on the freedom of
navigation in the Sea of Azov, are imprisoned to this
day, which is a violation of international law. Over the
years, our Russian friends have said - and Vassily has
said - that it was an internal coup to overthrow the
Government. However, we must be aware of the fact
that it was a Russian invasion. Russian soldiers were
directly involved, both in the occupation of Luhansk
and of Donetsk.

There is a Russian television documentary that
clearly states that, on 23 February 2014, President Putin
ordered the security services to retake Crimea. Crimea
is still occupied. Donbas is still occupied - by "little
green men"- and its fate lies in their hands: Russian
soldiers. In 2014 and 2015, when it became increasingly
clear that many Russian soldiers had been killed, there
was a great deal of criticism on social media in Russia.
Then, in August 2014, Russia banned the Committee
of Soldiers' Mothers of St. Petersburg and declared it
a foreign agent. There were many complaints about
Russian soldiers engaged in Donbas. Subsequently, in
a decree issued in May 2015, President Putin banned
reports about the death of members of the Defence
Ministry in peace time. That is how the situation was
handled in Russia.

Let us now turn to Minsk and the historical
circumstances. I do not know if it is a privilege, but
I was in Minsk and in negotiations for approximately
16 hours. There were several items on the agenda.
I will recap some of them. The key element at that
stage was the issue of the ceasefire. Russian troops
were advancing in Donbas at that time. They went
beyond the lines stipulated in the previous Minsk
agreement and attempted to occupy the city of
Debaltseve, which is a cross point for roads and trains
and of strategic importance. The main discussion was
focused on when the ceasefire would take place. The
Russian army wanted to have it as late as possible.
The members of the Normandy format, in particular
the non-Russians, insisted on an early ceasefire. In
the end, the ceasefire was agreed on the morning of
12 February 2015, following some back and forth
between Mr. Zakharchenko and Mr. Plotnitsky, who
signed the agreement. It was set to start on 15 February
at midnight. I agree with Vassily's logic: you have to
see the package of measures in sequence.

The first paragraph stipulates an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire as of 15 February 2015. The
ceasefire never happened, because the Russian military
was actually right and they were unable to reach
Debaltseve at the time stipulated in the agreement. It
took them several days to arrive. Instead of having a
ceasefire, Russian troops continued until they finally
occupied Debaltseve. And that is, in a way, the original
sin committed when it comes to the implementation ofthe
Minsk agreements. Together with my French colleague
at the time, I visited Ukraine several times. We went
to the Rada and spoke with the members of Parliament
about adopting laws and so on. The scepticism was
very palpable. There was no trust that Russia would do
its part after having committed the original sin of not
honouring the ceasefire. We have seen no withdrawal
of heavy weapons to date. Ambassador Apakan also
highlighted that, with regard to the section of the Minsk
package pertaining free access to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, it is in particular in the occupied
territory of Ukraine where the Monitoring Mission does
not have free access. Russian-supported elections on
11 November last year again demonstrated that Russia
is not ready to adhere to the Minsk package.

There is distrust in Ukraine but, nevertheless,
the Rada adopted a number of important of very
important elements of the Minsk agreements. There
was a first reading of the constitutional amendments on
decentralization. The law on the special status and the
amnesty law were adopted. They are all key elements.
It was extremely difficult to convince the members of
the Rada and receive the necessary support.

Germany, together with France, will continue to be
active and to support in the Normandy format all efforts
to broker a ceasefire and reach a solution. We are also
ready to support the idea of a United Nations mission,

which was discussed. The mandate for it was proposed
by Russia and states that United Nations peacekeepers
should protect the Special Monitoring Mission. I think
that is a joke; for it to have free access and be able to
move around freely would require just one phone call
from the Russian President. We are ready for the United
Nations, but it has to have a serious mission.

Let me briefly turn to the worst outcome of what
happened in Ukraine - the humanitarian situation
in Crimea and Donbas. Ursula Mueller painted a
terrible picture of what is happening there: many dead,
injured, sick and impoverished and families separated;
industry more or less destroyed; mines flooded and
huge environmental risks. I think what should be done
now is to consider the humanitarian issues. I do not
understand why it is not possible to have an agreement
between Ukraine and Russia on the Stanytsia Luhanska
pedestrian bridge, which was mentioned by all of the
briefers. There are reports about the situation there
and how old people have to cross it. I would ask the
Ukrainian Ambassador, in View of his statement, to
make a commitment that everything will be done to
ensure that the bridge again becomes operational. The
exchange ofprisoners and hostages, which was possible
at the end of 2017 with 300 people, should be possible
now. The essential infrastructure should be spared and
repaired, as mentioned previously.

The Minsk agreements have been severely criticized
and there is every reason for such criticism because
the original sin occurred in their implementation.
Nonetheless, it is the only show in town. The Normandy
format remains committed to the agreements and we
want them to be successful. We are therefore ready to
work on the issue, not least for the benefit of the people
who are suffering terribly.

