Mr. Jallow: I will respond briefly to three
comments.

First, I turn to the concern of the Ambassador of
Germany in relation to the 40 cases. The President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has
already made some clarification in that respect, but I
should like to say that these are only earmarked for
transfer; none of them has yet been transferred, and not
all of them are earmarked for transfer to Rwanda. Some
are earmarked for transfer to other jurisdictions. We
have yet to finalize the list. We have to review the
cases and determine whether there is, in fact, a
possibility of success if these cases are transferred and
prosecuted.

We also have to work out, of course, the terms
and conditions for the transfer. We have to be satisfied
that the countries or the jurisdictions to which the cases
might go are capable of providing fair trials, in
accordance with the standards that have been set by the
United Nations, which have to be satisfied. If there is a
lack of capacity, that issue could be addressed by the
Security Council or by the United Nations itself in
coming to the assistance of the State and providing
support for its judiciary in order for it to be able to
undertake the prosecution of these cases.

I think, as has been rightly noted, that one of the
important legacies of this sort of practice is that
capacity has to be built in the countries or regions
where these events occurred. Some capacity has to be
built up in the judiciaries and other institutions for
them to be able to deal with such incidents when they
occur. That is a primary concern of the Court I am
coming from - the Special Court for Sierra Leone -
where we are very much concerned with developing
the capacity of the Sierra Leonean national judicial
system to respond to these cases and to deal with them
expeditiously. That will be the process we will go
through for handling the cases.
The Ambassador of Mexico raised questions
concerning the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF). Among
the 26 targets for investigation, there are some
members of the RPF. That is as much as I can explain
to the Ambassador of Mexico. Secondly, I assure the
Council that our mandate is to prosecute those persons
who bear the greatest responsibility for whatever may
have occurred. The decisions of the Prosecutor are
taken on the basis of the evidence and of the law. I
wish to assure my colleague on that point.

With regard to the issue raised by the
representative of China as to whether the combination
of the completion strategy and early transfer would
lead to a completion of the cases by the target dates, as
the President has said, the judicial process is not easily
predictable. We have to resort to a combination of
strategies. What is clear is that, if we do not have
additional ad litem judges, we cannot even start
prosecution of the cases which are already ready for
trial. If we do combine the strategy of transfer to
national jurisdictions with a strategy of increasing the
number of ad litem judges and also resorting to other
measures, I am optimistic that we could meet the
targets which have been set by the Security Council.

Other than that, I should like to thank the Council
for its interest in and its support for our work.

