At the outset, Thailand welcomes the Secretary-General's recently released report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773), which was submitted against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As highlighted in the report, the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences can lead to increased tensions and violence and may exacerbate existing drivers of conflict and undermine social and economic resilience. Moreover, the economic, security and social effects of COVID-19 are likely to cause greater instability in conflict-prone countries. Therefore, the pandemic serves to underscore the need to create strong partnerships among all stakeholders to find tangible short- and long-term solutions in response to the pandemic. Thailand wishes to highlight our vision and experience that could contribute to the multilateral efforts aimed at addressing the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic in the peacebuilding context. First, Thailand encourages peacekeeping operations to continue carrying out their mandates while also further assisting host countries in their coronavirus response both in the short and long term. Against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic, peacekeeping operations remain an integral tool in multilateral strategies to help establish a sustainable environment for achieving sustaining peace and sustainable development, including supporting the public health aspect. We believe that early peacebuilding tasks undertaken by peacekeepers would beneficially contribute to host countries' long-term development, including through capacity- building activities, logistics, awareness-raising and supporting the establishment of health-care infrastructure. For its part, Thailand, through its Horizontal Military Engineering Company, has helped in the construction of COVID-19 screening facilities at the compound of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in response to the pandemic at its early stage. It has also established a learning centre in the UNMISS camp to share with the local community our best practices on agriculture, water and land management, and health care, as well as our sufficiency-economy philosophy to help improve the people's livelihood. We truly believe that this is the face of forward- looking and sustainable peacekeeping. Secondly, Thailand believes that South-South and triangular cooperation could be another innovative approach for creating peacebuilding partnerships. Because it is essential to mobilize common efforts to enhance inclusive peace and development, South-South cooperation could be acomplementary path to revitalizing and renewing supports to sustaining inclusive development and peace. We also encourage enhanced exchanges of views and dialogue among countries, regional and subregional organizations and the Security Council as well as other United Nations bodies, in order to achieve synergy and ensure complementarity. As a development partner in South-South cooperation, Thailand has been constructively engaged with a focus on promoting community development with security and resilience, increasing mutual understanding and laying fundamental preconditions for creating contexts for peace and stability. Equally important, Thailand firmly believes that peace does not exist in a vacuum. It is intrinsically linked with sustainable development and respect for human rights. We therefore believe that a comprehensive people-centred approach to peacekeeping is imperative. Also, inclusive national ownership is a prerequisite for successful peacebuilding and for sustaining peace. Thirdly, inclusive multi-stakeholder approaches could ensure long-term solutions in conflict-affected areas. In conflict-affected States, where health- care systems are already weakened, the pandemic will worsen the situation for vulnerable groups, particularly the elderly, who are more prone to the virus. Women and children, as well as persons with disabilities, will face greater difficulties in gaining access to health care and other essential services. It is therefore imperative for all stakeholders to create strong partnerships, share best practices and provide socioeconomic opportunity to vulnerable groups through sustainable development approaches. We must place importance in including vulnerable groups in all peace processes at all stages in order to ensure consistent peacebuilding progress and provide long-term solutions for all challenges, including public-health crises. Last but not least, the bridging role among relevant United Nations organs could foster cross-pillar approaches to the pandemic in the peace and security context. The COVID-19 pandemic could pose challenges on socioeconomic issues beyond those related to the immediate health and humanitarian impacts. Accordingly, the response to the pandemic requires systemic approaches for effective preparedness and solutions. A stronger and more coherent cross-pillar approach would lead to more efficiency in supporting countries to become more sustainable and resilient, which will contribute to a more peaceful society. Indeed, the ongoing review of the peacebuilding architecture in 2020 will be another critical milestone for all relevant actors to formally explore ways to further strengthen the work on peacebuilding. Thailand believes that peacebuilding and sustaining peace should be integrated through all pillars of the United Nations engagement at all stages of conflict and in all its dimensions. As we confront today's challenges from the COVID-19 pandemic, achieving the goal of sustaining peace has never been more important or relevant. Therefore, in order to achieve the goal of sustaining peace more effectively, we must calibrate our ambitions to match our strengths and needs, enhance and modernize our capacities, and stay relevant.
