Mr. Ivanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): While I am in the United States, I should like
first of all, on behalf of the leadership and the people
of Russia, to express profound condolences to the
Government and the people of the United States of
America following the tragic death of the crew of the
space shuttle Columbia. We share the grief of our
American partners, with whom we are actively
cooperating in outer space, primarily in the
implementation of the international space station
project.

The work of the astronauts is probably the best
demonstration of the shared fundamental interests of
humankind and of the need to pool our intellectual and
creative efforts in the name of the progress of
civilization.

Russia views today's meeting in the context of
the consistent efforts of the Security Council to find a
political settlement to the situation surrounding Iraq,
on the basis of complete and scrupulous compliance
with the relevant resolutions.

The unanimous adoption of Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002) and the deployment of
international inspectors in Iraq have demonstrated the
ability of the international community to act together in
the interests of attaining a common goal. We are
convinced that maintaining the unity of the world
community, primarily within the context of the
Security Council, and our concerted action, in strict
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and
the resolutions of the Security Council, are the most
reliable means of resolving the problem of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq through political means.

There is no doubt that we all want to resolve this
problem. It was with that in mind that we listened very
closely to the presentation given by Secretary of State
Powell. Russia continues to believe that the Security
Council - and, through it, the entire international
community - must have all of the information it needs
in order to determine whether or not there are
remaining weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.

The information given to us today definitely will
require very serious and thorough study. Experts in our
countries must immediately begin to analyse it and
then draw the appropriate conclusions. The main point
is that this information must immediately be handed
over for processing by the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)

and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
including through direct on-site verification during the
inspections in Iraq.

Baghdad must give the inspectors answers to the
questions that we heard in the presentation given by the
United States Secretary of State. We appeal once again
to all States immediately to hand over to the
international inspectors any information that can help
them discharge their responsible mandate.

The information provided today by the United
States Secretary of State once again convincingly
indicates that the activities of the international
inspectors in Iraq must be continued. They alone can
say to what extent Iraq is complying with the demands
of the Security Council. They alone can help the
Security Council work out and adopt carefully
balanced decisions - the best possible decisions.

The statements made by Mr. Blix and by
Mr. ElBaradei in this very Chamber on 27 January
show that a unique inspection mechanism has been
deployed in Iraq which has everything it needs to
ensure compliance with resolution 1441 (2002) and
other Security Council resolutions. This great potential
must be used to the fullest.

The Security Council and all its members must do
everything they can to support the inspection process.
Russia, for its part, intends to continue actively to
promote the creation of the best possible conditions for
the work of the international inspectors in Iraq. In
particular, we are prepared to provide an aircraft for
aerial monitoring and, if need be, additional inspectors
as well.

Russia welcomes the continuation of dialogue
between the Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC and
the Director General of the IAEA with Iraq on
outstanding unresolved issues. We hope that this
dialogue will be extremely concrete and productive. It
is facilitated, inter alia, by the fact that work has been
carried out according to the timetable set out in
resolution 1284 (1999), which should make the
international inspections and monitoring even more
systematic and effective, especially with respect to
clarifying key disarmament tasks by the end of March
of this year.

It is perfectly obvious that the work of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA can be effective only with
full cooperation in good faith from Iraq. Iraq should be
the first to be concerned about providing definitive
clarity on the question of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems. That is the only way to
reach a political settlement, including the lifting of the
sanctions on Iraq. Baghdad should fully realize how
crucial this is and do everything in its power so that the
international inspectors can carry out their mandate.

Recently, we have often heard the expression that
time is running out for a settlement to the question of
Iraq. Of course, resolution 1441 (2002) aims to quickly
achieve practical results, but it does not set out any
concrete time frame. The inspectors alone can advise
the Security Council on how much time they need to
carry out the tasks entrusted to them. In this respect,
we cannot rule out the possibility that at some stage the
Security Council may need to adopt a new resolution,
or perhaps more than one resolution. The main point is
that our efforts should continue to be aimed at doing
everything possible to facilitate the inspection process,
which has proven its effectiveness and which makes it
possible to implement Council decisions by peaceful
means.

Unfortunately, the current situation concerning
Iraq is far from being the last problem whose solution
we will all still have to work on. The international
community of the twenty-first century is confronting
new global threats and challenges requiring a unified
response from all States. A graphic example of that
approach was the creation of the broad coalition to
combat the primary and most dangerous threat of our
time: international terrorism. It is precisely because of
the unity of the world community that initial success
has been achieved in combating that scourge. However,
it is perfectly obvious that we are only beginning a
very difficult battle with terrorism. And the
information from the United States Secretary of State
about the activities of Al Qaeda is further corroboration
of that fact.

The unity of the world community will continue
to be the principal guarantee of the effectiveness of the
world's action. It is precisely unity that is essential in
our approach to all problems, however complicated
they may be. Tactical differences may arise, it is true.
And probably there will be quite a few of them, given
the complexity of the tasks we need to resolve. But
they must not overshadow the strategic goals that are in
the interests of our common security and stability.

