Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank Special
Representative Farid Zarif for his important briefing.
We thank Prime Minister lvica Dacie and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaci for their compelling statements.

We welcome the peace and normalization
agreement signed by Serbia and Kosovo on 19 April
this year. The agreement is indeed a landmark. The
two Prime Ministers have underlined that this is a
historic moment for the two countries to improve
relations and forge good-neighbourly ties. Leaders on
both sides have shown courage and foresight to reach
out, explore common ground and make the necessary
compromises. They have succeeded against heavy
odds. We congratulate them and the people of the two
countries for their achievement. It should signal a new
dawn in the region.

We appreciate High Representative Catherine
Ashton for her skilful mediation which made the
Agreement possible. We salute the European Union for
its steadfast commitment to peace in the Balkans.

The signing of the agreement increases the
prospects of reconciliation between Belgrade and
Pristina and promotes peace in the region. It has a built-
in potential to save future generations of Serbs and
Kosovars from the scourge of strife. It is an opportunity
for the region to transcend the narrative and the reality
of ethnic cleansings.

The ratifications of the agreement by the Parliaments
of Serbia and Kosovo demonstrate the collective desire
ofthe people on both sides to resolve outstanding issues

and move towards a common European future. We laud
the undertaking that neither side will block each others'
path towards integration with the European Union. The
implementation of the agreement is as important as its
signing. We urge both sides to conclude arrangements
for implementing the agreement. They should not be
deterred by those who seek to obstruct the path ofpeace.

It is important for the leaders to build support
for the agreement among their communities and
constituencies. The holding of elections in northern
Kosovo in October 2013 and the integration of Serbs
into the national mainstream are important benchmarks.
Ethnic divisions and barriers must blur over time.

We are glad to learn that the situation in Kosovo is
generally calm. That opportunity should be used to let
peace and stability grow, but we should also heed the
warnings by Special Representative Zarif and Prime
Minister Dacie that stability in Kosovo is fragile.

In the implementation phase, therefore, close
coordination between NATO, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) will be extremely important. UNMIK,
under the effective leadership of Special Representative
Zarif, has an especially key role to play. We hope that
the leadership of both countries will continue to find
solutions to all outstanding problems and move their
people away from the legacy of conflict to cooperation.
Rapprochement should lead to new bonds between
the two neighbours. The Agreement also gives fresh
ground to the Council to bridge differences on Kosovo.

Pakistan recognized Kosovo's statehood last year.
We sincerely hope that the people of Kosovo will grow
and prosper in a stable environment as they rebuild their
nation into a unitary and functional State. Pakistan
wishes both States well. This is a historic moment. It
must be captured by all, but primarily by Serbia and
Kosovo.

