We wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Council. We appreciate your efforts and those of your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China, in guaranteeing the continuity of the Council's work and adopting innovative working methods in the face of unprecedented procedural challenges, in particular to ensure that those challenges did not prevent this very important meeting from going ahead. We also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his comprehensive briefing and valuable efforts. The debate on the situation in the Middle East has taken on a particular urgency with the crisis unleashed by the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. The region is particularly vulnerable to its devastating effects, in terms both of public health and of its potential political and socioeconomic impact, compounded by humanitarian crises, faltering economies and the destruction and frailty of the health sector caused by the region's conflicts and crises. A further difficulty is how to cope with the potential spread of the virus in refugee and displaced persons camps and in communities that have been devastated by violence. The spread of the virus, which threatens us all, should serve to encourage a rapprochement in the region, to promote the search for solutions to crises and tensions and the cessation of hostilities, and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Qatar supports the efforts towards and calls of the United Nations for a ceasefire so that we might focus on addressing dangers of the pandemic. It also commends France, Tunisia and the other members of the Security Council for their efforts to promote the adoption of a resolution on the COVID-19 pandemic, which is of the utmost importance. Qatar has treated this cross-border threat with all due seriousness and shown that it is eminently prepared to deal with it. It wasted no time in taking a number of precautionary measures at the national level, making sure that the health sector had sufficient capacity to handle coronavirus cases. It has also taken urgent and long- term measures to address the economic impact of the pandemic and to ensure a high degree of food security. At the international level, in accordance with the principle of shared responsibility and cooperation in facing global crises, Qatar has sent material aid to help countries affected by the pandemic and established air bridges for the rapid transport of critical medical equipment and to airlift people stranded in areas hit by the virus and United Nations personnel to their home countries. It has played an active role in facilitating their transit through Hamad International Airport. Qatar Airways has continued to operate, especially in humanitarian cases, at a time of restrictions on international aviation. The call for definitive solutions to the region's crises necessarily includes the longest-standing of them all, the Palestinian question. Qatar reaffirms its position of principle in support of any efforts sincerely undertaken to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace and a resolution of the Palestinian question in all its facets, in line with international law and the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations. There is no alternative to a peaceful, negotiated settlement between the two sides based on the agreed terms of reference; the internationally recognized resolutions; the principle of land for peace; the Arab Peace Initiative; the achievement of a two- State solution leading to the creation of an independent and viable State of Palestine within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living alongside Israel in security and peace; an end to the occupation of all Arab territories; a guarantee that the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people will be upheld; and a just solution to the refugee issue. That requires the removal of obstacles that stand in the way of a solution, such as the ongoing occupation and settlement activities; illegal attempts to annex territory; measures that affect the character, legal status and demographic composition of Jerusalem; and all practices of the occupation authorities that contravene international law and United Nations resolutions. Mindful of its responsibilities, Qatar has joined international partners in accelerating efforts to create conditions conducive to peace, including by helping to alleviate the difficult humanitarian and economic situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. The spread of the COVID-19 is an additional threat and burden, in particular for the Gaza Strip, which has been exhausted by a stifling blockade. His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, has therefore directed that $150 million in financial aid, including support to combat the pandemic, be provided to the Palestinians in Gaza over a period of six months as a contribution to joint worldwide efforts to confront this global challenge. That assistance is in addition to the humanitarian and development aid allocated to address urgent and long-term needs in Gaza in the areas of education, electricity supply, infrastructure improvements, housing and funding to create jobs, along with tangible contributions in support of the activities and programmes of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Those endeavours reflect the country's principled support for the Palestinian people until such time as it can exercise all its legitimate rights. The Syrian crisis has entered its tenth year, and the Syrian people is still waiting for this painful chapter in its country's history to come to an end and for its unity, sovereignty and independence to be preserved. Attempts to impose a military solution cannot prosper and will lead only to humanitarian catastrophes, as has recently been demonstrated in north-western Syria, where the targeting of civilians has led to the largest wave of displacement since the crisis began, accompanied by gross violations of international humanitarian law, including the targeting of health facilities, which are supposed to be off limits to attack, according to the summary of the report of the United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry into certain incidents in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic since 17 September 2018 involving facilities on the United Nations deconfliction list and United Nations- supported facilities (S/2020/278, annex). The only way forward is through a political solution leading to a political transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, in accordance with the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex); the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) in its entirety; and measures to ensure that the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity are held to account and brought to justice. In Libya, people are yearning for security and stability after a prolonged period of great human suffering. The military operations against Tripoli and the targeting of the internationally recognized legitimate Government by Haftar's forces have posed a serious threat to the country's unity and stability. His forces have committed grave violations of international humanitarian law, the latest of which was a rocket attack on a hospital equipped to treat coronavirus patients in the capital. We therefore call again on all sides involved to put the interests of the Libyan people ahead of all else, to respect its desire for a peaceful solution and the preservation of its country's unity, to overcome human suffering, especially given the threat posed by the coronavirus pandemic, and to support efforts to stop the violence, achieve national consensus and implement the resolutions of the Security Council. The humanitarian and economic suffering afflicting the people of Yemen is nothing short of a tragedy, and the need to end it has become more pressing than ever. The basic needs of all Yemenis must be met and action must be taken to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid as a matter of urgency, especially given the threat posed 85/99 86/99 by the coronavirus pandemic. In order to truly resolve this human tragedy, an end must be brought to the crisis through comprehensive dialogue aimed at achieving a political solution and national reconciliation on the basis of resolution 2216 (2015), preserving the country's unity and restoring its security and stability. We support the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen in his efforts to implement his mandate. The situation in the region has been further complicated, and a pall cast over its security and stability, by an unjustifiable and artificial crisis that was manufactured on spurious grounds by States that arbitrarily imposed a blockade on and adopted illegal, unilateral measures against my country in June 2017. Since then, the malicious intent of that provocative and misleading campaign against Qatar has been revealed, as has the vacuity of the lies upon which it was based. The plan to defame Qatar and its sovereign decision-making has proved to be a miscalculation and the policy of sowing division among kindred peoples and wrecking regional solidarity and cooperation, which are needed now more than ever in the face of the coronavirus pandemic, has failed. Such illegal, unilateral measures undermine cooperation and have a direct impact on all the region's States and peoples as they seek to confront the spread of the pandemic. It has thus become a matter of still greater urgency to lift the illegal and unjust blockade imposed on Qatar and to remove the restrictions on the entry of Qatari aircraft into the airspace of the blockading countries. As Qatar has stated in the complaint filed with the International Civil Aviation Organization, those measures violate international law and the provisions of the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation. Despite those ongoing policies and measures against it, Qatar has stood by its principles, which are grounded in respect for international law and the Charter of the United Nations, and has successfully petitioned the international legal system, first and foremost the International Court of Justice, to confront those unjust measures, which are a flagrant violation of the Charter, the principles of international law, international agreements and covenants, and human rights. In accordance with its well-known policy of resolving disputes through dialogue, mediation and friendly relations among States, Qatar has consistently stressed that it is prepared to resolve the crisis peacefully through constructive, unconditional dialogue based on mutual respect that preserves the sovereignty of States. It has unfailingly commended the earnest efforts of His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the kindred State of Kuwait, while the other side has continued to reject dialogue. In conclusion, we call on the international community to reject any attempt to provoke crises, use underhanded means of eroding stability or jeopardize regional and international solidarity. We need such solidarity in order to confront a pandemic that threatens us all without distinction, and to address the many challenges and threats facing all humanity.
