Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing. I
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury
Fedotov, for his briefing. I commend Ambassador
Tanin for his statement and wish him every success in
his new appointment.

A year ago, the coalition Government assumed
its duties to lead a new transformation decade in
Afghanistan for the period 2015-2024. That period is
crucial to building a strong foundation for the State and
to demonstrating firm national leadership and a sense of
ownership. There is a sense of progress, albeit difficult
and slow. Yet it has been marred by the fiercest fighting
by the Taliban in many years, thereby undermining the
regional integration of Afghanistan and leading to poor
economic growth, corruption and weakness in the rule
of law.

We echo the calls for bolder reforms that would
underpin the importance of the rule of law, human
rights, accountability and justice. We commend the
Government's endeavours to continue with reforms and
to finalize senior appointments. The public confidence
of Afghans will grow with administrative reforms that
promote capacity-building in anti-corruption, political
participation and the civil service. We regret, however,
that nominations for the first female candidates for
a seat on the Supreme Court and for the Minister of
Defence were rejected by the Wolesi Jirga.
The United Nations has been in Afghanistan
for over 50 years. At this stage, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), United
Nations agencies and the international community
remain important to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. UNAMA's field presence in remote
regions of the country has been vital to achieving
peace, self-reliance and growth. The Tripartite
Commission, established under resolution 2210 (2015),
has submitted its recommendations to the Council (see S/2015/713, annex). We look forward to discussing how
best United Nations agencies can assist the country in
the future. Too many of the challenges in Afghanistan
are of a transnational nature, and we have just heard
briefings in that regard. Therefore, increased emphasis
on UNAMA's political good-offices role in the region
will be required.

The increased and indiscriminate targeting of
civilians by the Taliban and terrorists and their deep
involvement in the drugs trade are very disconcerting.
Civilian casualties continue to grow, and the conflict
has become deeply entrenched. In just the past few
months, the geographic scope of suicide bombings and
complex attacks has spread beyond Zabul, Hilmand and
Kabul to many other areas. Children have increasingly
been killed, in disregard of international law, which
prohibits attacks against civilians.

While we commend the resolve of the Afghan
national defence and security forces, we underline the
further need for the Government to maintain its focus
on building the capacity of those forces. The NATO-
led Resolute Support Mission, which is providing
training, advice and assistance, plays a significant role
in that regard. Exploratory negotiations between the
Taliban and the Afghan Government - a step towards
peace - has stirred hopes in Afghanistan. An inclusive
peace deal should remain an ultimate objective, and we
urge regional partners to support President Ghani's
efforts and to follow up on the direct talks in July in
Murree, Pakistan.

Security challenges undermine economic
development, and poverty is rampant, as every third
Afghan lives below the poverty line. The lack of
economic opportunities and alternative livelihoods, the
debts of farmers and the lack of access to credit have
created fertile ground for the cultivation of poppies.
Afghanistan accounts for a staggering 85 per cent of
global opium production. We also note with concern
Mr. Fedotov's warning about a sharp increase in drug
addiction and the concurrent dangers of HIV/AIDS
in Afghanistan. The launch of the Afghanistan Drug
Reporting System on 23 June, in collaboration with
UNODC and the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, might
prove to be a positive contribution.

Poverty goes hand in hand with illiteracy.
Only 17 per cent of Afghan women are able to read.
Afghanistan sadly ranks as one of the worst countries
for women in terms of access to education and health
care and pervasive domestic violence against women.
The Afghan Government has taken some steps, and
we welcome the launch of its national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, for the period 2015-2022, as well as President
Ghani's pledge to ensure women's participation in the
peace process at all its stages. We also note the progress
made towards the establishment of police women
councils.

As was said earlier in this debate, restoring
confidence in the electoral system and the independence
of electoral bodies and the establishment of a voter
registry are key. The agreement between President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah to establish the
Special Electoral Reform Commission is a welcome
step. We urge Afghan leaders to set the date for
parliamentary elections without delay.

Regional efforts to establish peace and stability will
remain critical. We support the recently held Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, the
sixth such high-level ministerial meeting. Encouraging
efforts have been made by Afghanistan and Pakistan,
and we stress the importance of further constructive
steps.

Lithuania has contributed to the multinational
efforts in Afghanistan since 2005, and we will remain
a steadfast partner to Afghanistan. We stand ready to
support the people of Afghanistan. We look forward to
resolute actions and strong leadership in Afghanistan,
because the responsibility for the future of the country
rests with Afghans.

