Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I take the floor to express
our grave concern over the prevailing situation in the
Gaza Strip and to reiterate our solidarity with the
Palestinian people. Pakistan shares their pain and
suffering in these exceptionally trying circumstances.

The besieged populations of Gaza, who were
originally dispossessed and driven from their own
homes by the Israeli occupation, are being tormented
once again by a brutal military campaign by the
occupying Power. For 12 days now, the international
community has witnessed in shock and horror the
unimaginable human tragedy and grave humanitarian
crisis that have unfolded in Gaza as a result of the
callous, excessive and indiscriminate use of force by
Israel.
9

The killing of any civilian on either side is
unacceptable. We have called for an end to the firing of
rockets on Israel. Those actions do not serve the
Palestinian cause in any way. However, attempts to
justify the overwhelming force and massively
disproportionate response by Israel to those rockets are
misplaced. Such attempts seem to try to mask the

origins of the conflict, the root cause - that is, the
occupation, human rights violations and the collective
punishment of the Palestinian people - and the

obvious frustration of an oppressed and deprived
population languishing under the stranglehold and
blockades of the occupying Power.

The colossal scale of death and destruction caused
by this campaign of terror especially targeted against
civilians and the infrastructure in Gaza has been widely
reported and documented by the international media,
human rights and humanitarian organizations and the
United Nations. Nothing has been spared - homes,
civilian facilities, places of worship, civilian shelters
and even United Nations schools. Indeed, in this
precision targeting and so-called smart bombing, among
the hundreds martyred and the thousands injured are
scores of women and children. Those actions cannot be
justified under any pretext whatsoever. They are in
flagrant violation of international law and of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. There should be
accountability for these violations.

Together with the entire international community,
the Government and the people of Pakistan have
strongly condemned this aggression and the spilling of
innocent blood in Gaza. We have appealed for the
cessation of hostilities and violence and support all
efforts to that end. We believe that the use of force not
only contravenes international principles and norms; it
is also counterproductive, as past experience has
proved. The failure to stop the aggression will only
perpetuate the cycle of violence and foment
desperation, anger and extremism. We take note of the
reprieve in attacks, and we sincerely hope that it
becomes permanent. The resumption of attacks, with
the resultant civilian casualties, however, is not
acceptable.

From the broader perspective, we are seriously
concerned that the deteriorating situation in Gaza as a
result of the Israeli attacks could lead to an escalation
of tensions in the region and undermine the efforts for
promoting a peaceful, just and durable settlement of
10
the question of Palestine, which is the key to achieving
a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

The crisis in Gaza requires an urgent, collective
and effective response from the international
community. It cannot wait while innocent people
continue to be killed. In accordance with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council was expected
to galvanize and lead such a response. Yet the Council
has once again failed to act. To be truthful, it has not
been allowed to act. It has failed to recognize the
international condemnation of the situation in Gaza. It
has been unable to capitalize on the worldwide backing
for an immediate ceasefire and to support the numerous
ongoing efforts by regional and international partners
to secure peace. It has failed to reciprocate the sincere
and constructive approach and proposals by the Arab
Group, whose high-level delegation is currently with
us.

Under the circumstances, the silence and the
inaction of the Council are inexplicable and are a
further blow to its already questioned credibility and
legitimacy - a point that was repeatedly raised by
many delegations in the debate yesterday. Ironically,
this foot-dragging by the Council comes in the wake of
its own much-touted resolution 1850 (2008), adopted
recently, on 16 December 2008. While noting the
shortcomings of that resolution, we had nevertheless
hoped that serious and sincere efforts would be
undertaken to realize the underlying commitment for
peace embodied in it. We believe the Council must
stand firmly behind its call on the parties to fulfil their
obligations and to refrain from any steps that could
undermine confidence or prejudice the outcome of the
negotiations. The Council must stop the Israeli
aggression in order to contribute to an atmosphere
conducive to peace and negotiations.

We support the calls for the Council to adopt,
without further delay, a resolution that should compel
Israel to immediately stop its aggression, demand an
immediate and permanent ceasefire and its full respect
by both parties, provide for a complete lifting of the
siege of Gaza and opening of the border crossings,
ensure unhindered and safe access and conditions for
humanitarian work, establish a mechanism to ensure
the protection of the civilian population and the
monitoring of the ceasefire, and promote intra-
Palestinian unity and reconciliation.
09-20163

In that regard, we support the draft resolution
submitted by Libya on behalf of the Arab Group, which
is also consistent with the final communique of the
extraordinary meeting of the Executive Committee of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) at
the level of foreign ministers, held in Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia, on 3 January 2009.

We would also like to note that, in coordination
with the Arab Group, the African Group and the
Non-Aligned Movement, the OIC Group in Geneva has
requested a special session of the Human Rights
Council on 9 January to address the grave violations of
human rights in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the aggression on the occupied Gaza Strip.

Together with these steps, the international
community must rededicate its attention and redouble
its efforts towards the larger objective of a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East and the
resolution of the Palestinian question on the basis of
international law and the full implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and agreements,
the obligations of the parties and the framework
provided by the Madrid terms of reference, the Road
Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We would like to conclude by reiterating
Pakistan's steadfast and complete support for the
achievement of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to exercise self-determination and sovereignty
in their independent, viable State of Palestine, on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital.

