Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): care d'Ivoire would like to thank Mr. Angelino
Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), on behalf of his country, Italy, for his briefing
on the programme of his chairship during his mandate.
We welcome the convening of this meeting, which is
part of the overall framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in the
area of international peace and security, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

The work of the OSCE in Europe and that of the
Economic Community of West African States, for
example, in West Africa, shows clearly that regional
organizations can be effective tools for supporting the
United Nations in conflict prevention and resolution.
We need hardly recall the OSCE's peacekeeping and
international security efforts, which are a major part of
preventive diplomacy in its area of remit. In that regard,
my delegation commends the ongoing support that the
organization provides to the mechanisms established
to resolve the conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh,
Abkhazia and South Ossetia and to advance the peace
talks concerning Transnistria and Georgia. We also
appreciate its role in helping to stabilize Kosovo and
monitor the implementation of the Minsk agreements
on eastern Ukraine.

Cote d'Ivoire calls for enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE, which, with
its 57 member States, continues to be one of the most
significant collective-security entities in the world. We
welcomes the priorities outlined by the Chairperson-in-
Office, which are geared towards dialogue, ownership
and responsibility and based on a proactive approach
to security, encompassing its political, military,
economic, environmental and human aspects. We also
welcome the focus on migration issues and the fight
against corruption and new transnational threats, such
as terrorism, cybercrime and trafficking in persons.

In conclusion, the delegation of Cote d'Ivoire
wishes Italy every success in implementing its priorities
in chairing the OSCE with the aim of achieving the
organization's goals and objectives.

