Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I followed with great interest the statements
made by my colleagues members of the Council, and I
noticed that some of the statements calling on the
Syrian Government to scrupulously implement the
provisions of the resolution that has just been adopted
are themselves not in consonance with those provisions,
as they use - probably owing to a lack of awareness -
the term "regime" in referring to the Syrian
Government. I studied the resolution but I did not come
across the term "regime" therein. I saw the words
"Syrian Government".

Yesterday morning, I met with the Secretary-
General and his senior aides. I appealed to him to
continue his good offices, as mandated of him by the
Charter, and to further engage positively in the efforts
being made to guarantee the desired national political
solution, with Syrian leadership. That is crux of the
Annan plan. I should now like to take this opportunity
to address to the Council the same appeal I addressed to
the Secretary-General yesterday morning.

Since the beginning of the crisis, the Syrian
Government has been open to any sincere and impartial
efforts and initiatives to help it emerge from the current
crisis affecting the Syrian Government, State and
people, while preserving its sovereignty without
prejudice to the independent national resolution of the
crisis and guaranteeing its stability and security.

My country has demonstrated considerable
cooperation and commitment vis-a-vis the efforts of
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan, based on our interest
in achieving a peaceful political solution to the Syrian
crisis. The Syrian Government has implemented the
part of the Annan plan relating to its responsibilities.
We continue to inform the Special Envoy regularly in
writing of the measures being taken in that regard on a
daily basis, including the release of a number of the
detainees who were not responsible for crimes, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the affected
regions in cooperation with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and the granting
of visas to a great many members of the media - over
600 all told.

I am pleased to announce today, on behalf of my
country's Government, that Syria has informed
Mr. Annan today of its implementation of article 2 of
the plan, as well as all of the subsidiary paragraphs of
that article, namely, (a), (b) and (c).

The forces responsible for maintaining public
order and the police forces will ensure the maintenance
of security, order and law and will exercise the utmost
degree of restraint. They will be prepared, as the
Governments of the countries represented here and
those of any State of the world would be, to carry out
their duties in responding to armed terrorist groups if
they continue to attack citizens, Government forces and
public and private property and if they continue to
commit acts of violence. Our national army and armed
forces will remain prepared to defend our homeland's
territory and borders against any aggression, ensuring
the protection of strategic centres and sites such as
ports, airports, international routes, oil refineries and
infrastructure facilities.

The dispatching of impartial monitors to the
Syrian Arab Republic was a basic Syrian demand,
which stems from a position of strength and self-
confidence. The motive behind that demand is the fact
that global public opinion is well aware of the reality of
the situation and monitors the crimes of armed terrorist
groups, disregarding political and media
misinformation.

That Syrian position was initially demonstrated by
the reception of the team of the Arab League monitors,
which submitted an objective report documenting the
crimes of terrorists against our people and institutions.
This prompted the Governments of Qatar and Saudi
Arabia to withdraw their monitors, which led to the
termination of the mission, fully ignoring the mission's
report.

My Government has reiterated once again its
Willingness to cooperate and its openness by recently
signing, in Damascus, the preliminary agreement that
governs the work of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in the framework
of respecting Syrian sovereignty and guaranteeing the
commitment of all parties. Our Government is ready to
sign the protocol regulating the deployment of the
United Nations monitors when the United Nations is
ready to do so, on the basis of the preliminary
agreement.

My country has a vested interest in the success of
the work of the Mission, given our keenness to achieve
stability, safety and security for our country and our
citizens. We would like to state here that the monitors
must carry out their work on the basis of objectivity,
impartiality and professionalism.

Some parties have responded to this clear-cut
commitment by the Syrian Government by carrying out
a hysterical campaign of questioning, which clearly
reveals their bad intentions in principle towards the
Syrian Arab Republic, its homeland and its people. This
demonstrates that they are frustrated by the initial
return of stability and calm to Syria.

Armed terrorist groups met that Syrian
commitment to the Annan plan with a lengthy series of
violations that undermine the Annan plan. They have
escalated their terrorist acts, their killings of civilians
and the forces of public order, and their destruction of
public and private property. We have regularly provided
Mr. Annan, the Secretary-General and the President of
the Council with documented information on the total
number of violations perpetrated by the armed groups
since the 12 April ceasefire went into effect. As of
yesterday, those violations now total 593 in number.

In that regard, we are gravely concerned about the
curious ongoing disregard for the actions of those
groups, which coincides with a systemic political
misinformation campaign demonizing the Syrian
authorities and the Syrian army and accusing the Syrian
State of the crimes perpetrated by those groups by
turning the facts on their heads while saying nothing
about the crimes perpetrated by them.

All of that is designed to bring about the failure of
the Annan plan and to hold Syrian authorities
responsible for that failure, with a View to initiating
military action under humanitarian pretexts. That is
similar to the mendacious allegations that led to the
destruction of Libyan infrastructure and the
assassination of 150,000 civilians at the hands of NATO
forces with the participation of Qatar.

Once again, Syria would like to reiterate its hope
that Mr. Annan and the Security Council will address
the crisis in a comprehensive manner, given the need to
redouble efforts to achieve commitments by the armed
groups and those standing behind them so that violence
will cease.

The Syrian Government's support for the Annan
mission is not enough to bring about its success. In
word and deed, international, regional, Arab and other
groups must cease to fund, arm and train the armed
groups, desist from encouraging them to continue their
terrorist acts and refrain from inciting the opposition to
reject the comprehensive national dialogue.
Some of those who predict the failure of the
Annan plan are doing their best to ensure that it does. A
case in point is the statement made by the Emir of
Qatar. Two days after the adoption of resolution 2042
(2012), he stated that the chance of the Annan plan
succeeding did not exceed 3 per cent.

Creating parallel tracks to the Annan plan would
undermine it and squander the efforts made to achieve a
peaceful solution to the crisis. That includes the
conferences attended by a number of States in Tunis,
Istanbul and Paris, among others, at which alternative
plans outside international legitimacy were sanctioned
on the arming of the opposition and imposing sanctions,
while rejecting peaceful solutions. Depriving the Syrian
people of stability and development constituted the
considerable triumph to which they aspire.

It is paradoxical that, following Syria's openness
in dealing with the initiative, yet another parallel
conference has been held to exacerbate the crisis, take
the solution out of the political framework and
undermine any positive efforts to stop the bloodshed.

I would like to emphasize an absolute truth: we
reject interference in our internal affairs. We are keen to
protect the sovereignty of our homeland while pressing
ahead with the process of reform and comprehensive
national dialogue, and we reject any type of
dependency, trusteeship and direct or indirect
occupation. Syrians are well aware that the forces that
bear grudges against their country target all Syrians,
trading on their suffering and legitimate aspirations in a
bloody stock market in order to protect the interests of
Israel, its defenders and allies.

On this occasion, the Ambassador of Germany
said that his country is eager to protect minorities in
Syria. In a previous statement, I said that there are no
minorities or majorities in Syria, just one Syrian people
proud of its religious and cultural diversity. That people
does not want any radical wahabi or salafist factions to
penetrate its ranks vis-a-vis terrorist trends propagated
by Saudi Arabia and Qatar.

