Mr. Qin Huasun (China)(interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese Government has all along attached
importance to and supported the peace process in Haiti,
as well as the positive efforts made by the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, the
Organization of American States, Latin American
countries and the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) in restoring peace and stability in Haiti, and we
hope that the Haitian people will soon be able to live in
happiness and peace. It is in this spirit that the Chinese
delegation has voted in favour of an overwhelming
majority of the resolutions on this question that have been
adopted by the Council so far.

We are pleased to note that substantive progress has
been made in the Haitian peace process, thanks to the
help of the United Nations and the international
community. Parliamentary, local and presidential elections
in Haiti have concluded smoothly. The President-elect has
officially taken office. The task of creating a police force
in Haiti has been completed. The security situation in
Haiti has also improved markedly. The primary task now
facing Haiti is rehabilitation and reconstruction. The
question of security is undoubtedly important for Haiti's
development. However, both the maintenance of a secure
environment and economic development can ultimately
depend only on the Haitian people themselves. The help
of the international community in the process can play

 

only a supplementary and promotive role. In this regard,
other United Nations bodies and some countries can play a
proper role. At the same time, considering precedents in
other United Nations peace-keeping operations and the
current serious financial difficulties of the United Nations,
we believe that the United Nations Mission in Haiti should
withdraw as scheduled.

However, considering the recommendation of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali, the request of the
Haitian Government and the attitude of the Latin American
and non-aligned countries on the question of UNMIH, the
Chinese delegation exercised maximum flexibility during
the Council's consultations and did its best to find a
compromise proposal. In view of the fact that the draft
resolution before us has basically incorporated the
amendments by the Chinese delegation, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

The Chinese Government will, as always, support the
peace process in Haiti and is ready to establish and develop
friendly relations of cooperation with Haiti on the basis of
the United Nations Charter and the five principles of
peaceful coexistence. We are convinced that the Haitian
people, under the leadership of their new President, His
Excellency Mr. Preval, will be able to build Haiti into a
peaceful, stable and prosperous country, thus making their
contribution to peace and development in Latin America
and the world as a whole.

