Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): As a newly elected
member of the Security Council, Bangladesh takes up its
responsibility with great humility and a strong sense of
commitment and determination.

Bangladesh believes it is very fitting for Vice-
President Al Gore of the United States to preside over the
first Security Council meeting of the new millennium. His
presence here is indicative of the strong commitment of
the United States to the United Nations in general and to
Africa in particular.

Coincidentally, but very appropriately, for the
Security Council the twenty-first century is commencing
with the presidency of the United States. We commend
Ambassador Holbrooke for the initiative of devoting this
month to Africa. Bangladesh also expresses its deep
appreciation to Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock for his
leadership of the Council during the United Kingdom
presidency last month, and particularly for holding a
major debate on Africa. We thank him and other
members of the Council for facilitating the new incoming
members' presence at the informal consultations during
the month of December.

 

Bangladesh welcomes the initiative to discuss the
impact of AIDS on peace and security in Africa. This is a
recognition of the broader dimensions of security, a vision
that security in a changed world extends beyond its
conventional parameters. It is ultimately human security
that we are seeking; every individual - wherever he or she
may be - should feel safe and secure. We appreciate this
opportunity to speak at the first meeting of the Council on
this broad-based topic. A global culture of peace, we
believe, can ensure such an all-encompassing security of
countries and individuals.

AIDS is spreading fast. Its threat is global. It is a
threat to an entire generation - indeed, a threat to human
civilization as a whole. For much of the developing world,
the outlook is grim. For Africa, it is already a catastrophe.
Globally there are already 33 million people infected
with HIV. Two-thirds of them are in Africa. Last year the
disease killed 2.6 million people around the world, more
than in any previous year. Most of these deaths occurred in
sub-Saharan Africa. Life expectancy in this region has
dropped to a level not seen since the 1960s.

The AIDS pandemic is devastating many African
economies. Soaring death rates among the young are
crippling the growth of entire regions. Due to the high cost
of AIDS treatment, little is accessible to the poor. AIDS
leaves poor societies poorer still, and thus even more
vulnerable to infection. Experts project a loss of growth of
at least 1.4 per cent per year over the next 20 years.

The social impact of AIDS is staggering. Since 1981,
over 11 million children have been orphaned, 95 per cent
of them in Africa. As Secretary-General Kofi Annan has
said, AIDS is taking away not only Africa's present, but
also its future.

In many sub-Saharan countries, nearly half of the
armed forces are affected. Civilian law enforcement is
slumping as AIDS takes its toll on its personnel. This has
threatened safety, security and law and order both within
and beyond national boundaries. African military and
civilian police personnel play a crucial role in
peacekeeping. Their vulnerability to infection affects the
defence of peace.

We thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
statement this morning and for his proactive leadership in
combating AIDS in Africa, as manifested at the meeting
held at the United Nations Headquarters last month. The
United Nations agencies and civil society organizations, as
invaluable partners, deserve our appreciation for their
positive work in this area. The World Bank's contribution,
under the effective guidance of Jim Wolfensohn, is very
much recognized. We thank him in particular for his
focus on poverty and development in his statement this
morning.

Africa itself is leading the counter-attack against
AIDS. Its leadership is making a real effort to involve all
of society in the battle. Countries like Uganda, Botswana,
Lesotho, South Africa, Zimbabwe, Nigeria and Namibia
have shown what can be achieved.

The threat of AIDS is not confined only to Africa;
it is a threat to the global community. The epidemic was
a latecomer to Asia and the Pacific, but its spread has
been swift. It is predicted that in the years to come, the
number of people affected may grow exponentially.
In combating the scourge of HIV/AIDS, some
measures should get priority attention.

First, ongoing efforts need strengthening, with a
special emphasis on the young and on children. The target
set by the special session of the General Assembly on the
five-year review of the International Conference on
Population and Development (ICPD) to reduce infection
in young people aged 15 to 24 by one quarter before the
year 2005 should be foremost in our actions.

Secondly, new and sustained public-private
partnerships, such as the "Secure the Future" programmes
of southern Africa, with the commitment of $100 million
for the next five years from the private sector, need to be
forged.

Thirdly, the scientific community should receive full
support to speed up its work to develop effective
vaccines.

Fourthly, effective treatment should be made
available to people at prices that affected societies can
afford.

Fifthly and finally - and most importantly -
adequate resources should be made available to fight the
epidemic, to the development of preventive measures, and
to mitigate the harm already done.

In recent years, as we have seen, most conflicts have
been within States. These have causes and consequences.
There are both military and non-military threats to

 

security, and the collapse of social fabric and of State
structures is undeniably a peace and security concern. A
desperate situation can lead to desperate acts. As Peter Piot
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) has remarked, when it comes to Africa, AIDS
has killed more than 10 times as many people as armed
conflict. Mark Malloch Brown, in his statement this
morning, called it "the world's most dangerous insurgency".
To combat this, we need true solidarity and effective
strategy, not mere rhetoric.

The world will not be a secure place if its women and
men do not have security of the individual self. We are
glad that recognition has been accorded to a more
encompassing dimension of security. We hope that the
pioneering initiative of the United States will be pursued by
others in justified earnestness. We look forward to
discussing other non-military threats to peace and security,
including such overriding global priorities as poverty,
environmental degradation, drugs, organized crime and so
on. The world has changed, and the time has come to
extend the concept of security as well.

