Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset, Sir, to express my pleasure at
addressing the Council on behalf of Spain in this
important debate under the presidency of China, a
country for which we have great admiration.

I endorse the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. My remarks should therefore be
considered to be complementary to that statement.

I join in the congratulations offered to the
Chairpersons of the Security Council Committees -
Ambassadors Loj, Mayoral and Motoc - who, at this
meeting, have for the first time provided joint briefings
on the excellent work they are doing. I assure them of
Spain's complete cooperation, whenever it is needed,
as they pursue their important functions.

Spain attaches the utmost priority to the fight
against terrorism within the framework of the United
Nations. That priority was underscored once again by
the fact that Madrid was the venue, from 8 to 11
March - precisely one year after the terrible terrorist
attacks in our capital - of the International Summit on
Democracy, Terrorism and Security. The conference,
organized by the Club of Madrid - an entity
composed of over 50 former heads of State and
Government of democratic countries - sought as its
main objective the specific goal of promoting a
democratic and coordinated response to the global
threat of terror.

In Madrid, with the assistance and participation
of heads of State and Government, high officials -
including the Secretary-General of the United
Nations - and other important personalities, as well as
experts from throughout the world, the so-called
Madrid Agenda was unveiled. While drafted under the
exclusive responsibility of the Club of Madrid, that
document constitutes a call to action on political
leaders worldwide and a programme of action for
Governments, institutions, civil society and citizens,
based on the inalienable principles at the very heart of
the United Nations Charter and democratic societies.
The recommendations of the Madrid Agenda are a
powerful tool for raising awareness of and commitment
to counter-terrorism. They deserve to be incorporated
into and to enrich international debate and action led
by the United Nations.

The Madrid Agenda, the distribution of which
Spain has requested as an official document of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, has also
been incorporated into the agenda of the Ministerial
Conference of the Community of Democracies, to be
held late this month in Santiago, Chile. The Secretary-
General expressly chose the Madrid Summit as the
occasion to outline the basic principles of the United
Nations global strategy for fighting terrorism, in line
with the suggestion made by the High-Level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change in its report entitled
"A more secure world". In our view, the Madrid
strategy should be at the core of efforts to contribute,
inter alia, to improving the effectiveness and
coordination of agencies and organs of the United
Nations system, allowing an integrated approach to the
United Nations fight against terrorism.

In that regard, we believe that the current
momentum in the process of United Nations reform
should be exploited to take concrete and practical
steps.

We believe that, pending a restructuring of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, it would be
appropriate to take the initial step of unifying the
administrative support structures of the three
Committees. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, when adequately strengthened,
could be responsible for providing all three
Committees with the necessary assistance, taking care
in each case to act in accordance with the mandate of
the Committee concerned.

In a few months, the Council must consider the
renewal of the mandate of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We
believe that would be the right moment for the Council
to request from the Committee a report identifying the
obstacles it has encountered, things that could be
improved and gaps in the Committee's work in order to
improve and revitalize the Committee's functioning,
thus enhancing its effectiveness.

Technical assistance in that area should be
strengthened because, we must not forget, many
Member States face serious difficulties in fulfilling
their obligations under the Council's resolutions, not
due to any lack of political will but, in many cases,
simply as a result of a severe lack of resources. In that
context, we regret that the recent report of the
Secretary-General entitled "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005) did not take up the recommendation of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change to
provide such technical assistance through the work of
the Executive Directorate.

We should also briefly mention the importance of
resolution 1566 (2004), which remains to be promptly
and thoroughly implemented. With respect to the
working group established pursuant to that
resolution- to whose Chairman, Ambassador Baja,
we offer our fullest cooperation - we request that due
priority be given to providing the working group with
the technical support it requires. That task could also
be given to the Executive Directorate.

Finally, but most important, I cannot fail to refer
to the challenge described by the Secretary-General: to
pay greater attention to the victims of terrorism and to
ensure that their voices are heard. The international
community's recognition of the victims and their
families and its solidarity with them must be one of the
pillars upon which the United Nations bases its
strategy as it works actively for the adoption of
international measures and mechanisms for protection
and assistance. It is also necessary to work to
strengthen civil society's engagement in the fight
against terrorism by promoting the participation of
civil society groups, in particular victims associations,
at the national and international level. Making that
duty of solidarity with the victims of terrorism a reality
has already been suggested by the Security Council in
its resolution 1566 (2004) and by the Secretary-
General when he stressed that urgent measures must be
taken in that regard. It is our fervent hope that this will
be acted upon.

