Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation too would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his excellent briefing on the latest developments in the
political process in Syria. We also thank Ms. Sabah Al
Hallak, representative of civil society in Syria, for her
detailed briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire commends the mediation and good
offices efforts of the Special Envoy, which enabled the
work of the Constitutional Committee to be launched
in Geneva on 30 October in a constructive spirit. We
also applaud the willingness of the two co-chairs of the
Constitutional Committee to meet again in Geneva on
25 November.

Despite these positive developments, my delegation
believes that the establishment of the Constitutional
Committee is but one step in the political process
towards the resolution ofa conflict that has been going
on for more than eight years. That is why C6te d'Ivoire
calls on the international community and, first and
foremost the Council, to strongly support all actors in
their continued peace negotiations under the auspices
of the United Nations.

My country also reiterates the need for a complete
cessation ofhostilities in order to create an environment
conducive to the successful conduct of talks. In that
regard, we welcome the agreements signed between
Turkey and the United States and Turkey and the Russian
Federation on 17 and 22 October, respectively, with
regard to the cessation of the offensive against Kurdish
forces in north-eastern Syria. Those agreements,
in addition to the unilateral ceasefire declared on
31 August by the Russian Federation and Government
forces in Idlib province, seek to build the climate of
trust required for successful negotiations among the
Syrian parties.

In that context, my delegation remains concerned
about the persistence of sources of tension in north-
eastern Syria. We are also concerned about the military
escalation between Tel Aviv and Damascus, which could
exacerbate regional tensions and the already worrisome
security and humanitarian situations in Syria. My
country therefore urges both States to give priority to
dialogue in the pursuit of solutions to their differences.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire hopes that the work of
the Constitutional Committee will lead to the expected
outcomes of peace and lasting stability in Syria. In that
regard, we call on the Council to support the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to achieve a
political settlement of the Syrian conflict, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).

