Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President,
at the outset, I should like to express my sincere joy
at seeing you preside over the Security Council this
month. I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs for her valuable briefing. We can conclude from
that briefing that a new and comprehensive approach is
needed to guarantee the adoption of effective measures
in an attempt to put an end to the threat of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs).

We must also stress the centrality of disarmament
and non-proliferation efforts in maintaining
international peace and security. In light of the vital
importance that Egypt attaches to the disarmament and
non-proliferation of WMDs, and to seize this important
opportunity to discuss such a crucial issue in such an
important setting, I have decided, contrary to normal
practice, to deliver my statement today in English to
ensure the full clarity of my message.

(spoke in English)

Egypt has always been at the forefront of multilateral
efforts aimed at the disarmament and non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, which continue to
represent one of the most pressing threats to humankind
and to international peace and security. We highly
value the indispensable role of the Security Council
in addressing proliferation challenges and enforcing
the relevant Security Council resolutions and legal
framework governing the issue. However, we believe
that the Council's working methods in this area require
significant improvement. We should examine more
efficient and inclusive methods that would improve
the sense of ownership of the measures adopted, seek
a stronger utilization of the Secretary-General's good
offices, and always adopt decisions that reinforce the
concept that the ultimate aim of all measures adopted by
the Council is to achieve a peaceful political solution.

From a more comprehensive perspective, Egypt
reiterates its concern over the grave threat posed by the
continued existence ofnuclear weapons, and we reaffirm
that the total, verifiable and irreversible elimination of
such weapons represents the ultimate guarantee against
their proliferation and the ultimate warranty against
their use by States or non-State actors. Attaining this
goal largely depends on the implementation by the
nuclear weapon States of their obligations under article
6 of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and leading the efforts towards the
achievement of universal adherence to the Treaty, which
continues to represent the cornerstone of international
security and the core of today's disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture.

In spite of the evident tangible progress achieved in
the area of non-proliferation, progress towards nuclear
disarmament continues to be held hostage to construed
conceptions pertaining to strategic stability. It is time
for us, States Members of the United Nations, to have
an honest and inclusive discussion on the validity
and consistency of those arguments that imply that
the possession of nuclear weapons and reliance on
nuclear deterrence contribute to international security
and stability. In fact, a closer look at contemporary
non-proliferation challenges, including country-specific
cases, would clearly reveal that, one way or another,
those challenges flow from the continued existence
of nuclear weapons and the discriminatory nature of
the non-proliferation regime, which undermines its
credibility and effectiveness.

There is no doubt that, in a world free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, the
United Nations and the Security Council would have
been much better positioned to address non-proliferation
threats and cases of non-compliance in a more credible
and non-discriminatory manner. Practice has shown
that it is quite illusive to address non-proliferation
while disregarding disarmament, or selectively tackle
cases of non-compliance while deliberately ignoring
achieving the universality of the NPT.

Several recent remarkable developments, such
as the adoption of the Humanitarian Pledge, as well
as a landmark treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons,
are clear signs that the circumstances have changed
on the international stage - clear messages that the
non-nuclear-weapon States that have truly committed
themselves to the principles of disarmament and
non-proliferation are becoming increasingly impatient
with regard to the need to seriously address the gaps in
the prevailing regime and the discrimination embedded
therein, which was not intended to last forever at the
time of the NPT negotiations or at its entry into force.

Despite the extremely volatile nature of its region,
Egypt has proven its good intentions by becoming party
to the NPT and fully implementing its obligations, in
recognition of the vital role of the Treaty in international
security. We took those decisions in good faith because
we value human life and international security.
Furthermore, Egypt has always actively supported
and implemented all Security Council resolutions
aimed at addressing country-specific proliferation
concerns without discrimination, as well as combating
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.

Egypt continues to fully support the Council's role
in seeking a peaceful solution to address the nuclear
activities of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
which violate Security Council resolutions and which
we strongly condemn. We also support the Council's
supervision of Iran's compliance with its obligations, as
well as establishing credible facts regarding the parties
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

Nevertheless, the Middle East regrettably continues
to be one of the most evident examples of the threats
that the non-proliferation regime is facing, as well as
the selective manner in which the Security Council
has approached such threats. It is important to recall
that the Security Council has failed to implement the
stipulations of resolution 687 (1991), which contains an
explicit recognition of the objective of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.

It is therefore unsurprising that the region is
experiencing an unprecedented level of frustration,
especially among the Arab countries, due to the repeated
failures in implementing the agreed undertaking to
establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction. This is reflected in the
resolution on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 NPT
Review and Extension Conference, which represents an
integral part of the decision on the indefinite extension
of the Treaty. We remain greatly disappointed by the
decision of three States parties to the NPT to block
consensus on the final document of the 2015 NPT
Review Conference, thereby further eroding the
credibility of the Treaty.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our principled
position that such thematic, cross-cutting issues
pertaining to the enforcement of disarmament and
non-proliferation commitments should also be
addressed in a more inclusive manner and with the
active involvement of all Member States in all the
relevant organs of the United Nations. Collective
security for all is a necessary requirement now more
than ever to achieve the kind of sustainable peace and
development that we owe to future generations.

