Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Francois Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), and Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi, Secretary-
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States, for their comprehensive briefings.

Allow me to focus on three aspects: the political,
security and humanitarian situation in the region.

We commend the important work carried out
by UNOCA in terms of good offices, mediation and
preventive diplomacy as well as in support of the
United Nations and regional and subregional initiatives
to achieve peace and security in the region.

Nevertheless, the recent developments in Central
Africa highlight the volatile nature of the political,
security and social situation in the subregion. The root
causes of the aforementioned problems in this area
require an urgent response, especially by promoting
good governance and economic reforms.

Bearing in mind the upcoming elections at various
levels planned in several countries of the region, we
expect that the Governments of those States will work
towards the conduct of timely, inclusive, credible
and peaceful electoral processes and will ensure the
participation of women and young people.

The unstable situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the Central African Republic as
well as the recent developments in Cameroon are
of particular concern to us. Poland believes that
international and regional support for State-building
and stabilization in those countries are crucial, not
only from their own perspective but also from the
perspective of the entire subregion.

While we appreciate the achievements to date, we
are still concerned that the Lord's Resistance Army and
Boko Haram pose a serious threat to security across
significant parts of the region. That demonstrates that
international initiatives aimed at combating those
organizations require continued support, particularly
from the Multinational Joint Task Force and the African
Union Regional Task Force.

We condemn all acts of violence committed in
the central African region, including the recruitment
of children into military ranks and sexual and gender-
based violence. The conflicts and the unstable situation
in some central African States are the main cause of the
humanitarian crisis in the region. A proper response to
the challenges in that regard requires the smooth and
comprehensive coordination of all parties engaged in
maintaining stability and peace on the ground, as well
as a constructive dialogue with the local authorities.

Poland calls for the immediate cessation of all
attacks on humanitarian personnel, especially medical
staff working in crisis hospitals, and for allowing them
full access so as to carry out their mandate and deliver
essential aid to the affected people. We fully support the
actions undertaken by the United Nations, as well as the
European Union. At the same time, Poland recognizes
the key role of regional partners and organizations.
We commend their efforts to address the challenges to
peace and security and to enhance regional cooperation.

In conclusion, we share the reflections contained
in the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of UNOCA (S/2018/521). We would again
like to express our support for Special Representative
Mr. Fall and for the further extension of the mandate
of UNOCA.

