Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing today. We share many of the concerns that he
has raised, and the aide-memoire that we have gathered
to adopt today shows the weight of consideration that
the Security Council has given to this issue over the
years.

But I think we need to apply some perspective:
Have we really come far enough? Given the perilous
situation in which many civilian populations find
themselves today, it is imperative that the Security
Council proactively ensure that this issue remains at
the forefront of our work.

We are very grateful to the peacekeepers who
take on the vital protection function. But we should not
forget that it is the parties to an armed conflict who
bear the primary obligation under law to protect
civilians.

I want to say at the outset that I have listened
very carefully to the debate today, and I have also
listened to the national experiences that Council
colleagues have described. I must say that I do not
agree with all the characterizations of situations that
we have heard today. But I do not want to turn this of
all meetings into a political debate, so I will not go into
detail. I would simply like to place on record that we
do not share all those characterizations.

The Under-Secretary-General rightly led off with
Gaza, and this is very much at the forefront of
everyone's minds, as we have heard today. We
discussed it also in last week's meeting with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (see S/PV.6062). The civilian population now is all the
more vulnerable because it cannot flee. I would like to
join other Council members in reiterating the call for
an immediate and durable ceasefire, condemning all
acts of violence directed against civilians and
condemning all acts of terrorism. What we and others
need to see is the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009).

I would also like to pay tribute to the United
Nations and other workers who are trying to bring
stability, peace and help to Gaza in what are obviously
extremely difficult circumstances.

We have heard a number of speakers raise various
conflicts which are on our minds at the moment. In
addition to Gaza, I would like to bring up the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Events there
have emphasized the scale of the task we face.
Obligations are not being met. The Council has been
very clear that the primary task for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) is the protection of civilians. We
would like to see its unambiguous mandate in this
respect translated into action on the ground. We would
like to see the concept of operations adjusted to reflect
the priority that the Council attaches to the protection
of civilians. In turn, that requires an understanding of
the specific activities that peacekeepers can conduct to
turn Council language into reality.

A while ago, it was incumbent on NATO and
other nations to go into Bosnia to uphold the Dayton
Peace Agreement. I think that was one of the first
mandates in recent times to have had protection of
civilians as one of its core tasks. I would like to take
this opportunity to invite all Council members who, for
one reason or another, opposed robust language in
peacekeeping mandates on the protection of civilians
and who opposed chapter VII authority to back up
forces who undertake tasks for the protection of
civilians to reflect on whether their actions, whatever
the political justification may be, are actually, overall,
aiding the Council's work on protection of civilians.

The protection of civilians is not a role for which
many militaries have traditionally trained. The
implementation of Council directives on protection
have been met with adaptation and flexibility by
United Nations peacekeepers. We now have good
practice on which we can build, but we need a more
systematic approach on this to ensure that protection
issues are properly understood and that there is
comprehensive United Nations guidance on how
exactly to go about engaging in protection: what it
means to take given decisions on a given day on the
ground. We feel that practice here is somewhat
incomplete and that more training for troop
contributors in the field could be useful in that respect.

Afghanistan was mentioned by the Under-
Secretary-General and a number of other speakers. We
very much regret the civilian non-combatant deaths
and casualties there, and we send our condolences to
the victims. I want to make it clear that we do not
target civilians. We keep our procedures on targeting
under rigorous review, and we will continue to do so.
Other things that we have been discussing include
the informal Council expert group. We hope that we
can create such a group to help the Security Council,
under resolution 1674 (2006), to systematically address
protection issues. The aide-memoire can be an
important instrument underpinning the expert group's
considerations. Likewise, we support the United
Nations system's ongoing work to produce guidance
for peacekeepers, as I said earlier.

If we engaged in more systematic consideration
of protection issues, such as through an expert group,
that might also provide an opportunity for some
creative thinking about how to deal with uniquely
difficult situations. We heard about the Lord's
Resistance Army today; we too are very disturbed by
the recent reports of the high number of civilian
casualties that they have inflicted. I think that the
Permanent Representative of Uganda captured the
problem well when he talked about the need for the
Council to find some way to address non-State actors. I
hope that that could be a theme of ours in 2009.

I should like to conclude by mentioning the
responsibility to protect. The 2005 World Summit
Outcome is clear about the responsibility that falls to
the Council under the responsibility to protect. There is
not yet a unified view within the Council or within the
membership at large about what the responsibility to
protect means in practice, but I hope that the recent
work done in that area, including by representatives of
the Secretary-General, can shortly bring us to a
common understanding of what needs to be done as
part of our work to address the question of enhancing
the protection of civilians.

