Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): This afternoon the United States and the United
Kingdom started a military attack against Iraq which
violated the United Nations Charter and norms governing
international law. We were deeply shocked by this act, and
we condemn it.

It must be pointed out in particular that with the joint
efforts of the Secretary-General and the international
community, Iraq had resumed its cooperation with United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and progress
had also been made in verification efforts.

Against this backdrop, the unprovoked military action
of the two countries is completely groundless. We are
deeply concerned over the safety and security of the people
of Iraq and the United Nations staff in the country.

We also would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the remarks he made today on this question.

The Chinese delegation at the open debate this
morning on the question of the maintenance of peace and
security and post-conflict peace-building stated that we are
against power politics or the unilateral resort to the use or
threat of force in international relations. We believe that
such acts contravene international law and norms governing
international relations and are in themselves a serious threat
to international peace and security. These remarks of ours
were not without targets.

China has always strongly advocated peaceful
settlement of international disputes and is against the use or
the threat of use of force in international relations.

The differences that exist between UNSCOM. and Iraq
on the verification issue can properly be settled through
dialogue and consultation. The use of force, far from
helping to reach a settlement, may create serious
consequences for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, for relations between Iraq and the United
Nations and for peace and stability in the world and in the
region.

We call upon the United States and the United
Kingdom to immediately stop all military actions against
Iraq, to avoid any other acts which may worsen the
situation and to return to the path of cooperation and
dialogue.

The leader of UNSCOM. has played a dishonourable
role in this crisis. The reports submitted by UNSCOM. to
the Secretary-General were one-sided and evasive
regarding the facts. It is difficult for the UNSCOM. leader
to shirk his responsibility in the current crisis.

From the letters addressed to the President of the
Council by the United States and the United Kingdom, it
can be seen that they have taken the relevant UNSCOM
reports as the main argument for the use of force against
Iraq. Perhaps that was precisely the purpose of those
reports, but I must point out that whatever the intention
was behind the preparation of the reports by the
UNSCOM. leader, and however the countries which read
them try to make use of them, there is in fact no excuse
or reason for the use of force against Iraq.

We believe that only through political and diplomatic
means can an appropriate settlement be found to the
various contradictions and differences over the question
of weapons verification in Iraq.

The United Nations Charter entrusts the Security
Council with the main responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. At this crucial moment
of war and peace, the Council should shoulder this sacred
responsibility. We are ready to join the international
community in an effort to this end.

