The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity With the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, Without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
2
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2007/485, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France. I also wish to
draw the attention of members to document
S/2007/423, which contains the text of a letter dated
16 July 2007 from the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) transmitting the report of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhana's.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1771 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.
07-45566

