Mrs. Senn (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish, at
the outset, to express, on behalf of the delegation of
Mali, my warmest thanks to the delegation of the sister
Republic of Guinea for this initiative of convening this
Security Council workshop to consider an issue that
has been a concern to our subregion for almost 10
years. I am referring to the circulation of small arms. I
wish to pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts in dealing with that matter. My
delegation also thanks the various institutions
combating the proliferation of light weapons, and it
fully agrees with their analysis.

First I wish to briefly refer to two major
initiatives that my country has taken on the issue of
small arms and light weapons. In 1994, the President of
Mali at that time, His Excellency Mr. Alfa Omar
Konare, called for and obtained from the Secretary-
General a study on the risks inherent in the illicit
circulation of small arms in the Sahelo-Saharan
subregion. A year later that led to a United Nations
resolution on small arms, which has become a
resolution of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on assistance to States to
halt the illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons and to collect and destroy light weapons.

Secondly, I wish to recall our initiative,
subsequently approved by ECOWAS, that a
Moratorium be adopted on the import and export of
small arms. Speaking about the Moratorium and its
characteristics, President Konare said "In the mind of
Malian diplomacy, the Moratorium is not a legal ban
designed to infringe on the sovereignty of States and
their freedom to provide defence, but rather it is an act
of faith showing the world the unswerving political
commitment of our States to eradicate the
accumulation of death and destruction-dealing devices,
to pursue the economic and social development of our
peoples that have been so sorely tested. It is an act of
diplomatic intelligence leading to self-censorship,
restraint, the temporary abstention of States of the
subregion from producing, receiving or exporting
weapons, as a necessary preliminary stage to reinforce
means of effective security and take positive action
related to micro-disarmament in subsequent phases".

Support for the Moratorium is voluntary and is
open not only to States of the subregion, but also to all
African States. The Moratorium is essentially a
confidence-building measure relating to the import,
export and manufacture of small arms. To enhance the
effectiveness of that Moratorium and to reinforce the
capacity of concerned Governments to exercise stricter
monitoring of small arms traffic, Governments may
take additional steps. The Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development is an
additional device that was adopted. I will not dwell on
that programme, which was addressed in a statement
this morning.

Five years have elapsed since the adoption of the
ECOWAS Moratorium on the import, export and
manufacture of light weapons. In announcing the
Moratorium on 31 October 1998, the heads of State of
the Community decided to harm themselves by
refraining from importing, exporting or manufacturing
small weapons for three years. Those three years would
then be used to draw up an inventory of the national
arsenal, to create national and community registers.
That period was designed to enable the various
ECOWAS members to take the steps necessary to
protect borders and prevent the illicit circulation of
small arms. At the end of that three-year period, an
assessment reinforced the conviction of the heads of
State that they made the right choice in renewing the
Moratorium for three more years.

It is obvious that as long as there is illicit
proliferation of small arms in the subregion, peace in
ECOWAS will always be precarious. Without being the
cause of conflict, small arms nonetheless contribute to
exacerbating them. Brawls and small disputes among
neighbours, farmers and ranchers frequently become
armed conflicts among socio-professional groups or
ethnic groups and can spawn civil war or genocide. The
proliferation of small arms and light weapons underlies
the phenomenon of child soldiers. The massive
accumulation of small arms and light weapons has
meant that supply exceeds demand. That means that
supplies of arms and munitions are very plentiful in
times of armed conflict.

The implementation of the Moratorium has made
it possible to reduce the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons in the subregion, with the participation
of arms manufacturers. While the circulation of
weapons has been slowed down, there are nonetheless
8 million weapons in West Africa remaining in the
hands of illegal owners. To prevent any possibility of
their misuse, it is necessary to recover these illicit
weapons that are illegally held, which contribute to
banditry, the creation of armed gangs, criminal cross-
border activities and the use of mercenaries. Over the
long term, if their firepower permits it, those armed
gangs regroup and form mercenary armies willing to do
anything to threaten the peace and security of other
countries. That is the situation prevailing in our
subregion. The situation in Cote d'Ivoire is a perfect
illustration of that.

As can be noted, all armed conflicts occur when
one party or another feels that it can engage in an
armed battle after having stockpiled arms and
munitions that they can use or that they have received
through a deal with mercenaries. Despite international
legal instruments prohibiting the use of mercenaries, it
must be noted that they are still relevant because they
are now using new information technology, such as the
Internet.

To improve the situation of small arms in relation
to the use of mercenaries, my delegation would like to
make the following suggestions. Embargoes against all
countries to a conflict might be envisaged, as could
preventive measures imposed against countries
responsible for the illicit traffic of weapons. Also of
value would be a binding resolution prohibiting the use
of mercenaries in all its forms. The provision of
additional support to national commissions combating
the illicit proliferation of small arms in order to
establish additional development projects might also be
envisaged.

Unfortunately, our subregion, once a haven of
peace, is afflicted by this fever, which is rooted in
poverty, unequal distribution of justice, joblessness,
unequal distribution of income, bad governance and,
finally, a deficit in democracy.

