Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing. We have taken
note of her fifth report to the Security Council. We
commend her hard work and strong commitment to the
criminal justice system.

Pakistan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute, and
thus it is not a member of the International Criminal
Court. However, we recognize the rights and obligations
of the States that are members of the ICC.

The formation of a democratically elected
Government is a significant achievement for the Libyan
people. The country has now entered the important
phase of constitution-making, which is critical for its
prosperous and stable future. Success in that endeavour
can be achieved only with the support and cooperation
of all stakeholders.

Recent events in Tripoli, however, confirm that
Libya continues to face some daunting challenges.
The actions of the revolutionary brigades are likely to
undermine the progress so far achieved. We call upon
all armed groups in Libya to lay down their arms and
to engage in the democratic process and in dialogue to
resolve their differences and grievances.

Libya has submitted an admissibility challenge
in the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi. The Libyan
Government has asserted that it is willing and able to
prosecute him, and it therefore has precedence over
the Court in accordance with the complementary
nature of its jurisdiction. The Prosecutor's report has
noted that Libya is acting fully in compliance with the
Rome Statute in challenging the admissibility of the
cases against Saif Al-Islam and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
We hope that the request of the Libyan authorities to
try Al-Senussi and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi will be
positively considered.

We understand that the ICC would like to monitor
the trials of those individuals if they are conducted in
Libya. The monitoring would be done in accordance
with the arrangements made between the Court and the
Libyan Government. That would give an opportunity to
the Libyan Government to demonstrate its commitment
to holding fair trials in accordance with due process, as
well as Libya's international obligations.

The ICC Prosecutor has commended the cooperation
extended by the Libyan Government. We call upon the
Libyan Government to maintain its engagement with
the Court and to provide the necessary information for
the consideration of those cases.

We also encourage NATO to fully cooperate
with the Court, as well as Libya's national efforts to
investigate civilian casualties during the conflict.

With regard to the investigation of other alleged
crimes committed in Libya, we underline the need
to conduct thorough and impartial investigations
regardless of which side perpetrated the crimes.

The international criminal justice system has
demonstrated that national judicial mechanisms can
ultimately be more efficient and cost-effective in dealing
with such crimes. The ICC and other international
tribunals have succeeded in dealing with only a handful
of cases. For the bulk of the cases, greater reliance on
national judicial systems is advisable.

Therefore, strengthening the Libyan judicial system
is essential for addressing the crimes that occurred in
the country. The Libyan Government must continue
to formulate and implement a comprehensive strategy
to address those crimes. The international community
should extend its full support to Libya to achieve that
objective.

In the long run, the promotion of reconciliation is
essential for fostering national unity and bridging the
fissures caused by the conflict. Achieving a balance
between the imperatives ofjustice and peace is always
a difficult challenge. That can best be achieved through
national mechanisms and institutions.

In conclusion, we underscore Pakistan's full support
for the well-being and prosperity of the people of Libya.
We wish them success in their quest for reconciliation,
stability and institution-building.

