Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Congratulations to you, Madame, for the assumption of
the presidency in November and to Ambassador Ryan
for a formidable handling of the chair in October. The
United Kingdom fully supports the statement which
Belgium will later make on behalf of the European
Union. We are honoured to have with us this morning
the Foreign Minister of Liberia, and we welcome his
presence here. We are very grateful for the
presentations made this morning by Ambassador
Mahbubani, by Panel Chairman Ayafor and by Mr. Tsui
on behalf of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). We think that the Panel
of Experts has done a superlative, professional job, and
the whole team has clearly contributed to that. It is a
very detailed report, based on sound methodology and
on extremely thorough research.

The Council has to keep firmly in mind the
purpose of the sanctions in resolution 1343 (2001), that
is to press President Taylor for full compliance with the
requirements of the resolution and to discourage him
from fomenting instability in the region. The key
question we have to keep in our minds is whether
President Taylor is complying fully with the demands
of the Council. The answer is, unfortunately, at this
point, no. The bond between Monrovia and the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) remains strong.
President Taylor continues to buy arms in breach of the
arms embargo. As Mr. Ayafor said this morning, there
is a steady flow of new weapons which continues to
enter the country. Thirdly, President Taylor continues
to benefit from the sale of RUF diamonds, which may
be going in directions that need further research in
other contexts.

It is therefore crucial to increase the pressure on
President Taylor, if we are to stop this continued
destabilization of the region. Well, how? It is clear that
timber and shipping are both increasingly important
sources of funding for the Liberian Government and for
President Taylor now that he can no longer profit as
much as before from the diamond exports. We would
like to see President Taylor stopped from using revenue
from timber to buy arms. We believe that that a round
log ban, as recommended by the Panel, would only
temporarily disrupt President Taylor's finances,
whereas a comprehensive ban on timber would better
achieve the aim of sanctions, by depriving him of funds
to buy arms. Secondly, we would wish to see revenues
from the shipping registry going to legitimate Liberian
Government purposes with independent monitoring, so
that they cannot be diverted to buy arms. Thirdly, we
want to see stricter enforcement of all the sanctions,
including the travel ban. The Panel has revealed quite a
number of breaches of sanctions across the board and
the travel ban, in particular, I think, has been an
effective instrument of the Council and needs to be
maintained, although we are happy to ensure that the
travel ban list is up-to-date and relevant.

For all these reasons and wider ones, we would
welcome a follow-up report from the Panel of Experts,
but we also agree that the Council should respond
where Liberia has taken action to comply with Council
demands. We support the recommendation to lift the
grounding order on Liberian aircraft on a case-by-case
basis and we agree that we should encourage the
Liberian Government to establish a diamond
certification scheme.

As for the important humanitarian considerations,
the Council must restate clearly that sanctions are
targeted at the Liberian Government and at President
Taylor and that a travel ban and arms and diamond
embargoes do not hurt ordinary Liberians. The report
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in that area is not the whole story. We need to
encourage donors and non-governmental organizations
to contribute to remedying the humanitarian situation
in Liberia and to reverse the decline in humanitarian
aid. The United Kingdom will play its part in doing
that, having contributed £12 million since 1998 to the
Liberian humanitarian situation, and we will contribute
continually in that area.

