Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me first express our
felicitations to you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
present month. We are confident that for the Council
this month will be not only eventful, but fruitful as
well. We also wish to express our admiration to
Ambassador Baja and the Philippines delegation on
their very successful presidency last month.

I wish to join other delegations in thanking the
Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
1267 Sanctions Committee and the 1540 Committee.
We appreciate the practice of these briefings. We have
noted the reports of the three Chairmen and wish to
offer some comments on this issue.

The threat of terrorism knows no boundaries. It
poses a challenge to entire humanity. Terrorism has no
faith and is abhorrent to all religions and beliefs.

Pakistan has been a victim of terrorism for over
two decades, including cross-border and State-
sponsored terrorism. We remain in the forefront of
counter-terrorism efforts. We have strengthened our
legal, administrative and financial controls. We have
signed, or are a party to, 11 out of the 13 United
Nations conventions and protocols on terrorism. Our
armed forces, moreover, continue their search and
interdiction operations against terrorists in the border
regions with Afghanistan, and we have captured more
than 700 Al-Qaida operatives.

With regard to the work of the three Committees,
we have noted the efforts of the 1267 Sanctions
Committee to bring clarity to its working methods and
that the Committee is engaged in the process of
improving its guidelines. We believe a more credible
process for listing and delisting needs to be evolved.
We hope that the Committee will continue to bring
greater transparency to its work to ensure full
cooperation from all States.

We also welcome the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), which
finally has become operational and is assisting the
Committee in its work. We hope that Committee will
become an instrument to promote a more
comprehensive counter-terrorism approach in the
future.

We welcome the increased level of reporting by
Member States on the steps they have taken or plan to
take to implement the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004), whose scope is clear and is unambiguously
focussed on preventing non-State actors from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction.

A significant number of reports have been
examined by the 1540 Committee, yet as you yourself,
Mr. President, have noted, 67 Member States have not
been able to report. That underlines some of the
challenges with regard to capacity and the need for
assistance. We hope the Committee will draw
appropriate attention to those aspects in its outreach
activities.

Consistent with our strong commitment to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, we have provided to the Committee
perhaps the most extensive information on a range of
measures that we have in place to implement resolution
1540 (2004). We hope that other States will also be
able to share with the Committee the steps they have
taken or envisage taking to implement that resolution.

Pakistan has consistently urged the Security
Council to evolve a mechanism to associate the larger
membership of the United Nations with the Council's
work, especially in the field of terrorism, since global
cooperation is so essential in that field. It could be
done, for example, by opening the membership of the
counter-terrorism Committees to other United Nations
Member States through elections. The ultimate
decision-making would of course remain with the
Security Council. That would promote inclusiveness,
provide alternative perspectives and views and enhance
transparency and accountability in the work of the
three Committees.

The 2005 summit has unequivocally condemned
terrorism "in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever
purposes". (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 81) The Summit sought the adoption and
implementation of a comprehensive strategy; it agreed
to consider convening a high-level United Nations
conference; it recognized the important role of the
United Nations in combating terrorism, and it stressed
the need to make efforts to reach agreement on and
conclude a comprehensive convention during the
present session of the General Assembly.

The conclusion of the convention is held up
because of the unjustified effort to exclude from its
purview the activities of armed forces in situations of
armed conflict. Granting such a blanket exemption
could imply that armed or military forces of a State
enjoy impunity for acts that are terrorist in nature.
Indeed, armed forces, especially those engaged in
foreign occupation and suppression of self-
determination, have often been involved in acts that are
terrorist in nature. Various proposals are under
consideration to resolve that important issue.

The September outcome document also called on
the General Assembly to develop and adopt such a
comprehensive strategy. We believe that such a
strategy should include both short-term and long-term
measures at the national, regional and international
levels. The short-term measures should be aimed at
providing support for, and enhancing the effectiveness
of, ongoing efforts to counter terrorism, including by
the three Committees of the Security Council. The
long-term measures should aim at addressing the
underlying causes of terrorism. Let me reiterate that
root causes do not justify terrorism, but they do explain
it. In that regard, the need to win the hearts and minds
of potential terrorists cannot be overemphasized.

Domestically, religious bigotry, hate campaigns
and confrontational tendencies have to be curbed. That
must be done through bold, determined, well-thought-
out and indigenously applicable strategies. The misuse
of religion to spread militancy, hatred and violence has
to be suppressed, and an international discourse, as
well as a national debate in affected societies, must be
conducted on religious harmony.

President Musharraf of Pakistan has outlined such
a strategy and what he terms the strategy of
enlightened moderation at the global and international
levels.

Besides developing a comprehensive strategy, we
also need to focus our attention on developing an
institutional mechanism to implement it. One proposal
in that regard could be the development of an
international counter-terrorism centre, which has
already been proposed by His Majesty King Abdullah
of Saudi Arabia.

We trust the General Assembly will take decisive
and early action to develop a comprehensive approach
to ensure sustained success against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. The work of the Council's
three Committees will remain an integral and essential
part of that endeavour.

