Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Viet Nam later this evening on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Let me also offer our thanks to Indonesia for
the comprehensive concept note prepared for this
open debate (S/2019/385, annex). We also thank the
Secretary-General for his substantive report released
on 7 May (S/2019/373) and his perceptive briefing
today. Allow me to highlight a few elements drawn
from our own experience that we feel are also relevant
to the discussion today.

First, it is essential to build and sustain a
protective environment for civilians and to reduce
threats to sustainable peace and development. The
most effective way to protect civilians is through a
long-term process and a comprehensive approach that
covers the periods before, during and after a conflict.
In our View, the concept of sustaining peace urges us
to view peacebuilding more holistically, as part of a
peace continuum that spans from conflict prevention
and resolution to laying the foundation for sustainable
peace and development.

Secondly, stronger partnerships are key to
strengthening protection of civilian mandates. Member
States and the United Nations must work closely to
ensure that all principles and elements related to the
protection of civilians are implemented by all those
involved in such missions. We also have to explore
innovative practical tools and approaches to enhance
the implementation of protection mandates. This
requires an integrated approach among military,
police and civilian components, in coordination with
national authorities, local communities and relevant
humanitarian organizations.

Thirdly, the issue of training is an area that
Thailand has always viewed with a discerning eye. All
peacekeepers have to be properly prepared, trained and
equipped to meet the challenges they will face in the
field. It must be underlined time and again that intensive
predeployment and periodic in-mission training, both on
operational tasks and other protection-related elements,
is Vital. As an active troop- and police-contributing
country, Thai peacekeepers are trained as a standard
procedure to assist the local population in their efforts
to prevent the relapse of armed conflict and ensure
sustainable development. Thailand continues to support
the delivery of consistent and coherent training, in
collaboration with relevant agencies, for all mandated
tasks, to our peacekeeping personnel. Those elements
include international law, gender-based issues, the
protection of civilians, child protection, conflict-related
sexual violence and cultural sensitivity.

We recently endorsed the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. We also have our sights set
on becoming a regional centre of excellence on the issue
of children and armed conflict, and have been working
closely with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. There is more we can and want to do.

But allow me to conclude with a parting thought: in
Thailand's view, durable peace is not tenable if civilians
lack security and are not safe. We need to continue to
evolve our discussions on enhancing and reinvigorating
the protection of civilians agenda in order to meet the
new challenges of protecting civilians.

