Mr. Obuchi (J apan)(spoke in Japanese; interpretation by the delegation): At the outset, I should like to pay
tribute to Her Excellency Madam Madeleine Albright,
Secretary of State of the United States, for having taken the
initiative to convene a formal ministerial-level meeting of
the Security Council on the situation in Africa. I believe it
is extremely important for the Security Council to reaffirm
in today's ministerial-level meeting its commitment to
Africa.

The many and intense conflicts now occurring in
Africa pose the greatest challenge to peace and security, not
only for the African region but for the entire international
community as well. Indeed, it may be said that our success
in resolving the African problem will be a test of the
effectiveness of the Security Council as the principal organ
of the United Nations with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Many of
the conflicts afflicting Africa in recent years, stemming
from various societal factors - including the failure of
good governance, the collapse of civil society and the
persistence of tribal rivalries - are very different from the
many regional conflicts we witnessed during the cold-war
era.

Against the backdrop of the proliferation of these
conflicts, which are destroying the entire fabric of society
in many parts of Africa, there is a growing sense of
frustration and despair that the United Nations, and
especially its Security Council, have not always been able
to respond to them effectively. Japan believes that the
Security Council, which is entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, should involve itself more proactively in
playing its role and assisting in the endeavours of the
African countries to prevent and resolve these conflicts.
It is precisely in this context that the reform of the
Security Council, aimed at making this organ more
legitimate and effective so that it might deal effectively
with these conflicts in Africa, is so urgent at this moment.

In dealing with these conflicts, which in many cases
have their root causes in the indigenous societal
conditions of the country involved, it is essential that the
Security Council seek close cooperative relations with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
Organization of African Unity and the Economic
Community of West African States. It is with this in mind
that Japan, in January of next year, will convene in Tokyo
the International Conference on Preventive Strategy,
focusing in particular on Africa. I earnestly hope that,
building on the results of today's meeting, concrete
recommendations may come out of the Conference for
strengthening such cooperative relationships as well.

In thinking about the problem of conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa, we cannot emphasize too
strongly the importance of humanitarian assistance for
refugees, displaced persons and others in the context of
conflicts. Japan wishes to take this opportunity to express
its deep appreciation for the efforts that international
humanitarian agencies, such as the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the International Committee of
the Red Cross and others have been making. Japan
believes that the Security Council should seek to further
develop its cooperative relations with these and other
organizations. In this context, I wish to renew the appeal
which Japan has been making that the parties involved
fully respect the principles of international humanitarian
law and make their utmost efforts to ensure the safety of
all personnel engaged in humanitarian activities.

Japan believes that, in coping with these African
conflicts, it is crucial to deal squarely with the issue of
development as well as to address the conflicts
themselves. I say this in the belief that peace and
development are two sides of the same coin - without
development the causes of conflict will not be eliminated
and without peace the conditions for development will not
be met. Therefore, with a View to contributing to

 

international peace by tackling development issues in close
cooperation with the United Nations, Japan has been taking
the initiative for a new development strategy, which is to be
based on the firm recognition of ownership of the countries
involved, as well as a genuine partnership between them
and industrialized countries.

This is a comprehensive strategy to be carried out by
donor countries, including Japan, developing countries, the
United Nations, the World Bank and all other partners in
development issues. It seeks to achieve development
through an organic combination of official development
assistance, trade, human resources development and other
means. Japan seeks the active support and cooperation of
all concerned in giving this strategy concrete form.

To this purpose, Japan will co-organize in the autumn
of 1998, together with the United Nations and the Global
Coalition for Africa, the second Tokyo International
Conference on African Development, in which the
participation of all the African countries is anticipated at the
ministerial level. The Conference will explore concrete
ways in which the new development strategy can be applied
to Africa. Japan seeks the cooperation of all countries
concerned towards the success of the Conference, so that
substantive progress can be made in the promotion of
African development. This, in turn, will contribute to
conflict prevention.

The achievement of African stability will be essential
to the promotion of prosperity founded on peace and
stability in the international community as a whole in the
twenty-first century. In View of the relevance of economic
and social development in meeting the challenges of
African conflicts, the Security Council should give more
thought and attention than it has done in the past to the
intrinsic relationship that exists between conflict resolution
and development. The Council should also broaden its
perspective on the problem of conflict prevention and
resolution by exploring a comprehensive approach to the
conflicts in Africa in which we can address issues relating
to humanitarian assistance as well as post-conflict
reconstruction.

That this will require greater cooperation between the
Security Council and other organs is self-evident. Japan
hopes that, on the basis of this understanding of the issue,
the Secretary-General will study concrete ways and means
for the resolution of conflicts in Africa and make a report
to the Security Council containing concrete proposals at an
early date. Based on those proposals, Japan will actively
explore concrete ways to contribute to conflict resolution.

If it is deemed appropriate, Japan hopes to
contemplate, subject to the concurrence of the other
members of the Council, a further opportunity for the
Security Council to address this issue as it assumes the
presidency in the first half of next year, taking into
account the outcome of the International Conference on
Preventive Strategy that Japan is organizing in January.

