Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): As Haiti struggles to emerge
from its turbulent past into a future of peace and stability,
Kenya is optimistic that the historically resilient spirit of
the Haitian people will overcome all odds and rebuild that
great nation.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. Kenya's vote today is a gesture in
support of the Haitian people. We believe that a minimal
but continued United Nations presence, to be known as
the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
(UNTMIH), will be useful in consolidating the gains
which were made by the Haitians with the help of the
outgoing United Nations Support Mission in Haiti
(UNSMIH). This will be a neutral force with a clear
mandate, and it must be viewed by all Haitians from all
walks of life as that and nothing more. My delegation
also agrees with the recommendation of the Secretary-
General in his report that such a force should not stay in

 

Haiti for too long and that a four-month duration is quite
adequate.

Kenya believes that peace is a necessary condition for
development. The relative insecurity now prevailing in Haiti
is largely the result of poverty and lack of improvement in
the basic living conditions of the Haitian people. Only a
concerted, whole-hearted attack on poverty and a complete
focus on sustainable development will alleviate Haiti's
problems. In this regard, my delegation is happy to note
that the draft resolution recognizes that significant
international assistance is indispensable for sustainable
development in Haiti.

My delegation commends the Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti for their untiring efforts, and especially
those of the men and women of UNSMIH for their courage
and hard work in that country.

Finally, my delegation calls on all the Haitian people
to work together to rebuild their nation. With turmoil,
development will remain as elusive as peace has been. At
the end of the day, it is the Haitian people, and especially
their leaders, who must propel and navigate their nation
towards the future prosperity of all, and in this regard,
Kenya can only wish them the greatest success.

