Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September, and thank Poland
for its successful presidency in August.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting and Special Representative Ghassan Salame,
Ambassador Juergen Schulz and Ms. Marwa Mohamed
for their informative briefings on the most recent
developments on the ground.

We would like to begin by reiterating the need
for the parties to return to the table in the quest for
a political solution, which is the only viable one in
this context. That entails an immediate, unconditional
ceasefire, followed by confidence-building mechanisms
and institutional unification processes, in particular in
the case of the security forces. The goal is to prevent
further escalation, which would undoubtedly benefit
terrorist groups in that area.

In reaffirming our support for the plan put forward
by Special Representative Salame', we welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to maintain the political process through
meetings held within the framework of track-two
dialogues, in which many women have participated.
As Ms. Mohamed reminded us, that is crucial to any
political, social and economic solution. At the same
time, we welcome the initiatives spearheaded by young
Libyans to promote a humanitarian truce.
We are particularly concerned about the serious
human rights violations committed by all parties to the
Libyan conflict, including allegations about the use of
child soldiers. In that regard, it is imperative that those
responsible be held accountable. Indiscriminate attacks
and the destruction of basic civilian infrastructure,
including by air strikes on hospitals and health and
humanitarian personnel, must be investigated and
punished. That is all compounded by the serious
humanitarian situation that has plagued the country,
as a result of the ever-increasing number of internally
displaced persons, owing to violence and the loss
of basic services, and in particular the critical and
degrading conditions suffered by migrants and refugees
in detention centres, which, as proposed by the Special
Representative, should be redesigned or closed. That
is in line with the Secretary-General's assertion that
Libya is not currently a safe port of disembarkation and
that necessary measures must be taken in that regard,
including efforts to prevent migrants and refugees from
falling back into the hands of traffickers.

In all such cases, the assistance of the international
community is crucial, in particular in efforts to end
the current crisis. The first step is to ensure strict
compliance with the arms embargo imposed by the
Council and to refrain from taking measures that could
exacerbate the current situation.

We conclude by expressing our solidarity with the
Libyan people and reaffirming our support for Special
Representative Salame and the entire UNSMIL team
for their commendable and necessary work under such
difficult conditions. We also endorse the extension of
the Mission's mandate. In that regard, we welcome the
reopening of United Nations offices in the east of the
country and encourage the Mission not to halt efforts
to ensure the resumption of a comprehensive political
dialogue in coordination with and in support of the
Government of National Accord.

