The Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan provides a unique opportunity to ensure long-term stabilization and a transition to progressive development in the Sudan. The authorities are ready to address the root causes of conflicts, including the conflict in Darfur, and progress has been made in the implementation of the peace agreement. Khartoum has to solve the difficult tasks of restoring the country's economy and implementing peacebuilding initiatives, with the help of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has succeeded in reaching its goals. We believe it is necessary to proceed with the closure of the peacekeeping operation in line with the time frames stipulated in resolution 2525 (2020). The situation in Darfur has not undergone any significant negative changes. Intercommunal clashes in some states due to transhumance-related circumstances have not changed the overall situation. In addition, the well-coordinated and prompt reaction of the authorities to those developments, as well as the active national strategy for the protection of civilians, on which Sudanese representatives have regularly updated the Council, once again proves the willingness of Khartoum to comprehensively overcome the root causes of conflict. We can only welcome such a stance. Against that positive backdrop, we note that it has been 15 years since the Security Council entrusted the International Criminal Court (ICC) with the task of holding accountable all those who have committed crimes in Darfur. Those 15 years have not brought any progress, however. On the contrary, the work on the Darfur file has exposed the incompetence and political bias of the ICC, which for the sake of achieving short-term goals, has attempted to distort the effective norms of customary international law concerning the immunity of heads of State. In the meantime, in the absence of the celebrated "Hague justice", the Sudanese people have decided to take ownership of the situation and we can only support them in so doing.
