Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this public meeting concerning the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also wish to
offer my thanks to the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Lord Paddy Ashdown, for his
comprehensive briefing.

Almost 10 years have passed since the signing of
the Dayton Agreement, and the tasks called for in the
peace process have been steadily fulfilled in Bosnia
and Herzegovina during this period. My Government
commends the vigorous reform efforts made by the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to
consolidate itself as a stable, multi-ethnic State
integrated into Europe. Among the achievements, we
particularly appreciate the economic reform policy
measures, as exemplified by the completion of the
legislation concerning the value-added tax and the
establishment of the Ministry of Defence and of the
Intelligence and Security Agency at the State level. We
are particularly appreciative of the efforts made by the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
his staff.

Nevertheless, there is still much to be done in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is necessary to resolve the
remaining problems so that Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be able to stand on its own feet. For that purpose,
we expect the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with the cooperation of the international
community, to take the initiative to make further
progress on the most urgent tasks, such as the
consolidation of the rule of law, the further reform of
the economy - which must include improving the
investment environment - and the strengthening of
State institutions.

The Government of Japan is of the view that
resolution of the issue of war criminals is essential for
true implementation of peace in the former Yugoslavia.
We are approaching the tenth anniversary of the
atrocities that took place in Srebrenica. We continue to
call upon the relevant authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to fully cooperate with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and to
extradite every person indicted for war crimes to the
Tribunal.

At the same time, we wish to underscore the
importance of the War Crimes Chamber, which was
established to prosecute war crimes inside Bosnia and
Herzegovina and which is expected to be effective in
fostering reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
through its rapid prosecution process. Japan has
contributed to that important project by providing staff
training and equipment for the Chamber through the
United Nations Development Programme.

My Government is pleased to hear that the
handover from the Stabilization Force to the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) was
accomplished smoothly. We would especially like to
commend EUFOR's proactive initiative in dealing with
organized crime, and we look forward to a continuation
of those efforts.

As a member of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, Japan has been actively
contributing to the peace implementation process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have pledged $500
million to support rehabilitation and reconstruction in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and have been steadily
implementing that assistance. Last April, in Tokyo,
Japan co-chaired with the European Union presidency
the Ministerial Conference on Peace Consolidation and
Economic Development of the Western Balkans. At the
conference, we expressed our view that in order to
ensure that the stabilization and the development of
that region is irreversible, there should be regional
efforts focusing on the three key elements:
consolidation of peace, economic development and
regional cooperation. We are providing support in line
with that view, dispatching advisers to help stimulate
investment and co-hosting workshops on the promotion
of tourism in the Western Balkans, among other
measures.

Japan, in cooperation with the rest of the
international community, intends to adhere to its
commitment to achieving stability and prosperity in
that region through activities including the follow-up
to the Tokyo ministerial conference. In his meeting this
month with Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers, our Prime Minister, Mr. Junichiro
Koizumi, reaffirmed Japan's intention to continue its
support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts. It is our
firm belief that stabilization of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is essential for the stability of all
South-Eastern Europe.

