Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): China has always been much concerned about
developments in the area of the former Yugoslavia, and has
always supported the efforts of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) to prevent the
spillover of the conflict in the area of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. We greatly appreciate the close
cooperation and consultations that have taken place between
UNPREDEP and the Government of Macedonia, and the
role that UNPREDEP has played in stabilizing the situation
in Macedonia.

As a matter of principle, China has always been of the
View that United Nations peacekeeping operations should
have both a proper beginning and a proper conclusion.
However, taking into account the request by Macedonia and
the concern expressed by other countries of the area, we
shall not object to the Secretary-General's recommendation
on the further extension of the mandate of UNPREDEP.
But we want to reiterate that in assisting in the
maintenance of stability and security in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia the international
community should respect the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
concerned, namely the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.

We have taken note of the recommendation of the
Secretary-General relating to the adjustment of
UNPREDEP's mandate to enable it to be responsible for
monitoring the border areas between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Albania. We hope that this adjustment
will help effectively to contain illicit arms flows and
terrorist activities in the region. On the basis of that
consideration, and in the overall interest of maintaining
peace and stability in the area, we shall not object to the
adjustment of the mandate of UNPREDEP, and will vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us.

At the same time, I wish to note that this vote by the
Chinese delegation does not constitute any change in its
position of principle with respect to resolutions 1101
(1997), 1114 (1997) and 1160 (1998), to which reference
is made in the draft resolution.

