Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): Before I begin my intervention, may I join you in offering our sincere thanks to the Secretariat, the interpreters and the security personnel who have made our presence here today possible. It is good to demonstrate that, when required, meetings at our Headquarters can be delivered. I would like to begin by thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his briefing and for the continued hard workof the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia despite the difficulties posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). I also thank Ms. Clemencia Carabali Rodallega, our civil society briefer, for her powerful and clear testimony. We note the potential challenge the pandemic poses to the important advances made in the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in the last three and a half years. We also note the efforts of the parties to mitigate the impact of the pandemic. I would address Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi in stating that the United Kingdom welcomes the Colombian Government's continued commitment to comprehensively delivering on the agreement, and in particular the confirmation that the Colombian Government does not intend to modify it. Although some key challenges remain, significant progress has been achieved since 2016. Colombia's transitional justice institutions have adapted to the pandemic admirably, quickly moving their work to the virtual space. We believe that victims must be at the heart of peacebuilding. We are encouraged by the progress those bodies have made in such a short time. We hope they will continue to receive the resources they need to carry out their valuable work. We note the aspiration of the parties for the United Nations Mission to assume a role in verifying the sanctions imposed by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We would welcome the Mission taking that forward. The implementation of the development programmes with a territorial focus also continues to advance, with all of Colombia's municipalities now including those programmes in their planning instruments. The involvement of local communities is vital for a sustainable and inclusive peace. We would encourage the Government to continue to ensure their active and effective participation. It is encouraging to see the mechanisms of the peace agreement being used to help prevent and respond to local COVID-19 outbreaks in and around former territorial areas for training and reintegration, including reinforcing their health-care capacity and delivering food. That is all the more important given the economic impact of the pandemic on former combatants' entrepreneurial projects. We hope the Colombian Government will continue to work with its partners to assist those communities so that reintegration remains on track. However, it is with great concern that we note yet again the high number of killings and threats against former combatants, social leaders, human rights defenders, women leaders and those from indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. Indeed, it was striking to hear the description of this situation by both the Special Representative and Ms. Carabali Rodallega as the greatest threat to the peace process. Urgent action needs to be taken on this issue. We urge the Colombian Government, first, to devote additional resources to responding to protection requests and carrying out those requests effectively. There must also be a prompt and cross-Government response to the Ombudsman's Office's early warnings. Preventing such attacks from happening in the first place is crucial. We note that the National Commission on Security Guarantees has not met fully since January. We would encourage the Government and civil society organizations to make full use of that body to develop a public policy to combat the serious threat posed by the perpetrators of those attacks. More work is also needed on bringing the perpetrators of such attacks to justice. We are pleased to see that three territories now have working groups to follow up on threats and attacks at a local level. We hope that initiative will soon be expanded across the country. In line with the Secretary-General's ceasefire call, as endorsed by the Security Council, and with grave concern for the humanitarian impact of armed violence, we encourage all conflict parties in Colombia to create the conditions necessary for a cessation of hostilities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Finally, progress remains slow on _ former combatants' access to land, which also affects their access to housing. At a time when they are facing potential economic hardship due to COVID-19, developments on that front would help ensure the sustainability of the reintegration process. Colombia has faced many challenges on its journey to peace, and the COVID-19 pandemic makes this a key moment. The United Kingdom remains committed to doing everything it can to support the Colombian Government at this difficult time in building a lasting peace that can be enjoyed by all.
