Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
expresses its satisfaction with the renewal of the
mandate for the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in order to ensure
the strengthening of its State institutions over the next

12 months of the mandate. It will provide support to
Haiti's administrative, legal and legislative institutions,
strengthen the rule of law; and help to fight crime and
promote good governance.

However, we express our concern with regard to
several of the Chapter VII provisions that have been
included in resolution 2410 (2018). We would have
preferred that priority had been given to the spirit of
trust between the support Mission and the Government
of Haiti and also that any disagreements could have
been solved through dialogue. In that light, we would
have preferred that those provisions would have been
included under Chapter VI. However, given the urgent
need to renew the Mission's mandate, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea voted in favour.

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) Haiti has in
recent years embarked upon a remarkable journey of
positive change. The country has made great strides
towards a stable political and security situation. That is
of direct importance to the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
as three constituent countries of our Kingdom - Saint
Martin, Aruba and Curacao - are in the Caribbean and
we have many Haitian citizens living in these countries.

In our view, Haiti should now seize this opportunity
to further build and strengthen its public institutions to
ensure the rule of law and respect for human rights.
The United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) was set up to support the Haitian
Government and people with this ambition. We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2410 (2018), which extends
the existing mandate of MINUJUSTH and enables the
Mission to continue its important work in integrated way.
We therefore regret that the resolution could ultimately
not count on the unanimous support of the Council. We
express the hope that Haiti, in close partnership with
the Mission, and involving women at all levels, can and
will build a solid foundation for longer-term political
stability, security and inclusive development.

