Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank the French and
German presidencies of the Security Council for their
response to the calls for the Council to urgently address
the dangerous situation unfolding in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. I would
also like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing, and the
Secretary-General for his written report (S/2019/251),
which has been circulated, on the implementation of
resolution 2234 (2016).

Before I proceed to read out my written statement,
let me say that I would be extremely happy to not
deliver a statement and instead engage in a discussion,
as my friend the Ambassador of Germany stated. But
I am only a representative of Palestine - although I
support the implementation of all the resolutions of the
Security Council and international law, beginning with
resolution 2334 (2016) - ifa way can be found. He is a
member of the Security Council and the representative
of mighty Germany. I listened very carefully to the
presentation delivered by my good friend the President,
the representative of France, and I completely agree
with him. However, if the Security Council comes to
me to tell me that it does not have the political will to
implement its resolutions, does it think that ifI come
here and selectively respond to certain questions asked
by some of those present that this is the solution the
predicament that we face?

I tell the Council, those here in the Chamber
and all those watching us from every corner of the
globe, that I am committed. I would be happy if the
resolutions were implemented, and I would not deliver
a statement. Can the Security Council get a similar
commitment from the other side of the table, which is
the one refusing to implement those resolutions? There
is another member in the Chamber that is powerful
and protecting the occupying Power from honouring
and respecting the Council's resolutions. If that is the
predicament we face, including the lack of agreement
within the Council to send the Council to see with its
own eyes the tragic reality of the Palestinian people
under occupation - it cannot even reach that basic
agreement to go visit - then the solution would be for
me to respond to some questions.

I beg the Council to find a way to implement its
resolutions, beginning with resolution 2334 (2016),
and I promise that I will not deliver a single statement,
if the Council finds the political will and methods to
bring to account those who are violating the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016). The Council will not see me
making statements or objecting to its ruling in that
regard, that is, on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016).

I was not planning to respond, but then I was
asked to; however, I have a statement that I need to
continue reading because I have to address the issue
at hand until the Council collectively finds a method
of implementing its resolutions as they relate to us.
There is no other option for now but to listen to more
statements. Members of the Council might think that
my statement is accusing the other side - they can
think that way - but I have to defend my people, who
live a life of misery under occupation, whether in the
Gaza Strip, the occupied West Bank or occupied East
Jerusalem. It is my duty to defend my people, who live
that miserable life.

History does not begin with the firing ofa rocket or
doing something wrong. The history is well-known to
all those present, and it is the tragedy of the Palestinian
people, who live under occupation. That tragedy has
to end, on the basis of ending the occupation and
upholding the independence of the State of Palestine.
As articulated by my good friend the Ambassador of
France, the parameters must be respected, which is why
I always look to all those present, for they are defenders
of those parameters - the global consensus on how to
solve the problem.

Many of those here often say that we all know
what the solution is, and it is very simple. That solution
consists of ending the occupation and upholding the
independence of the State of Palestine with a view
to reaching a two-State solution, living side by side,
and a just solution to the refugee question, which we
all know is a simple solution and acceptable to us and
the Council. But there are forces, which the Council
knows well, that are refusing that solution and acting
every day to prevent it, even though it is a solution
that emanates from the global consensus. I also took
serious note of the position that the Ambassador of
France, the President of the Council, reiterated, which
is shared throughout the Council, that any solution or
formula that is put on the table that does not take into
account the global consensus of what is known as the
parameters has no chance of resolving the conflict.

May I now proceed to read out the rest of
my statement?

Week after week, in official communications, we
have alerted the Security Council to the escalation
of Israeli violations against the Palestinian people,
who remain captive under Israel's medieval military
occupation and blockade. We have urged the Council to
heed the early warnings and act to halt the deterioration
of an already tense and volatile situation, which all have
deemed not only unsustainable but explosive. Time
after time, we have called on the Council to uphold its
duties under the Charter of the United Nations in order
to avert the outbreak of another deadly cycle of violence
and to protect innocent civilian lives. We have appealed
to the Council to implement its own resolutions with
a view to ensuring accountability and salvaging the
prospects for peace.

Yet all that has been to no avail. The Council has
been silenced by the obstruction ofa permanent member,
which has, in turn, emboldened Israel, the occupying
Power, to persist with total impunity in its systematic
acts of violent aggression, incitement, provocation and
collective punishment of the Palestinian people and
rabid colonization and de facto annexation of our land.

And so today we again find ourselves at the edge
of the precipice, fearing for the lives of our people as
Israeli officials ratchet up their threats of war against
the besieged Gaza Strip. Once again, the Israeli
occupying forces have taken to the skies to drop bombs
and missiles on our defenceless civilian population,
terrorizing and traumatizing them in a blatant act of
aggression and collective punishment in grave breach
of international law. While perhaps the cyclical wars
on Gaza have come to be seen by some as the norm,
there is nothing normal about imprisoning, isolating
and terrorizing 2 million people - more than half
of them children and young people - for more than
a decade. There is nothing normal about a people
being repeatedly trapped and slaughtered, including
children who pose absolutely no threat to life, just
like the families sheltering in their homes fearing the
next nightmare of Israeli attacks. There is nothing
normal about the targeting and injuring of more than
29,000 civilians - peaceful demonstrators - with live
ammunition and other deadly weaponry by one of the
most powerful armies in the world.

As we approach the one-year anniversary of the
Great March of Return, with deep worry about such
continued savagery by the Israeli occupying forces,
the Security Council cannot ignore the findings of the
independent, international commission of inquiry of the
Human Rights Council, which, with the exception of
one incident on 14 May 2018 and another on 12 October
2018, found reasonable grounds to believe that in all
other cases the use of live ammunition by the Israeli
forces against demonstrators was unlawful and that
demonstrators were shot in violation of their right to
life or of the principle of distinction under international
humanitarian law. Nothing under international
law - whether international humanitarian law or
international human rights law - can ever justify the
dehumanization, desperation and devastation imposed
upon our people - even the need for security, which is
neither mutually exclusive nor zero-sum. Implications
that the security of one must be achieved at the expense
of the humanity and welfare of the other are as offensive
as they are illegitimate. The law is more than clear. It is
not the occupied people that must ensure the safety of
the occupier, but the other way around. No rhetoric or
propaganda can change that reality.

What we are witnessing at this moment did not
begin yesterday; it is part ofthe long-running campaign
of violence and terror waged against our people by
Israel, the occupying Power, and its military forces
and extremist settlers. What we are witnessing is
pretext after pretext exploited by warmongering Israeli
officials - once again in the context of an election
campaign - to harm, kill, injure and maim defenceless
Palestinians in order to prove their might and bravado
and gain a few votes. Just listen to the words of
Israeli Government and military leaders themselves
as they boast of their intentions to annihilate, punish
and devastate Gaza, threaten to bomb the Palestinian
people back to the stone age and continue in vying
with one another to spill more Palestinian blood. Yet
that is met with silence. But one can just imagine
the condemnation, shaming and calls for action were
such threats and inflammatory rhetoric uttered by
anyone else.

We must once again put on record - contrary to
the blatant distortion and deception by Israel - the
fact that the Palestinian leadership has repeatedly and
unequivocally condemned acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terror. We reject any
libellous claims otherwise. We have condemned rocket
fire against civilian areas. That cannot be denied. We
have stood firmly against terror and have committed
to respect international law in that regard without
exception, including the Council's demand in resolution
2334 (2016) for the cessation of all acts of violence
against civilians, including all acts of terror, as well
as provocation, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric.
That commitment and our long-standing commitment
to non-violence and the pursuit of peaceful, political
and legal means for the realization of our people's rights
and ajust peace have been demonstrated over and over
again - also, regrettably, to no avail. Moreover, that
makes all the more repugnant Israel's attempts to paint
the leadership and entire people with the broad brush of
terrorism and its vicious claims concerning the social
assistance to the families of Palestinian prisoners and
martyrs who have suffered much under the unjust and
absolutely illegal occupation.
Palestinian families - defenceless children, women
and men - are bracing themselves for the prospect of yet
another barbaric military aggression by Israel against
Gaza, where the population has yet to recover from the
lasting impact ofthe destruction and human loss caused
by past Israeli wars, and coping capacities have been
depleted by the collective punishment of the illegal
Israeli blockade and the humanitarian catastrophe
that it has deliberately inflicted on them. The Security
Council must make its voice heard and act to deter
further violence and the escalation of this dangerous
situation. The Council is duty-bound to maintain
international peace and security and must not turn a
blind eye to Israel's violations and acts of aggression. It
must demand the occupying Power to respect its legal
obligations without exception, including to ensure the
safety and welfare of the civilian population under its
occupation pursuant to the fourth Geneva Convention
and ensure accountability in the case of continued
breaches. This is matter of urgency to avert another
onslaught and save innocent civilian lives.

We urge that the warnings be heeded and call for
serious action to prevent further brutality from raining
down on our people. We recognize and pay tribute to
Egypt and its efforts to secure a ceasefire. We also
recognize the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Special Coordinator Mladenov in seeking de-escalation
and the protection of civilian lives. We recognize, as
well, the vital humanitarian assistance that continues
to be provided by United Nations agencies on the
ground - even during these turbulent times, with the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in the lead constituting
a vital lifeline for the most vulnerable among our
people - our refugees. At the same time, we must
call on the Security Council, which today received
the ninth report (S/2019/251) of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) - in
writing, which we welcome - to remain vigilant in also
demanding an end to all other illegal Israeli policies
and practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Israel cannot be absolved,
under any pretext, of its obligations to completely and
immediately halt its settlement activities, which are
destroying the contiguity of the State of Palestine and
the viability of the two-State solution within the 1967
borders, in grave breach of international law and in
flagrant contempt of the Council. Furthermore, those
who are complicit in those crimes must not be spared
censure or accountability, including with regard to
attempts at the annexation of Jerusalem and the Syrian
Golan, in blatant violation of the prohibition on the
acquisition of territory by force, the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the rules-based order.

The Security Council must also demand that Israel,
the occupying Power, cease immediately all acts of
provocation and incitement, including by its extremist
settlers, and all military incursions, including attacks
on worshippers and the sanctity and historic status
quo of holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem, including
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Such reckless and unlawful
actions could lead to the outbreak of a religious conflict
with a far-reaching and disastrous impact.

Today we once again appeal to the Council to uphold
its responsibility to put an end to this illegal occupation
and historical injustice against the Palestinian people.
We urge the Council to act before it is too late, based
on the principles and parameters long enshrined in
the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016). We urge it to protect the
innocent lives endangered by this man-made disaster
and, beyond that, to seek solutions and to stop managing
crisis after crisis, tragedy after tragedy, generation
after generation, instead of resolving the conflict. The
lives of our people and their future depend on this; the
prospects for a just solution depend on this; and peace
and security in the Middle East depend on this.

I conclude by offering my apologies to my good
friend the Ambassador of Germany.

