Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by conveying my heartfelt gratitude to
the Malian, Senegalese and Guinea-Bissau authorities
for their warm welcome, and to the Secretariat, in
particular the secretariat of the Council, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) for having enabled and so ably
organized the Security Council mission from 4 to
7 March. We shall continue to work with the Secretariat
to draw all lessons from that important mission. I also
sincerely thank Angola and Senegal, with which we
formed a tight-knit team to conduct that important visit.

I should like to focus on the visit to Mali, where the
Security Council met with a great many stakeholders,
including the President and members of the
Government, as well as all the armed groups that signed
the peace agreement. We were also able to talk with
parliamentarians and State and local representatives
in Timbuktu, the imams of the Timbuktu mosques
and representatives of women's organizations. We also
had very useful exchanges with MINUSMA personnel
and representatives of Operation Barkhane and the
European Union Training Mission in Mali. Two years
after the first Security Council visit to Mali, our
mission allowed us to send three main messages.

The first message was that there can be no
peace without reconciliation among all Malians. All
components of Malian society throughout the territory
will have to come together and feel included. That was
the Council's message when it visited the northern part
of the country, including Timbuktu, for the first time.
The Security Council meeting with the main imams
in that city, which was deeply moving and powerful,
clearly demonstrated that Malians yearn for peace.

Our second message was that the efforts towards
reconciliation and the implementation of the peace
agreement must be accelerated. The Council strongly
urged all signatories to the peace agreement to speed
up its concrete implementation so as to bring its peace
dividends to the people of Mali. We were struck by the
fact that all players in Mali - including the Government
and the armed groups - spoke out clearly in favour of
the peace agreement. We were able to identify all that
was at stake in the full implementation of the agreement.

Our third message was that, in the face of the
ongoing threat of terrorism, our resolve must be
absolute. The Council offered its support to the Malian
forces that are at the front line of the fight against
terrorism, particularly in central Mali, which has been
destabilized by an increase in terrorist attacks since
early 2015. That is one reason why the Security Council
was determined to visit Mopti. The mission also allowed
us to demonstrate the Council's support for the Blue
Helmets of MINUSMA, whose courage and resolve in
protecting the civilian population are praiseworthy. All
stakeholders in Mali, including President Keita, loudly
called for MINUSMA to be strengthened so that it can
meet the asymmetric challenges it is facing. That was
also the message that the President of Senegal clearly
conveyed to us.

I have tried to be brief and clear in my assessment
of our very busy and useful visit to Mali.

