Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time that I am taking the floor in an open
meeting under your presidency, Madam, allow me to
congratulate your country, Jordan, on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and to wish every
success to you and to your whole Mission team. Chad
wishes to assure you of our constructive cooperation
and support.

My country welcomes the adoption just now of
resolution 2216 (2015), on Yemen, where the situation
is deeply worrisome on the security and humanitarian
fronts. The resolution addresses the root causes of the
conflict. Chad voted in favour of the resolution, hoping
to see the international community its join efforts with
those of the countries members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council so as to prevent the total collapse of Yemen,
which could pose a real threat to international peace and
security. In that regard, Chad supports the efforts of the
member countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council to
restore peace in Yemen. Accordingly, we emphasize the
need for strong mobilization by the entire international
community to put an end to the dangerous escalation
of the conflict and to promote the ongoing negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations in respect
of the legitimacy represented by President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, including resolution 2201 (2015).

The Security Council must send a clear and strong
message to all Yemeni parties, especially the Houthis,
to call them to immediately stop the violence and
respect the democratic transition under the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement, as well as decisions
of the National Dialogue Conference and the agreement
on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism. It is not acceptable that
an armed militia could use violence to undermine
the achievements of the National Dialogue or subvert
constitutional legitimacy.

In conclusion, Chad reminds all parties to the
conflict of their obligations to respect international
humanitarian law and to avoid targeting hospitals,
schools, civilian infrastructure and camps for refugees
and displaced persons.

