Mr. Konishi (Japan): My delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us, which endorses the
agreements signed in Belgrade between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), on 16 and 15 October,
respectively, concerning the verification of compliance by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and all others in
Kosovo with the requirements of the Council's resolution
1199 (1998).

The situation in Kosovo remains serious. Japan is
especially concerned over the humanitarian situation, in
View of the winter which has almost arrived in that region.

In order to improve such a grave humanitarian
situation and to pursue the political settlement of the
Kosovo crisis, the authorities in Belgrade, especially
President Milosevic himself, must comply swiftly and fully
with the commitments contained in the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, which include cessation of
hostilities, withdrawal of security and military forces,
unimpeded access of humanitarian workers, cooperation
with The Hague Tribunal, facilitation of the return of
refugees and displaced persons, and commencement of a
meaningful dialogue with the Kosovo Albanian leadership.
My Government believes that the verification missions
which are to be established will play a significant role in
ensuring compliance with those commitments.
On the other hand, we should stress that the leadership
and all other elements of the Kosovo Albanian community
are also bound to comply with the provisions contained in
the resolutions of this Council. My delegation believes that
the Kosovo Albanians would be making a grave error if
they were to interpret the messages being sent not only
from this Council but also from other parts of the world as
signs of support for their terrorist actions or for their
demand to gain independence for Kosovo.

A settlement of the crisis in Kosovo must be pursued
by political and peaceful means. This is the basic position
of Japan. My country greatly appreciates the various efforts
made in that direction by the international community, in
particular by the Contact Group countries.

In order to participate in those international efforts, the
Government of Japan decided in August to extend its
humanitarian assistance through the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in the
amount of $2.31 million in response to the United Nations
Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal. In September my
Government dispatched a mission to work on the ground
for the purpose of conveying to the parties concerned our
position on the peaceful resolution of the crisis and of
studying the possibility of a further contribution by Japan.
Yesterday, 23 October, based upon the results obtained by
that mission and in response to that renewed United
Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal, my
Government announced its new contribution, totalling
$7.3 million, through UNHCR, the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) and other agencies.

Finally, I should like to express the readiness of my
country to continue to contribute in various ways to the
settlement of the problems in Kosovo and our sincere
hope and conviction that the Verification Missions of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization will discharge
their tasks successfully.

