Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Mr. Marzuki
Darusman, Chairperson of the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar, for his chilling and
insightful briefing and more broadly for the outstanding
work that his team has carried out, professionally
and independently, in difficult conditions. The 875
interviews conducted, along with the variety of
information sources used, attest to the solidity of the
work that he has done. Let me also take the opportunity
to emphasize the importance for the Security Council
to continue to rely upon the work of the instruments
established by the Human Rights Council in order to
fully carry out its mandate to maintain international
peace and security.

Since the violence of August 2017, France has
consistently underlined its concern and called for the
mobilization ofthe Security Council in response to what
President Macron, echoing the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, has described since September 2017
as "ethnic cleansing". France is extremely concerned
about the findings of the fact-finding mission's report
(A/HRC/39/64), according to which charges ofgenocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes - committed
in particular against the Rohingya in Rakhine state but
also in Kachin and Shan states - could be brought
against the Burmese army and security forces. The fact-
finding mission's report concludes in paragraph 85 that
on the basis of "reasonable inference", there are factors
"that have allowed genocidal intent to be established ".
It also notes that attacks and sexual violence committed
by the Burmese army in villages, including against
children, constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law that may constitute war crimes.

Establishing the facts is essential ifjustice is to one

day be done and to enabling genuine reconciliation.
And the facts that have been presented to us, along with
their merciless premeditation, amount to the highest
level of severity within the scale of international
crimes. The Security Council cannot turn a blind
eye to those facts, unless it relinquishes its own
responsibilities and renounces its very raison d'etre. If
the Security Council feels that such a situation does not
concern it, what situation would? Let us also be aware
that our action or inaction in response to the tragedy is
being closely watched by all those who could commit
comparable atrocities. This means that our collective
responsibility is imperative, now and in the future. May
Mr. Darusman's message and warning be clearly heard
by all.

The sentencing on 3 September of two Reuters
journalists to seven years in prison by the Burmese
courts, while they were preparing a report on the
serious allegations of human rights violations in the
Rakhine state, is the latest example of the climate of
fear that hinders the investigative efforts on the ground.
It constitutes a serious violation of the freedom of the
press. On behalf of France, I reiterate the call for the
release of those two journalists.

In that context, and in accordance with the
presidential statement adopted by the Council almost a
year ago (S/PRST/2017/22), we must remain mobilized
around three main and complementary priorities.

The first is humanitarian support for the Rohingyas
who remain in Rakhine state and to refugees in the
camps in Bangladesh. In Burma, the tripartite agreement
concluded in June by the Burmese authorities, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme
was an important step, but its implementation by the
Burmese authorities must be significantly accelerated.
The restoration of unhindered humanitarian access to
all affected villages in Rakhine state is urgent to meet
the needs of the population. It is also urgent for the
displaced Rohingya people in Rakhine state to regain
full freedom of movement and access to basic services.
In Bangladesh, we reiterate our appreciation for the
exceptional generosity of the authorities and the people,
and for the outstanding work being carried out by United
Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations. As
long as the conditions for their voluntary, dignified and
sustainable return are not met, international assistance
will remain essential to supporting Rohingya refugees
living in extremely precarious conditions.

The second priority is the effective implementation
of the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, formerly led by Kofi Annan, for
which we have been calling for more than a year. The
Commission proposed a road map, which the Burmese
Government has accepted and the Security Council has
endorsed, to enable all the people of Rakhine state to
live together in peace. France reiterates in particular
the importance ofthe recommendations on the question
of citizenship and the revision of the 1982 law, as well
as equal rights, including the right of access to public
services, health care and education for all persons
belonging to the Rohingya community.

The report contains other very relevant
recommendations on the freedom of movement, the
socioeconomic development of the Arakan and the
fight against discrimination against all minorities
that, if effectively implemented, would constitute
important confidence-building measures allowing for
the voluntary return of refugees in accordance with
international law. Through that, what is at stake is the
possibility of a stable, inclusive and democratic rule
of law in Burma, governed by a civilian power and
based on the equal recognition and citizenship of all,
without distinction.

Finally, the third priority, which is inseparable
from the first two, is the fight against impunity. We
call on the international community to identify all the
consequences of the conclusions of the fact-finding
mission. The decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on 6 September,
which concluded that the Court has jurisdiction over
the alleged deportation of Rohingya from Burma to
Bangladesh, is an important step in the fight against
impunity. We welcome the decision of the Court's
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to open a preliminary
review of the allegations and reiterate our full support
for the Prosecutor and the ICC in their ongoing work.

The decision of the Human Rights Council to
establish an independent and permanent investigative
mechanism is also a very important step. France calls
on all States and regional and international bodies to
support the rapid operationalization of that mechanism,
which will allow for the collection and preservation of
evidence concerning all allegations ofcrimes committed
in Burma. We call on all States to cooperate with the
ICC and the mechanism. The evidence collected will
be used in proceedings before competent national
or international jurisdictions. Finally, we call on the
Burmese commission of inquiry to cooperate with all
United Nations bodies and mandate-holders.
The situation of extreme distress of the Rohingya
population is a crushing blow to the human conscience
and violates all the norms and values that inspire and
form the basis of the United Nations. That is why we
must step up our efforts and our collective commitment
to shedding light on the crimes that have been committed
in order for justice to be done and for the Rohingyas
who wish to return to Burma to do so in dignified,
safe and sustainable conditions. The United Nations
has a vital role to play, and we recall in that regard our
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
France will continue to be actively engaged with
respect to this major crisis and stands ready to consider
all the options available to the Council to contribute to
a lasting solution.

