Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Let me begin by
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of February. Although it is
rather late in the month, I would like to assure you of
the full cooperation of our delegation.

Let me also thank you, Mr. President, and members
of the Security Council for giving me the opportunity
to address the Council on this issue of vital importance
to my country. I must confess that I do so with mixed
feelings.

On the one hand, we are deeply appreciative of the
crucial contribution that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) is making in our country
in critically important areas and under very trying
circumstances. UNMISS emerged out of the strong
support and solidarity that the international community
had for our new country, which had been devastated
and rendered vulnerable for half a century by war.
This initial support now extends to helping the country
respond to the crisis that broke out in mid-December
2013 and soon expanded into a full-fledged civil war.

On the other hand, the picture that the report
(S/2015/118) paints is very disturbing and a challenge
to our pride, dignity and the value of our independence
and sovereignty. This, of course, should intensify our
motivation to find a remedy with a sense of urgency,
in collaboration with our regional and international
partners. But for our Government and people, it also
gives rise to paradoxical feelings about our place in the
international community and our relations with those
with the goodwill to help the country and its suffering
people.

As I have repeatedly stated to the Council, painful
as the reports of violence and gross violations of
human rights in our country are, we do not want to be
defensive or in denial. Quite the contrary, as I have just
indicated, we appreciate and are grateful that all this
is a manifestation of the support that the international
community is demonstrating for our beleaguered
country and suffering people. The critical question is,
what can we do together to address this national crisis.

As I read the report of the Secretary-General and
heard the statements just made, I was struck by two
elements that may provide a basis for collaboration in
resolving the crisis. The first is the impression given
that the whole country is in turmoil. We know that while
three states are affected by the conflict, the rest of the
country, seven states, is experiencing relative peace
and harmony. Secondly, the impression conveyed by
the report is that the international community, through
UNMISS, is virtually the one managing the situation,
with the Government manifestly failing in discharging
its primary responsibility for protecting and assisting
its populations. Worse, it is made to look as though the
international community cares more about the people
of South Sudan than their own leaders. One has to
witness the pain that President Salva Kiir feels and
articulates about this senseless war and the suffering it
is inflicting on our people to appreciate how much he
cares for his country and all his people.

There is a need to bridge the discrepancy between
the primary responsibility of the State and the
complementary support of the international community,
in this case, UNMISS. Although South Sudan is
now violently divided between the Government and
the opposition, it is important to remember that the
leadership was popularly elected and represents the
legitimacy of the Government and the sovereignty of
the country. It is of course prudent to be connected to
both sides and to work on fostering national consensus,
but the United Nations should work in collaboration
with the current Government to address the practical
problems facing the country.

It is one thing to condemn the leadership of the
country and threaten the imposition of sanctions, which,
as I have had occasion to say to the Council, would
only generate an adversarial relationship and aggravate
the situation; it is quite another thing to reaffirm that
the international community went to South Sudan
in the first place to support the country, that recent
developments may indeed undermine the nature and
magnitude of that support, but that remedies can be
found to restore a constructive basis for partnership
in the stabilization and development of the country. It
would be an ironic double jeopardy to punish a country
that is already suffering from an acute crisis. I believe
it would be appropriate for UNMISS and the country
team to meet with the country's relevant authorities
in the Government to discuss and strategize the
most constructive way of addressing these crises and
concurrently use their mutual strategic understanding
as a basis for reaching out to the armed opposition.

What the report does not cover, or even allude to,
presumably because of its complexity and sensitivity,
is the interconnection between the conflicts within the
Sudan and South Sudan that spill over their borders
and paradoxically bind them together. Each country
accuses the other of supporting its rebels, although they
both deny those allegations. But, unless these internal
conflicts are addressed to promote a comprehensive
regional peace, the two countries will not be at peace
internally or between themselves. I realize that this is
probably asking too much of the Council and the two
countries, but it is a perspective that should not be
overlooked.

Needless to say, I am not expecting any miracles
in the search for solutions to these challenges. What
I am proposing is to bridge the impression that the
United Nations is virtually running the country,
that the Government is delinquent in discharging
its primary responsibility for the protection of its
population and that there are no national policies, plans
or programmes for addressing the crisis the country is
going through. I also believe that it is necessary to put
the crisis in the regional context to promote broader
regional cooperation, specifically between the Sudan
and South Sudan. To develop common ground towards
that admittedly ambitious vision, it is in our mutual
interests to improve communication, cooperation and
complementarity in addressing the challenges within
South Sudan and its relationship with the Sudan.

