Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to start by
congratulating you, Madam President, and your team
on the excellent work done during your presidency of
the Council this month. I should also like to commend
the members of the Permanent Mission of Luxembourg
for their professionalism in steering the work of the
Council during the exceedingly busy month of March.

Imagine an early morning of a spring day in
Jerusalem - the soft breeze carrying the smell of
thyme; the first sunshine thread bringing warmth; the
knell ofa church bell sounding in the distance, echoing
the muezzin calling for prayer; quick steps on gravel of
an early riser going to the temple; a city on the verge of
resuming its bustling activities. That is what Jerusalem
should sound like.

But today, the story is completely different there.
The sounds are those of crashing rubble from houses in
East Jerusalem being demolished by Israeli authorities;
the voices are those of shouting soldiers and settlers,
and the hurried steps are those of scared Palestinian
children running away. Jerusalem, the holy city of the
three monolithic religions, is becoming a city of one
voice. Jerusalem is being denied its inclusive tradition
by the inadmissible and illegal behaviour of settlers
protected by Israeli forces, in particular in the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque, where those shielded settlers are
spreading fear and intimidation and Israeli forces are
closing the gates and refusing access to worshippers.

How many letters of complaint must the Council
receive for it to condemn these illegal activities and to
compel Israel to abide by its obligations? Yes, it has
obligations under the customs and rules of international
law, under the Charter of the United Nations and
under resolutions adopted by this body; obligations
under article 4 of the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict, to refrain from any act of hostility directed
against this holy site; obligations under article 38 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, to respect people's
religious convictions; its obligations under article 18
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights to respect a people's right to observe
and practice their own religion.

How many of these provisions, treaties and norms
should Israel be allowed to disregard before the Council
reacts? The Israeli practices in Jerusalem are only part
of a wider scheme to create new realities on the ground,
making the two-State solution a more difficult objective
to attain. Indeed, people are being segregated based
on their national and religious identities and isolated
in very restricted areas in an alarming reminder of
apartheid.

Demolition, the confiscation of land, forced
displacement and the authorization ofillegal settlements
are just a few examples of these Israeli practices.
Indeed, on 28 March Israel demolished a two-storey
building, followed by the demolition of European
Union-funded humanitarian shelters in Jabal Al-Baba
on 8 April to make room for new settlements. As if this
were not enough, the decision authorizing settlers to
move in to Al-Rajabi House in Hebron illustrates yet
another expansion of this settlement policy.

As Council members know, Israel did not live
up to its commitments to release the fourth batch of
Palestinian prisoners. Moreover, nine months ago,
while commending Mr. Kerry's efforts to relaunch
the peace process between Palestinians and Israelis,
we cautioned that Israeli persistence in its illegal
settlements activities would hinder these efforts and
jeopardize the negotiations. Today, the reaction of the
Arab and Muslim world, the European Union and many
other countries to these illegal settlement activities and
policies is unanimous, and has culminated in a collective
condemnation through the adoption of four resolutions
by the Human Rights Council. Our challenge today
remains to strengthen the resilience ofthe peace process
and press for a just and comprehensive solution to all
aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in a rejection of
partial solutions and in accordance with United Nations
relevant resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the integral provisions of the Arab Peace Initiative.

Turning to my country, Lebanon, the Government of
national interest has reiterated its respect for all United
Nations resolutions and reaffirmed its commitment to
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and its
call on the international community to help us to put an
end to the Israeli violation of our sovereignty. Almost
daily overflights and unilateral aggressive actions,
such as Israel's bombing of the houses of civilians in the
south of Lebanon, not only exacerbate tensions but also
undermine joint efforts of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon to
fulfil their mandate under the said resolution.

My Government has also highlighted the following
priorities: preserving the sovereignty of the State,
ensuring the stability of the country, and guaranteeing
its security. In this regard, I am proud to announce that
the Lebanese Armed Forces have begun the successful
implementation of security plans in Tripoli and the
Bekaa, and to undertake measures to curb the threat of
terrorist attacks.

Furthermore, the Government of Lebanon is
determined to expedite the implementation of the road
map established to mitigate the socioeconomic impact of
the Syrian crisis in the country, based on the assessment
study prepared jointly with the World Bank. In the said
report, the figures speak for themselves. Lebanon's
gross domestic product shrank by $7.5 billion, while
the cost to the Treasury was estimated at $5.1 billion,
including $3.6 billion in expenses directly used to
provide services for the Syrian refugees, and Treasury
revenues dropped by $1.5 billion due to the decline in
economic growth.

Today, the number of refugees fleeing Syria into
Lebanon and registered with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has exceeded
1,034,000. As has been stated by Mr. Antonio Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,

"if the flow of people seeking safety in Lebanon
continues, there could be over 1.6 million refugees
in the country by the end of this year. But even
now, Lebanon already has the highest per-capita
concentration of refugees of any country in recent
history, with nearly 230 registered Syrian refugees
for every 1,000 Lebanese."

That is more than 140 times as many refugees per

inhabitants as in your esteemed country, Madam

President.

Every effort must be pursued to support my
country facing such challenges. In this regard, Lebanon
expresses its deep appreciation to the Government of
France for hosting the International Support Group for
Lebanon on 5 March, and commends the members ofthe
Group for their unwavering commitment. Lebanon also
looks forward to the Rome Conference on building up
the capacities of the Lebanese Army, and considers the
generous contribution of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
to be the cornerstone in this endeavour. Furthermore,
my country highly values the contributions made to the
multi-donor trust fund. These are but the first seeds
of financial assistance to respond to the dire need for
greater aid to help the country cope with more than
1 million Syrian refugees. Lebanon calls for more
generous contributions in this regard.

In addition, Lebanon has proposed measures to curb
this existential threat through the provision of direct
assistance to Government institutions, to honour the
commitments made during the pledging conferences, to
increase the number of refugees included in resettlement
programmes based on the principle of burden-sharing,
and, most importantly, to focus serious efforts on
widening the humanitarian space to accommodate the
Syrian refugees in safe camps inside Syria or in safe
zones along the border.

More than three years into the conflict, Syria is
now, in the words of the Secretary-General, the "biggest
humanitarian and peace and security crisis facing the
world" (S/2014/208, para. 49). These words translate
the sufferings of the Syrian people - millions of
internally displaced people and millions upon millions
of refugees. Today, more than ever, the international
community should overcome its inability to put an end
to this raging conflict and to offer to the Syrian people
their basic right to choose and live in dignity and peace
by paving the way to a political process that will fulfil
their aspirations.

