Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I am pleased and honoured
to address the Council under your stewardship, Sir,
concerning the presidential statement on South Sudan
that has just been adopted (S/PRST/2015/9).

We have spoken on this issue on so many occasions
that there is no longer much to be said. We have always
maintained that we appreciate that the measures taken
by the Council emanate from the deep concern about
the conditions of our country and people, in particular
under the current crisis. However, at the outset let
me express my delegation's disappointment that the
Council continues to deliberate on important issues of
peace and security in South Sudan without extensive
consultations with the African region. This is not in line
with the spirit of the cooperation framework between
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council. Equally, although
my delegation is courteously consulted sometimes on
the draft Security Council resolutions or statements
pertaining to South Sudan, our views are hardly ever
reflected in the Council's final documents.

The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
is committed to the peaceful solution of the conflict
in our country. President Salva Kiir has emphatically
made the point on numerous occasions, including in his
statement to the nation Wednesday, 18 March. In this
respect, we commend the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for its relentless efforts in
seeking peaceful settlement of crisis in South Sudan.

Indeed, my Government has been engaged in the
peace talks in good faith and has accepted various
proposals made by the mediators in all rounds of the
talks, including the establishment of a transitional
government of national unity. Due to his desire for
inclusivity in IGAD peace talks, the President of the
Republic allowed for the participation of a wide range
of stakeholders, including faith-based groups, civil
society organizations, youth, women and political
parties, so as to ensure ownership and inclusivity of the
peace process.

The Sudan People's Liberation Movement in
Opposition (SPLM-IO), under the leadership of
Mr. Riek Machar, continues to shift positions and put
unreasonable demands on the table, which has made it
extremely difficult to reach consensus on contentious
national issues. In the last round of peace talks, the
rebels demanded two armies during the 30-month
interim period followed by the amalgamation of forces,
rather than their integration, as should be the case. They
also demanded the position of First Vice-President and
a 50/50 share in the formation of the Government. It is
incomprehensible that a country can have two separate
armies under two different commands. The Government
proposed the integration of rebel forces into the national
army - a practice that has been successfully tested in
countries emerging from civil wars across the globe, in
particular in Africa.

The SPLM-IO also demanded that the Government
pay the debt incurred by the Opposition during its
rebellion, introducing a new formula for wealth-
sharing. This means, in other words, paying them for the
weapons and ammunition that they used to kill innocent
civilians in South Sudan. Again, the Government did
not see any justification for these demands, except
that they were meant to create obstacles to reaching an
agreement within the time frame concluding 5 March,
given by IGAD. Therefore, the moral equivalency
implied in today's presidential statement - which
expresses disappointment that both President Salva Kiir
and Rick Machar have failed to conclude an agreement
on the transitional arrangements, as was outlined in the
1 February 2015 statement - is not correct.

President Salva Kiir, in his recent public address
to the nation, extended an olive branch of peace to the
SPLM-IO and former detainees. The President called
upon the SPLM-IO to accept the general amnesty the
President offered and return to their units with their
previous Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA)
ranks and ordered the Chief of General Staff to send
directives to all SPLA units to receive the rebels and to
provide them with necessary assistance. Furthermore,
the President called upon the former detainees to
come home and contribute to implementing the
SPLM. reunification agreement, which was signed on
21 January 2015 in Arusha, Tanzania.

As I have stated before the Council on other
occasions, I strongly believe that sanctions rarely
achieve their desired objectives but only encourage
the hardening of positions towards confrontations. The
international community can use more constructive and
productive means ofengaging the parties than sanctions.
The Government is understandably disappointed by the
plan to impose sanctions, rather than adopt measures
that would encourage the parties to cooperate with the
international community for peace. Sanctions at this
critical juncture in the history of South Sudan will
only devastate the economy and increase economic
pressures on people who are already suffering and who
are desperate.

Despite our differences, we are sincerely
appreciative of the opportunity granted us by the
Council to share our views and we remain hopeful
that, from this exchange of views, common ground can
emerge, divisive measure be avoided, and productive
actions agreed upon.

The meeting rose at 4.20pm.
