The President (spoke in Russian): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

From the very beginning of the Palestinian-Israeli
crisis, the Russian Federation has condemned the
violence and the excessive use of force and has done
its utmost to put a stop to these actions and to resume
the peace process. To this end, the President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia, Mr. Putin and
Mr. Ivanov, have been in constant contact with
Palestinian and Israeli leaders, leaders of other
interested Governments and the Secretary-General.
These contacts are continuing at this time.

We note that the combined efforts of the
international community to overcome the crisis on the
West Bank and in the Gaza Strip are beginning to bear
fruit. As has been announced, proximity talks between
officially authorized Israeli and Palestinian delegations
will begin on 19 December in Washington. Perhaps this
will prove to be a significant step towards resuming
direct dialogue. We expect that it will allow progress to
be made towards providing international protection for
the Palestinian civilian population on the West Bank
and in Gaza - an objective we fully subscribe to and
which perhaps realistically can only be achieved if
both the Palestinians and the Israelis consent to it.

We deem it particularly important, therefore, at
this crucial stage not to take measures that would
further complicate the diplomatic efforts undertaken
and exacerbate the situation without making it possible
to get closer to the objective of protection-
specifically, the protection of Palestinian civilians.

In view of all of these factors, the delegation of
the Russian Federation abstained in the voting on the
draft resolution. That decision was not an easy one for
us, as a sponsor of the peace process. However, we are
convinced that the only way to act is with the consent
of both parties. We believe that an international
presence in the occupied Palestinian territories can be
ensured only if the two parties agree on the conditions.
We will continue to try to achieve that objective.

In more general terms, we will continue to
undertake efforts to try to find an early settlement to
the Israeli-Palestinian crisis on the basis of what has
been agreed between the parties to the conflict and
with the support of the international community.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
11

S/PVAZAS

 

