Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Ms. Sylvie Vale'rie Ba'ipo-Temon, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic, to this meeting. I also thank
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General; Ambassador Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security;
Ambassador Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa,
European External Action Service; Ambassador Hilale,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission; and Ambassador
Ipo, on behalf of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic, for
their briefings.

In the past month there have been breakthroughs
on the issue of the Central African Republic. After
more than two weeks of negotiations, all parties to
the conflict officially signed a Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic in Bangui on 6 February. China welcomes
this progress.

The peace agreement represents the political will
of all parties to the conflict. It is also the result of a
multi-stakeholder mediation process by the countries
of the region, including the Sudan, as well as the
African Union and the United Nations. It was not
easy to achieve. The Central African Republic still
faces difficult security, political and humanitarian
situations, resulting in many practical difficulties
in the implementation of the Agreement. All parties
must honour their commitments thereunder, translate
their political will into genuine action and effectively
promote the peace and reconciliation process in the
Central African Republic.

The follow-up monitoring mechanism must be
established as soon as possible. The countries of the
region and the international community must provide
support for the implementation of the Agreement.

China commends the important role played by
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in the promotion of peace and stability
in the Central African Republic. We also support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
MINUSCA in the active implementation ofthe Mission's
mandate. China hopes that MINUSCA will continue
to contribute efforts to enhancing the administrative
capacity of the Government of the Central African
Republic, promoting security-sector reform and
implementing the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation programme.

The additional 900 military personnel authorized
by the Council are in place with special equipment
and are performing their duties well. We trust that
MINUSCA will take advantage of this window of
opportunity, continue to carry out its work on the
basis of its mandate and provide solid support for the
implementation of the Agreement.

Long-term peace and stability in the Central
African Republic will not be possible without sustained
support from the United Nations, the African Union,
the countries of the region and international partners.
All parties must enhance their coordination with the
Government of the Central African Republic, respect
its leadership and, on the basis of the evolving situation
and the needs on the ground, provide tailored support.

The priority at this moment is to assist the country
in achieving peace and reconciliation. The Council
must remain united and create the conditions necessary
for the situation in the country to improve.

The imposition of sanctions on the Central African
Republic is aimed at restoring national stability and
social order in the country at an early date. Against that
backdrop, when the situation there improves, China will
support the Council in adjusting the relevant sanctions,
in line with the situation on the ground and the wishes
and needs of the Central African Republic.

