Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
Ms. Annick Girardin, France's Minister of State for
Development and Francophonie, would have liked to be
here to speak on the subject of small island developing
States dealing with threats to peace and security, an
important issue for France and one particularly close
to Ms. Girardin's heart, since she herself is from the
archipelago of Saint Pierre and Miquelon in the north
Atlantic. She was unavoidably detained in Paris on
important business and has therefore asked me to
convey the following statement to the Council on her
behalf.
"I had hoped to be in the Council today, but
unfortunately that has turned out not to be possible.
I would first like to thank the New Zealand
presidency for organizing today's debate on such an
important subject. France endorses the statement to
be delivered later on behalf of the European Union
and would like to emphasize on the following
points.

"I would like to reaffirm the message that
there can be no development without security
and no security without development. France has
conveyed that message to Africa, Mali and the
Central African Republic, but it is true everywhere,
and security in small island developing States also
involves anticipating climate risks. In 2015, the year
of sustainable development goals and the twenty-
first session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP 21), I would like to emphasize that
aspect and offer a concrete proposal for progress.

"In the face of the increasing numbers
of climate disasters, I hardly need stress the
importance of warning systems to the Council. We
all remember Cyclone Pam, which hit Vanuatu in
the middle of the Sendai Third World Conference
on Disaster Risk Reduction. At the Conference,
France proposed the simple goal of mobilizing the
international community's support for the most
vulnerable countries, including small islands and
least-developed countries (LDCs), in developing
climate warning systems. France considers it part
of its responsibility to share its know-how and
expertise in order to help those countries that are
most vulnerable to climate change. That topic will
be central to the success of COP 21, and it is why we
devoted a round table to the issue at the Caribbean
Climate 2015 Summit, chaired by our President,
Francois Hollande.

"The international community is already
mobilizing around the teams from the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
(UNISDR) and the World Bank. The Global
Framework for Climate Services has enabled much
progress to be made. But we are still far from our
goal. Currently, not all least-developed countries
and small island States possess working warning
systems, and only four or five of almost 40 small
island developing States have them. The numbers
for LDCs are very similar. According to the WMO,
54 per cent of surface meteorological stations and
71 per cent of satellites deliver no data.

"However, warning systems help save lives and
reduce the economic cost of disasters considerably.
That is why France, in close coordination with
Norway, the WMO, the UNISDR and the World
Bank, has launched the Climate Risk Early Warning
System initiative. Its objectives are simple. They
are, first, strengthening and expanding action on
the part of the international community in support
of warning systems in vulnerable countries;
secondly, mobilizing additional financing for
supporting and strengthening actions already
under way in order to help achieve global coverage
for populations exposed to extreme weather events
between now and 2020. We must mobilize to fill
the gaps and enable the actors on the ground, at
the regional, national and local levels, to work in
good conditions, so that the populations concerned,
almost all of whom now who now have mobile
phones and other modern means of communication,
can be alerted in a timely manner when a disaster
threatens.

"Finally, there is the question of means. They
are within our reach. If we can mobilize about
$100 million by 2020, we should be able to change
the game in most countries. France is ready to
commit to that, and I hope all those here can too. I
will be putting our proposal on paper and hope that
between now and September we can work together
to raise the money. We also have genuine interest
from countries such as Mexico, Cuba and others
with experience that they are willing to share at the
regional level, for example. Businesses, especially
insurance and new-technology companies, should
also be mobilized. Together, we can make progress
with this project, which can be so useful to small
islands' security and development."

