The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Indonesia and Portugal in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia) and Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) took seats at
the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 3 September 1999 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document 8/1999/944.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the successful
popular consultation of the East Timorese people on
30 August 1999 and the letter from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Council of 3
September 1999 (S/l999/944) announcing the ballot
result. The Council expresses its support for the
courage of those who turned out in record numbers to
express their views. It regards the popular consultation

as an accurate reflection of the views of the East
Timorese people.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the
extraordinary work of the Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General. It also commends the courage
and dedication of the Special Representative for the
East Timor popular consultation and of the staff of
the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) in organizing and conducting the
popular consultation in extremely difficult
conditions.

"The Security Council calls on all parties, both
inside and outside East Timor, to respect the result
of the popular consultation. The Council urges the
East Timorese people to work together to implement
their decision as freely and democratically expressed
in the ballot and to cooperate in the building of
peace and prosperity in the territory. The Security
Council now looks to the Indonesian Government to
take the necessary constitutional steps to implement
the result of the ballot, in accordance with the
Agreements of 5 May 1999 (8/1999/513, annexes I-III).

"The Security Council recognizes that the
Agreements of 5 May 1999 which led to the popular
consultation of the East Timorese people would not
have been possible without the timely initiative of
the Government of Indonesia and the constructive
attitude of the Government of Portugal. It commends
the sustained efforts of the Governments of
Indonesia and Portugal, through the good offices of
the Secretary-General, to find a just, comprehensive
and internationally acceptable solution to the
question of East Timor, and expresses its
appreciation to the Government of Indonesia for its
cooperation with the United Nations in the process.

"The Security Council condemns the violence
in East Timor which both preceded and followed the
ballot of 30 August 1999. It expresses its
condolences to the families of United Nations local
staff and others so tragically killed. It underlines the
need for the result to be implemented in an
atmosphere of peace and security without further
violence and intimidation. In accordance with its
responsibility for maintaining peace and security
under the Agreements of 5 May 1999, it is for the
Government of Indonesia to take steps to prevent
further violence. It also looks to the Government of
 

Indonesia to guarantee the security of UNAMET
personnel and premises. The Security Council is ready
to consider sympathetically any proposal from the
Secretary-General to ensure the peaceful
implementation of the popular consultation process.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to report as soon as possible on the
implementation of the ballot result, including
recommendations on the mandate, size and structure
of the United Nations presence in East Timor in the
implementation phase (Phase III).

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 pm.

