Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your country's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month. I thank you for
convening this open debate. I also wish to express my
delegation's appreciation to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive briefing.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and with the statement made
by the representative of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the
Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

Malaysia welcomes the Secretary-General's visit to
the Middle East last week, which helped to maintain the
attention of the international community on the urgent
need to address the root causes of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Malaysia fully concurs with the Secretary-
General in that the status quo is neither sustainable nor
desirable.

Last month, the Russell Tribunal on Palestine
convened in Brussels to examine violations of
international law during the recent conflict in Gaza.
Based on the findings made by 12 renowned experts
from various fields and countries, the Tribunal found
Israel to have committed crimes against humanity and
genocide. The Tribunal also stated that Israel, as the
occupying power in the Gaza Strip, could not justify
its military aggression in Gaza as self-defence. Under
international law, people living under colonial rule or
foreign occupation are entitled to resist occupation.
Thus, Israel's actions were aimed at perpetuating its
occupation and suppressing resistance rather than
resorting to force in lawful self-defence. Israel was
also found to have violated two cardinal principals of
international humanitarian law, namely, proportionality
and the need to clearly distinguish between civilian and
military targets.

In recent months, Israel announced a new expansion
ofillegal settlements in occupied Palestinian territory in
the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. Palestinians
continue to be subject to forced displacement as their
houses and property are demolished by the occupying
Power. Those Israeli settlements are without a doubt
illegal under international law and an obstacle to the
creation of a Palestinian State.

Malaysia is also deeply concerned about increasing
attacks and provocations by Israel on various holy
sites in Jerusalem, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound. We strongly condemn attempts by Israeli
authorities to change the status and identity of the
holy sites in Jerusalem. We call for such provocations
to cease before the situation escalates and turns into
another senseless and tragic incident.

The international community has repeatedly urged
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
in View of persistent and flagrant violations by Israel
of international law, international humanitarian law,
United Nations resolutions and the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice. And yet the Security
Council remains in paralysis, and Israel carries on its
illegal actions with impunity.

Since the Security Council continues to shut its door
on Palestine, it should not blame or punish Palestine for
trying to open other doors in reliance on international
law and multilateralism in order to attain the fulfilment
of its long denied right to self-determination. The
Palestinian decision to accede to various international
conventions and treaties earlier this year, including
the four Geneva Conventions, should be welcomed.
The move is a step in the right direction, that is,
towards making Palestine a responsible member of the
international community, bound by the rules and norms
of international law.

While Malaysia agrees that the final solution
of the conflict remains in bilateral negotiations, it is
not acceptable to allow negotiations to go on forever,
as the Palestinian people continue to suffer. We
are perpetuating the historic injustice against the
Palestinian people if we insist that their only hope for a
Palestinian State depends on endless negotiations with
Israel, while at the same time, we allow Israel to move
further and further away from a two-State solution.
Malaysia therefore strongly supports the Palestinian
effort to set a time frame to end the Israeli occupation.
We call on the international community, especially
the Security Council, not to shut its door again but to
back the endeavour to end colonialism and apartheid
against Palestine for the sake of peace and stability in
the region.

Malaysia welcomes the outcome of the recent
donors Conference in Cairo. We commend the
Governments of Egypt and Norway for convening
the conference. Malaysia remains committed to
providing and facilitating the delivery of assistance
to the Palestinian people. As part of our contribution
to the reconstruction of Gaza, Malaysia contributed a
sum of $1.35 million to Palestine, both bilaterally and
multilaterally. That includes $100,000 to the Gaza Flash
Appeal launched by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
$100,000 to the Organization of Islamic Cooperation's
Islamic Solidarity Fund from the Palestine People's
Humanitarian Trust Fund set up by the Malaysian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. During the recent clashes
in Gaza this summer, Malaysian non-governmental
organizations also delivered 40 tonnes of humanitarian
and medical supplies to the Palestinians in Gaza to help
ease their suffering.
The international community needs to do
more than just rebuild Gaza. As emphasized by the
Secretary-General during his visit to Gaza this week,
the build-destroy/build-destroy cycle must be broken.
The 50-day conflict in the summer of 2014 was Israel's
heaviest assault on the Gaza Strip since the beginning
of its occupation of Gaza in 1967. We pray that it will
be the last.

