Mr. Bichler (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania;
the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, and Serbia and Montenegro;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Norway, member of the European Economic Area,
align themselves with this statement.

First of all, I wish on behalf of the European
Union to express my appreciation to Ambassador
Denisov, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for his comprehensive briefing on
the activities carried out by the Committee during the
past three months and on the programme of work for
the next 90 days, which the EU fully supports.

The European Union very much looks forward to
pursuing its good cooperation with the standing and
new members of the CTC. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ruperez for his valuable work since assuming the
leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). The European Union is looking
forward to the CTED's becoming fully operational
during the current 90-day period.

The European Union continues to attach great
importance to the open debates of the Security Council
on the issue of counter-terrorism, and in particular on
the work of the Committee. They contribute to
strengthening the general acceptance and legitimacy of
the CTC among all the members of the United Nations
family.

While the European Union actively supports your
call, Sir, on all States that have not submitted their
reports on time to do so as soon as possible, we would
like to focus today on three aspects which the
European Union believes deserve particular attention.
First is the development of a comprehensive
strategy to fight terrorism. At its summit meeting in
Brussels in December 2004, the European Union
reiterated its determination to combat the continued
threat of terrorism through a comprehensive and
integrated approach, reinforcing both internal and
international cooperation, in accordance with the
principles on which the Union is founded.

The European Union also reiterated its conviction
that, in order to be effective in the long run, the
Union's response to terrorism must address the root
causes of terrorism. As radicalization and recruitment
can be closely connected, the European Union has
decided to establish by June 2005 a long-term strategy
and action plan on both issues.

In that context, the European Union welcomes the
recommendations concerning counter-terrorism put
forward in the report of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change with regard to the
major role the United Nations should take in
developing a comprehensive strategy to fight terrorism.
Those include the urgent need to complete negotiations
on a comprehensive convention on terrorism, the
particular importance of reaching a consensus on a
legal definition of terrorism as soon as possible, the
urgency of achieving universal ratification and
comprehensive implementation of all international
counter-terrorism conventions and protocols, the need
to facilitate assistance to those who need it in order to
increase their capacity to prevent terrorism, and lastly,
closer coordination with all United Nations bodies and
all other actors in the global counter-terrorism effort.

Through its counter-terrorism coordinator,
Mr. Gijs de Vries, the European Union is currently
working to promote greater coordination between the
various counter-terrorism initiatives, policies and
activities of the European Union.

The second aspect I would like to raise today is
related to respect for due process. The European Union
is convinced that terrorism must be fought in the
context of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Counter-terrorism efforts must never take
place in the absence of respect for due process and the
rule of law. There can be no trade-off between human
rights and effective security measures. Indeed, respect
for human rights must remain an integral part of any
global counter-terrorism strategy.

In that regard, the European Union welcomes the
fact that a human rights expert will be one of the main
advisers of the Executive Director. We expect that
expert to increase the profile of human rights and the
rule of law within the Executive Directorate and in its
contacts with other United Nations bodies dealing with
human rights, as well as in its outreach to Member
States.

In the same context, the European Union also
welcomes the recommendation of the High-level Panel
to institute a process for reviewing the cases of those
claiming to have been wrongly placed or retained on
the watch-list of the Al-Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee. Such a process could also benefit the work
of other sanctions committees.

My third point pertains to the more dynamic role
to be played by the CTC in its relations with the
outside world. The European Union welcomes the fact
that the CTC and the Executive Directorate will
enhance and broaden their dialogue with Member
States and international, regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome the fact that the first visit
by the CTC to Member States is now scheduled for
March 2005. We also welcome the upcoming fourth
special meeting of the CTC with international, regional
and subregional organizations, which is to be held in
Almaty, Kazakhstan, in cooperation with the
Commonwealth of Independent States. The European
Union will participate actively in that very important
meeting.

In addition, direct dialogue will facilitate the
development of a set of best practices, in consultation
with the relevant bodies of the United Nations - in
particular with the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other
international, regional and subregional organizations-
and the provision of technical assistance. It will also
make it possible to better tailor those practices to the
real needs of Member States. For its part, the European
Union is actively pursuing its relations with third
countries, in particular through visits and direct
dialogue, including the possibility of providing
technical assistance.

In conclusion, allow me to congratulate the
Chairman of the CTC for the work he has done in very
clearly identifying the priorities for the three months
ahead. I would also like to reassure you, Mr. President,
that the European Union remains firmly committed to
the full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), as
well as all other Council resolutions related to counter-
terrorism.

