Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his briefing and his outstanding work in
very difficult conditions. I also thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement.

Although the situation in Afghanistan has shown
progress, the recent rise in security incidents is a
painful reminder of the many challenges still ahead.
Brazil is both saddened and alarmed by the recent signs
of hostility against the presence of the United Nations
in Afghanistan. We condemn in the strongest terms the
brutal attack on the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I take this opportunity to
reiterate Brazil's confidence in the work of the United
Nations in helping to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace and development in Afghanistan and
our support for the Afghan Government in the spirit of
transition. We welcome the security enhancement
project being implemented by UNAMA throughout the
country.

Brazil is also concerned at the rising civil unrest
in Afghanistan. After several years of war and
violence, Afghan society should no longer have to
endure the burden of war. The increase in conflict-
related casualties should not be treated as a mere
unintended consequence of the conflict. All concerned
must continue to do their utmost to protect civilians
and comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. There can be no military solution to
this conflict, and I think that we all agree on that. The
Kabul process must be closely followed until the
transition to full Afghan leadership and responsibility
has been achieved.

Despite the current difficulties, the transition
towards Afghan security responsibility must continue
to advance. In the same vein, the implementation of the
national priority programmes outlined by the Afghan
Government is essential to building the capacity and
infrastructure that Afghanistan requires in order to
promote its social and economic development as the
international military presence draws down.

In any scenario, reconciliation efforts remain
central to a political solution to the conflict in

Afghanistan. Dialogue is the path to a solid foundation
for the country's future. Brazil supports the
implementation of the measures agreed to at the
Review Conference of the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme. Through an enhanced
presence in Kabul, Brazil stands ready to work together
with the Afghan people and their Government towards
a future of peace and development.

