Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, wish to thank Mr. Kalomoh for coming to
introduce the progress report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Security Council mission to West Africa.

The Ambassador of Ireland will shortly speak on
behalf of the European Union and I fully endorse his
statement. At this stage, I simply wish to make two
comments. Our meeting today gives me the opportunity
of making a dual observation.

First, I believe that West Africa is now at a
turning point. Secondly, we must commit ourselves
further to a regional approach in our activity.

As I said, West Africa is today at a turning point.
I believe that we may note, first, that the situation in
each of the countries of the region has evolved
considerably for the better since the Security Council's
mission in July. In Liberia, the political transition is
under way and the new Government is working
towards the recovery of the country. The deployment of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), which
today has more than 9,000 troops - and I understand, on
the basis of the information available, that the figure will
soon reach 13,000 - is now changing the situation, as
we had hoped it would, including through the gradual
improvement of the security situation, the provision of
humanitarian assistance, progress in the area of human
rights and the prospect of disarming the armed groups.

In Sierra Leone, it seems to me that stability has
gained ground since last July. It would be fair to say
that the country is now on the right track.

It would appear that, in Guinea-Bissau, the
Government has made praiseworthy efforts to promote
national reconciliation and to undertake the necessary
reforms, including in the revision of the Constitution
and in good governance in general.

Finally, in Cote d'Ivoire, we must stress that the
peace process has registered important progress since
December. The ministers of the Forces nouvelles have
returned to the Government, heavy weapons have been
cantoned, the issue of the Prime Minister's mandate
has been settled and the primary texts are being
considered in accordance with the Linas-Marcoussis
Argument. Discussions held in the Security Council in
recent weeks have highlighted the momentum
unleashed in cote d'Ivoire, which must be maintained.

Having said that, while it may be at a turning
point, West Africa has not solved all of its problems.
We must be extremely vigilant and determined,
because the difficulties remain considerable. I shall
briefly address each of the four situations in turn in
order to illustrate our view of those difficulties.

We believe that the reconstruction of Liberia is an
immense task. It will require time, resolve and
financial resources commensurate with the efforts to be
made. In that regard, the international conference to be
held on 5 and 6 February will be an important event.
We know that the disarmament of the armed groups
remains to be accomplished, which is why I spoke
earlier of its "prospects". We know that some are
already refusing to be disarmed and taking refuge in
neighbouring countries, especially in cote d'Ivoire, as
noted by Ambassador Jones Parry earlier in referring to
the links between the three countries and the need to
take into account the disarmament situation in each.
Indeed, we are witnessing the transfer of weapons
taking place right now.

In Sierra Leone, the gradual withdrawal of the
forces of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
will depend on the ability of the Sierra Leonean
authorities to guarantee security and stability
throughout the territory. As the report before us notes,
stability in Sierra Leone continues to depend on the
situation in Liberia.

Guinea-Bissau remains on the brink of bankruptcy.
The support of the international community will be
essential to consolidate peace in that country, which
remains extremely fragile.

In Cote d'Ivoire, the key stages of the peace
process that are at the heart of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement remain to be initiated. C6te d'Ivoire will be
unable to forge ahead without the resolute commitment
of the United Nations. The time has come to
consolidate the political momentum to which I referred
earlier. We have a collective responsibility towards
Cote d'Ivoire, as we do to the other countries of the
region. I hope that we will soon be able to adopt the
draft resolution under discussion on transforming the
United Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire into a
peacekeeping force.

My second observation, which I am pleased to be
in a position to make, is that a consensus is emerging in
the Security Council on the need for a regional
approach to our activities. This consensus emerged
from - or was at least strengthened by - the mission
led by Sir Jeremy Greenstock to the subregion last July.
We welcome that consensus because, as I have already
said, the difficulties to which I have referred cannot,
for the most part, be settled other than on a region-wide
basis. It seems to me that, in this respect, we are facing
a challenge. We will await the report from our friend
Mr. Ould-Abdallah, but I believe that we are facing a
challenge. The consensus on a regional approach,
which all statements made so far today have
emphasized, will have to be translated into action. How
can we do so?

It seems to me that there is, first, a need to
support the considerable efforts being made by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which has played an essential and decisive
role in settling the crises of the region, including in
Sierra Leone. We also note the role it played in Guinea-
Bissau and, recently, in Liberia, where it spearheaded
UNMIL, as well as in Cote d'Ivoire, where, working
together with French forces and the United Nations, it
is doing an outstanding job. As I have often noted,
however, ECOWAS is reaching the limits of its
material capacity, and the international community has
a duty to strengthen its resources. I believe that an even
more effective ECOWAS is the best way of ensuring
the consolidation of peace in West Africa.
I believe that we must help the African people to
implement their commitments. One example of this is
the 1998 ECOWAS moratorium on small arms. For our
part, we are prepared to consider any measures that
might help to remove obstacles to its implementation;
we look forward to the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in that regard.

Finally, I believe that we must provide the
necessary support for the United Nations Office for
West Africa. That Office is a useful - indeed,
indispensable - tool in helping us to anticipate
developments in the countries of the region and to deal
in a consistent manner with cross-border problems
relating to mercenaries, refugees and child soldiers.

I would like to conclude by saying that the
Security Council's agenda for 2003 included many
items pertaining to West Africa; that will clearly also
be the case in 2004, as we consolidate peace in Sierra
Leone, confront the challenge of peacemaking and
reconstruction in Liberia and consider the prospect of a
strong United Nations presence in C6te d'Ivoire.

I am fully convinced that the Security Council
missions to Central and West Africa were very useful,
because they gave us a better understanding of the
realities on the ground and enabled us to make some
progress. I believe that, later in the year, when the various
forces have been established - when those in Liberia
and in Cote d'Ivoire have been fully deployed - and
the regional dimension has been fully explored, we
could consider the timeliness of a further mission.

