The President (interpretation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of the United Kingdom for his kind
words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of China.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has lasted over half a year, causing deep concern
among African countries and the international community
at large. China, too, has been very concerned over
developments in the Great Lakes region. We are deeply
disturbed by the loss of life and property caused by the
ongoing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its grave impact on the peace and stability of the
Great Lakes region and the entire African continent. As
a friend of the African countries and peoples, China is
deeply worried at the fact that the conflicts in the Great
Lakes region have been dragging on for so long.

Since the very start of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, China has maintained that the
parties concerned should reach a ceasefire as soon as
possible. On the basis of full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the parties concerned should find an effective way
to solve their differences, disputes and other problems
through dialogue and negotiations, proceeding from the
overall benefits of peace and development to Africa and
the fundamental interests of the African peoples, and in
the spirit of African unity and national reconciliation.
Only if they do so will the conflicts come to an early end
and peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
well as good-neighbourly relations between countries in
the region be restored.

China supports the active efforts of African countries
and regional organizations to secure a political settlement
of the Congo question. At the same time, we strongly
believe that the international community, especially the
Security Council, should respond to the legitimate
requests and appeals of the African countries, show
genuine concern for African questions and take effective
steps in this connection. In particular, it should give
political and financial assistance to African countries and
regional organizations in their efforts to solve their own
problems and play a positive and meaningful role in
helping African countries to settle the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Burkina
Faso. I invite him to take his place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

