Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized an open meeting of the Security Council to
consider the situation in Sierra Leone. We are grateful
in this connection to the Secretary-General for his tenth
report on the matter. We thank his Special
Representative, Ambassador Adeniji, for his very
useful update. We are glad to see the Force
Commander of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and the Special Representative of
the European Union for West Africa here with us.

Since the second meeting of the Committee of Six
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mediation and Security Council with the
United Nations, the Government of Sierra Leone and
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), held in Abuja
on 2 May 2001, the peace process in Sierra Leone has
developed in a constructive manner. Progress recorded
in the field of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), the release of children, the
proliferation of meetings among the parties concerned
and their commitment to move the peace process
forward are elements that could lead to the long-
awaited peace in Sierra Leone.

In this connection, I have three sets of comments
to make.

First of all, I would like to encourage the
Government of Sierra Leone and the leadership of RUF
to continue in a resolute manner and in good faith to
work towards peace. My delegation is not unaware of
the difficulties that still beset the peace process in
Sierra Leone, in particular the risk of derailment of the
DDR programme because of a lack of funding. This is
why we will never stop pleading for the United Nations
to insure funding for this vast programme, the success
of which is crucial for definitive peace in Sierra Leone.
In the same vein, we would like to echo the Secretary-
General's appeal to all members of the international
community to urgently and generously contribute to the
special trust fund for this programme.

My delegation share the opinion according to
which the citizens of Sierra Leone should show
tolerance and a willingness to forget in order to set in
motion an irreversible process of national
reconciliation. To this end, setting up a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and a Special Court can
make a contribution. But we would like to draw
attention to the negative effect of any partial exercise
of justice on the peace process that is already under
way.

My second comment is that my delegation
remains convinced that there is no military solution to
the crisis in Sierra Leone. The dialogue between the
Government and the RUF is increasingly directed
towards political questions, and we commend the
Government for granting assistance to the RUF so that
it can be transformed into a political party and
participate in the forthcoming elections in the country.
These elections, we constantly repeat, will require
international assistance if they are to be free and fair.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
intention to set out in his forthcoming report a number
of detailed recommendations concerning the necessary
size of UNAMSIL and its tasks in the framework of
support for the peace process and the elections.

My third and final comment is to restate that the
resolution of the crisis in Sierra Leone would do much
to put an end to armed incursions along the borders of
the three countries of the Mano River Union. We are
very much preoccupied by the fighting in Liberia and
its impact on the civilian population. If this situation is
not managed in good time, it could also disturb the
fragile peace process in Sierra Leone. I must restate the
conviction of the Government of Mali in this
connection that regional stability can be resolved only
through dialogue. ECOWAS is tirelessly labouring to
this end among the heads of State concerned.

We cannot fail to recall again the ECOWAS
decision to deploy troops of the Economic Community
of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
along the borders of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone
in order to put an end to armed incursions, to instil
trust among the parties, to provide security for refugees
and displaced persons and to create the necessary
conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.

Mali will continue to support any initiative or
action to restore peace and security in our subregion.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
gratitude of ECOWAS to the Secretary-General for his
concern and his commendable efforts for peace and
stability in West Africa. We also thank his Special
Representative for Sierra Leone, Ambassador Adeniji,
and all the staff of UNAMSIL, the troop-contributing
countries and humanitarian agencies for their
invaluable sacrifice in our subregion. ECOWAS will
continue to fully play the part that belongs to it in this
process.

