Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I welcome the
presence among us of His Excellency President
Olusegun Obasanjo and thank him for addressing the
Council in his capacity as President of Nigeria and
Chairman of the African Union.

We have been advocating in the Security Council
that the African Union should be granted the
opportunity to provide the Council with an
authoritative and accurate perspective on the
challenges ahead to achieve stability and development
in Africa. We have been requesting that the African
Union be invited to come to the Security Council. And
to my delegation, the historical and cultural ties
between Nigeria and Brazil confer even greater
meaning to this occasion.

We all agree that regional organizations are
increasingly relevant in the overall international effort
for peace and security. They may be even more
effective since they may be in a better position to
detect security threats, they have better knowledge of
the root causes of conflict, and they are necessarily
more flexible.

Since its creation only three years ago, the
African Union has proven itself royally capable of
leading African countries in their efforts towards
peace. We wish to take this opportunity to thank the
African Union for cooperating with this Council in
bringing troops and observers to Burundi, Somalia and
Sudan.

Political initiatives to promote governance and
stabilization have also been counting on the active
support of the African Union. We cite the example of
Cote d'Ivoire, where the tripartite monitoring
mechanism has brought together the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the United Nations in efforts to have
the benchmarks that were set up by the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement prevail over conflict.
Horizontal cooperation with ECOWAS and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in the Horn of Africa is ever more frequent. These
initiatives translate into action the unequivocal
determination and the leadership of the African Union
in the resolution of crises within its continent.

Complementarities between the United Nations
and regional organizations ought to be further
developed and utilized. The cooperation with the
African Union is thriving, and we trust that this
Organization and its Member States, individually, will
be forthcoming in making resources, technical
assistance and logistical support available to the
African Union. Partnership is key in making African
ownership viable.

Brazil highly praises and welcomes the
unequivocal determination of the African Union to the
resolution of the crisis in Darfur, which we understand
as a laudable and timely act of African ownership and
leadership. In the Security Council, the Brazilian
delegation has made all possible efforts in order to
ensure international support for the African Union
mission in Darfur as well as to safeguard its ownership
and leading role in the search for a solution to the
problems in that region.

Let us not forget that preventive action and early
warning are at the core of regional organizations'
assets in dealing with conflicts. There must be
innovative ways to work within a logic of conflict
avoidance, committing ourselves to eradicating
underdevelopment, under-education, poverty and
hunger. This growing interrelationship between
security and economic and social development means
there should be a better coordination among the United
Nations bodies, particularly between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council through
Article 65 of the Charter. As President Lula stated in
opening the general debate of the fifty-ninth session of
the General Assembly only three days ago, "If we wish
to eliminate violence, we must address its deep-rooted
origins with the same resolve employed against the
agents of hatred" (A/59/PV.3).

We commend President Obasanjo and his African
peers for their commitment to the advancement of the
New Partnership for Africa's Development, in
particular to the establishment of the conditions for
sustainable development by ensuring sustainable peace
and security in the whole continent.

