Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. Allow me to take this
opportunity to thank today's speakers for sharing their
expertise and insights.

Around the world today, children are exploited in
conflict, targeted with violence and used as instruments
of war. The crimes are horrendous. In January, Boko
Haram wrapped a young girl in explosives and sent her
into a busy Nigerian market. The explosion killed 16
people and injured another 20. This is not a world we
should accept - a world where lO-year-olds are used as
weapons of war. When we fail to protect children, we
fail to protect our future.

I speak before the Council today as the Permanent
Representative of the State oflsrael, but also as a father
and grandfather. I raised my sons, Lior and Tourer, and
my daughter, Oren, in Israel, and I know all too well the
abnormal normality of raising a family in Israel. Our
children go to schools with security guards stationed
at the door, we walk through metal detectors to enter a
mall, and our homes are built with reinforced concrete
to protect our families from rockets. Like other Israeli
parents, I want to see the day when our children can
grow up and grow old without hearing the wail of a red-
alert siren or the boom of rockets overhead. We want
our children to enjoy a life free from acts of terrorism,
but that day has not yet come.

In June 2014, Israelis were numb with horror when
they learned that Palestinian terrorists kidnapped and
brutally murdered three Israeli teenagers, Eyal, Gilad
and Naftali. We learned that terrorists will target an
Israeli child making his way home from school. In
August 2014, 4-year-old Daniel Tregerman was playing
with his younger siblings when a mortar fired by
Palestinian terrorists from Gaza struck his home and
killed him. We learned that terrorists will target an
Israeli child playing in his own home. In December
2014, Palestinian terrorists threw a firebomb at a car
carrying ll-year-old Ayala Shapira. Flames engulfed
the car, and Ayala suffered third-degree burns to her
face and upper body. We learned that terrorists will
even target an Israeli child sitting in the back seat of her
parent's car. The Israeli people have learned too many
painful lessons. Terrorists have robbed our children of
their dreams, their childhood and their futures.

Hamas may claim to represent its people's well-
being, but its actions reflect countless wrongdoings.
The terrorist group deploys minors as suicide bombers
and recruits them to carry out attacks against Israeli
civilians and soldiers. It uses children as human shields
and places children in harm's way by using schools,
hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods as a base for
their terror activity.

We saw abundant evidence of those crimes in
summer 2014. Here in New York, the underground
system is called the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority. In Gaza, Hamas built a metropolitan terror
authority - miles of dense terror tunnels that extended
like tentacles into Israel. Those tunnels were built
using Palestinian child labourers, many of whom were
killed in the process. Hamas' terror tunnels opened at
the doorsteps of Israeli communities, outside homes,
kindergartens and playgrounds, with the deliberate
intention of targeting and murdering Israeli children.

The Palestinian leadership regularly turns to
the international community for financial support,
but when it comes to funding, training, arming and
indoctrinating thousands of young Palestinian children,
there is no shortage of money. In January, Hamas,
which sits in the Palestinian unity Government, sent
over 17,000 Palestinian youngsters to 18 new military
training camps. The boys who attend those camps are
trained to fire weapons, storm Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) posts and abduct IDF soldiers.

The indoctrination of Palestinian children is
nothing new. They are born in hospitals named after
violent Palestinian groups, attend schools named after
terrorists and taught from textbooks that describe
Zionism as racism. In mosques, religious leaders are
spreading vicious libel, accusing Jews of destroying
Muslim holy sites. In their free time, Palestinian
children play on sports teams named after murderers,
watch television programmes that teach that Jews
should be killed, and read cartoons urging them to
commit terror attacks against Israelis.

But the Council does not have to take my word for
it. Senior Hamas official Fathi Hamad said that,

"For the Palestinian people, death has become an
industry This is why we have formed human
shields of the women, the children, and the elderly."

The evidence is overwhelming. Hamas has no interest
in building its people up. It is only committed to tearing
Israel down. Former Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir
said, "We will only have peace when our enemies love
their children more than they hate ours".

Across the Middle East, terrorists and extremists
are poisoning the minds of the next generation, teaching
them to hate, vilify and dehumanize Israelis and Jews.
We have lost an entire generation to incitement. Enough
is enough. Send the message that children should be
sent to playgrounds and not battlegrounds, that they
belong in schools and not on suicide missions and, most
importantly, that they have infinite value as human
beings and not human shields.

