Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank Mr. Lubbers, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for the excellent
presentation he has provided us with today. I should
also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Lubbers and the Government of Switzerland on the
success of the first meeting of the Parties to the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1961 Protocol, which was held in December in Geneva.

As this is a meeting that gives us an opportunity
to ask questions and make comments, I should like to
offer a few brief comments of my own and then
address a couple of questions to Mr. Lubbers.

First, I believe that we have received a very clear
message from Mr. Lubbers that the fight against
international terrorism cannot and must not be
incompatible with the right to seek refuge. In this
respect, the Security Council faces an enormous
challenge.

Secondly, it is essential that solidarity concerning
this issue, which has existed since 1951, be kept intact.
This solidarity requires political support, resistance
against the fear that may be generated by terrorist acts,

resources in an environment of increasing scarcity, and
fulfilment of simple commitments such as subscribing
unreservedly to the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees, in cases in which this has not yet been done.
This solidarity permeates the entire agenda of the
Security Council and is not confined to a few issues,
notwithstanding the focus of attention of the
international media.

Thirdly, in all cases security is essential, and
Mr. Lubbers has referred very explicitly to this fact.
We understand that it is fundamental that secure
conditions exist, not only for the return of refugees but
also for all humanitarian responses. both in countries of
origin and in countries of destination. However, the
issue of security conditions does not apply only to
Afghanistan. We must also bring this perspective
prominently to all our discussions, particularly those
related to Africa, where the needs are great but there is
often far less practical interest on the part of the
international community and fewer possibilities of
generating a solid international response backed by
resources.

My final comment involves the individual and
collective commitment of every member of the Council
to the political resolution of all conflicts. That is the
best way to achieve the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons - there is no substitute
for it 4 and to produce the best results in the long run.

On the basis of these comments, I would like to
ask Mr. Lubbers three questions.

The first concerns security in the refugee camps,
to which he has referred. In Africa in particular, there
are attacks on refugees, and a dynamic prevails in
which refugees are mixed in with rebels or even with
potential terrorists. I would like Mr. Lubbers to make
some practical recommendations, in the light of the
experience of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to help us draw a
distinction on the ground and also to implement
mechanisms of cooperation with local authorities to
carry out practical measures that would enable us to
distinguish a refugee from a rebel or terrorist.

My second question concerns the emphasis
placed by the international community on the refugees'
countries of origin or on the receiving countries. Our
perception is that we tend to focus on the countries of
origin - Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Sierra Leone - based somewhat on the fact
that those are the places of crisis. We tend not to focus
much on the countries of destination - Guinea, Iran,
Pakistan, Tanzania, Zambia. Recognizing that
resources are scarce and that there is a proliferation of
international causes that compete for those resources,
what would be your practical recommendation,
Mr. Lubbers, as to the approach we should take?
Should we focus more on needs in the countries of
origin or on those in the receiving countries? Naturally,
one might claim that it would be better to do both, as a
whole, and that sounds very good from a political
perspective. In practice, however, it may not always be
feasible.

My final question is this. In order to give us a
clearer picture, might Mr. Lubbers perhaps educate us
on the figures involved? How much does he estimate it
to cost to return, rehabilitate and reintegrate a single
refugee? The Council has at times been given certain
figures, for instance, for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, but I do not
have a very clear idea of the average cost of returning a
refugee. I should like to know, more or less, whether
there is a difference, for example, in such costs in
Afghanistan as compared to Africa. It might also help
the Council to respond if it were given some specific
figures.

