Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I should like to
thank you, Sir, and the Lithuanian presidency for having
convened this important debate with the participation
of the wider membership. I also extend my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his presentation, which
articulated many important aspects that will help us
focus on the topic.

The Republic of Korea reiterates its commitment to
an international order based on a global legal framework
and the rule of law with the United Nations at its centre.
The strengthening of the rule of law contributes to the
promotion of human rights as well as sustainable peace
and development. Historically, their neglect has been
both a cause and a consequence of conflict. As clearly
stated in presidential statement S/PRST/2012/l,

"sustainable peace requires an integrated approach
based on coherence between political, security,
development, human rights, including gender
equality, and rule of law and justice activities".

It is encouraging that the Security Council has been
making a growing contribution to the rule of law, with
18 current United Nations field missions already having
rule-of-law dimensions. Council-mandated tasks are
wide-ranging and include the drafting of constitutions
and legislative reform, the strengthening of institutions
and support to transitional justice processes.

We would also like to highlight the Council's
continued commitment to improving the overall
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping operations
by incorporating tasks related to the rule of law as
well as to the promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of women.

Accountability is at the heart of the rule of law,
and combating impunity is a vital aspect of its effective
application. Following the blueprint established by
the post-war Nuremberg and Tokyo trials, in 1993 the
Council revived the concept of international criminal
justice. The Council established the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda, which served as a source of inspiration for
the establishment of the International Criminal Court.
We are pleased to note that this international criminal
justice system has made significant progress in the fight
against impunity. Perpetrators of serious international
humanitarian and human rights crimes must be held
to account. Special consideration must also be given
to women, children and other vulnerable groups in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

The rule of law also has an important role to play
in the settlement of international disputes. Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations details a number
of methods for that purpose. In particular, we note
that the 2012 Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1) accurately reflects the basic principle
of the international community regarding Member
States seeking a peaceful solution of their own choice
to disputes, as stipulated in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nations.

We support the Secretary-General's extensive
efforts to ensure greater coordination and coherence
in the United Nations rule-of-law activities in
conflict-affected societies. We welcome the enhanced
responsibility of those in the field, the increased
support at Headquarters and the designation of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and United
Nations Development Programme as the joint global
focal point that will play a Headquarters role. Given the
critical importance of coordination and coherence, we
call on all participating bodies to redouble their efforts
in that regard.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
promoting the rule of law in all its dimensions. We will
strengthen our contribution to rule-of-law initiatives,
including by assisting in capacity-building for partner
countries around the world.

