Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Security Council for having
organized this public debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. As depositary of the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their additional Protocols,
Switzerland attaches particular importance to respect
for international humanitarian law and to the protection
of civilians. Switzerland has therefore been following
the Council's deliberations on this item with great
interest.

Switzerland welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2001/331) before the Council today, and
welcomes the Secretary-General's ongoing
commitment to civilians in conflict. We are gratified at
the report's objective of developing a culture of
protection of civilians. Switzerland fully shares that
objective, which - given that civilian populations are
the principal victims and often the actual targets of
conflicts - is intended to place the human being at the
centre of international concerns and to ensure that
protection heads the political agenda.

Some of the Secretary-General's recommendations
for establishing that culture of protection seem to us to
be of particular interest. Let me touch briefly on two of
them.

First is the need for clear ground rules for
negotiating access to vulnerable populations, including
criteria for engagement and disengagement of
humanitarian organizations. Indeed, the international
community has often stressed that safe and unimpeded
access to the victims of conflict is a sine qua non for
the provision of the international assistance and
protection that are provided for in international law.
Moreover, it is well known that in today's internal
conflicts access can be gained only after sometimes
long and arduous negotiations. Here, Switzerland
supports the Secretary-General's appeal for closer
cooperation among humanitarian agencies, with full
respect for their mandates and their independence, with
a view to gaining access to distressed populations.
Here we welcome the fact that the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee has been requested to develop a
manual for negotiators.

Another of the Secretary-General's recommendations
is to develop constructive dialogue with non-State
armed groups. Conflicts today are increasingly
characterized by the growing role of armed groups,
which are bearing responsibility with regard to civilian
populations that is comparable to that of regular armed
forces. Under article 3 common to the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949, all parties to a conflict are
obliged to respect minimum rules of conduct. Thus, all
those parties, including non-State actors, must
henceforth understand their true responsibilities. There
must be an emphasis on greater dissemination of
international humanitarian and human-rights law, and
improved promotion of humanitarian principles.
Switzerland believes that even politically sensitive
contacts with armed groups should be guided by
humanitarian imperatives and conducted with
pragmatism. The formulation under United Nations
auspices of basic standards for humane behaviour,
combining the key norms that should be applied by all
parties in all circumstances, could make a valuable
contribution to the dialogue.

Switzerland appreciates the Secretary-General's
inclusion as an annex to his report of a summary of the
situation with regard to the implementation of the
recommendations he made in September 1999. We note
with satisfaction efforts to take better account of the
humanitarian repercussions of sanctions regimes on
civilian populations, and to promote targeted sanctions.
Switzerland also takes note of progress with respect to
arms embargoes when civilian populations are under
threat, and to the safety and security of camps. While
much remains to be done, my Government assures the
Secretary-General of its gratitude and of its support for
his praiseworthy commitment to civilian populations
that are victims of armed conflict.

