Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Uruguayan
presidency for convening this important open debate
on the protection of civilians and medical personnel in
armed conflicts.

The plight of civilians as a result of the ongoing
conflicts in various corners of the globe, particularly
in the Middle East and Africa, has unequivocally
demonstrated the inaction of the international
community and its failure to provide protection to
civilians and preserve their dignity and humanity.
That is especially the case for the most vulnerable
demographic groups, namely, women and children.
Despite the development of the concept of the protection
of civilians following the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999) and the subsequent priority given to the
protection of civilians by the Security Council, we
have not seen words being translated into tangible
actions on the ground that would lead to the systematic
protection of civilians. Therefore, the entire system of
the United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
must adopt more effective measures in order to ensure
such protection.

We share the priorities defined by the Secretary-
General in his report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts (S/2017/414) aimed at promoting a
system of civilian protection. In that vein, we would like
to focus on the second priority defined by the Secretary-
General: the need to work on providing protection for
medical missions. Attacks on health-care facilities and
personnel, as well as on injured patients, constitute a
heinous violation of international humanitarian law. In
that framework and in the light of the increasing attacks
against the health-care sector, including perceived
moves by some parties to put obstacles in the way of
access to medical facilities and equipment, the Security
Council, at the beginning of Egypt's presidency in May
2016, adopted resolution 2286 (2016), which focused
on health care in armed conflicts. That historic and
important initiative, launched by five elected members
ofthe Security Council, including Egypt, reaffirmed the
commitment provided for in international humanitarian
law to the protection of the health-care sector. It also
condemned any attacks on medical facilities and
personnel. Furthermore, the resolution urged States to
adopt practical and effective measures to prevent such
violations and address them. It also stressed the need
to hold perpetrators of such attacks accountable and
eliminate the immunity with which those perpetrators
appeared to be acting. It also called upon the parties
to provide safe and unhindered access to medical care.

The adoption of the resolution was a milestone in
the conceptual development of the protection of the
health-care sector. However, it has not substantively
changed the situation. The targeting of health-care
workers in zones of armed conflict continues unabated.
Ironically, 2016 saw a huge rise in the frequency of
attacks targeting the health-care sector. The primary
responsibility for providing protection for civilians
lies with the States that are parties to the conflict,
pursuant to the Geneva Convention of 1949. However,
recent incidents around the world have shown the need
for concerted international efforts to prevent such
violations and bring to account the perpetrators, all
while fully respecting national sovereignty.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that today's
open debate presents an opportunity to assess the
progress made in implementing resolution 2286 (2016).
We call upon States to shoulder their responsibilities
and implement their commitments pursuant to that
resolution. For our part, we will spare no effort to
achieve the targets contained in the resolution, as we
are eager to uphold the noble values and principles of
international humanitarian law.

