The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Sahovic'
(Federal Republic onugoslavia), took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General upon his assumption of the
position as Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as
well as its appreciation to all the personnel of
UNMIK for their untiring efforts in ensuring the
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) of
10 June 1999.

"The Security Council notes the progress
made in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government, including the
inauguration of the Kosovo Assembly following
the elections on 17 November 2001 in Kosovo,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It calls on
Kosovo's elected representatives to resolve the
deadlock over the formation of executive
structures of the provisional self-governing
institutions and to allow the functioning of those
institutions, in accordance with the Constitutional
Framework and the outcome of the elections
which expressed the will of the voters. It supports
the development of cooperation between UNMIK,
Kosovo's elected representatives and the
authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Such cooperation is vital in implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).

"The Security Council reaffirms the
fundamental importance of the rule of law in
Kosovo's political development and condemns
any attempt to undermine it. It supports all efforts
of UNMIK, together with the international
security presence (KFOR) and the Kosovo Police
Service (KPS), to combat all kinds of crime,
violence and extremism. It supports the measures
taken to bring persons responsible for criminal
acts to justice, regardless of ethnic or political
background. It calls upon the elected leaders of
Kosovo to cooperate fully with UNMIK and
KFOR in promoting the rule of law and a multi-
ethnic Kosovo with security and freedom of
movement for all."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 2 pm.

