Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes the presence of the
Secretary-General at today's debate in the Council, the
importance of which is obvious.

I also wish to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for their reports following their recent mission to
Baghdad. My delegation believes that they have
worked well and, all told, the results are interesting. If
we compare their reports on 27 January to those of
today, we note significant developments that essentially

result from the wise and reasonable choice made by the
Iraqi authorities at last to begin cooperating fully with
the United Nations inspections teams. Thus, I note
important progress on the question of interviews
conducted within Iraq. I also note that the problem of
air surveillance by U-2 aeroplanes has been virtually
resolved. Lastly, I note and welcome the fact that Iraq
has just enacted legislation prohibiting illicit activities
on its territory of a chemical, biological or nuclear
nature.

In spite of these results, which we welcome,
unresolved questions remain, as reflected in the United
Nations Special Commission report and the Amorim
report, particularly with regard to the chemical and
biological areas and to delivery systems, in particular
missiles. Specifically with regard to missiles, my
delegation notes from today's reports that it has been
clearly established that the range of the Al Samoud 2
missiles manufactured by Iraq is far beyond the 150
kilometres authorized by the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular resolution 687 (1991).
We must agree that this is regrettable, since its
contradicts the Iraqi declaration of 7 December 2002.

In these circumstances, it is now up to our
Council to address this non-compliance, a matter that
until now had been raised on a regular basis but had
never before been so clearly established.

During the ministerial meeting of 5 February, the
United States delegation also raised the issue of small
unmanned aircraft that could be used to deliver
biological weapons. It also referred to other pending
issues. My delegation should like to hear from Mr. Blix
about the information provided by Baghdad in this
regard.

Cameroon believes that the documentation
submitted by Iraq to the heads of the inspection teams
last weekend could contain clarifications on the main
questions asked by the Council regarding the chemical
and biological weapons possessed by that country at
one time or another. The delegation of Cameroon hopes
that, if it is not possible to obtain a copy of all those
documents, Mr. Blix will soon be able to provide us in
writing with a summary of them, accompanied of
course by his comments and assessments.

At this stage of the implementation of resolution
1441 (2002), I wish to emphasize on behalf of my
delegation the need for the Security Council to
continue to safeguard, as it has in the recent past, its
unity and cohesion.

The progress made by the recent Blix-ElBaradei
mission reflects a noticeable change in the Iraqi
attitude. Cameroon recognizes and welcomes this
positive development. It is fitting to recall, however,
that, as the Secretary-General has said, we owe this
result, as we do the return of inspectors to Iraq, to a
great extent to the demands of President Bush, to the
broad collective pressure exerted by the Security
Council, and to the staunch determination of a strong
and united Council.

The discord, the cacophony, indeed the confusion
surrounding us in recent days can only harm our
effectiveness. The Security Council in its work has
accustomed us to certain means of reaching agreement
and communicating that in our view are completely in
line with the transparency expected of this body by
other Member States and by international public
opinion.

I therefore note, as others have, and rather regret,
that this seems to be the time for everybody to find out
who their friends are. But Cameroon, a country that is
open, pluralistic and diverse within its borders has
projected that very diversity and spirit of openness into
its international relations. It is therefore normal and
natural that Cameroon counts all members of the
Council among its friends. I need say no more.

My country, which is in favour of a peaceful
settlement of the question of the disarmament of Iraq
of weapons of mass destruction, is trying to take a
pragmatic and realistic approach. Indeed, Cameroon
believes that at this stage a peaceful settlement of this
situation depends above all on Iraq's determination to
cooperate fully and actively with the inspectors.

In our consultations, Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
clearly indicated to us that they expected, beyond
formal cooperation, that Iraq show unfailing resolve
and the firmest political will for future cooperation
with the inspection teams. Cameroon shares this view
and strongly urges Iraq to continue on the course that it
has at last been taking since 9 February.

Like other members of the Council, Cameroon
received from the French delegation a few days ago a
copy of a non-paper addressed to the heads of the
inspection teams. I wish at this meeting to thank France
for this contribution, which we welcome. It deserves
attention and will undoubtedly be useful to our
deliberations. At the present stage, my country is
carefully studying its content while awaiting, of course,
the objective opinion of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification, and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), to which the non-paper is addressed.

I would like to emphasize in this regard that in
our previous consultations, Cameroon had raised the
possibility of more robust inspections, subject to a
certain number of clarifications. I had already asked
Mr. Blix a question that I repeat today: What is the key
threshold in the number of experts required to conduct
robust inspections and what might be the cost, given
that, inter alia, there would be a need for particularly
effective equipment, both for the inspections per se and
for air surveillance?

Iraq's obligation to disarm is at the heart of the
ceasefire agreement concluded between that country
and the coalition forces at the end of the Gulf war. This
is why Cameroon calls for the complete and immediate
implementation of resolution 1441 (2002). We adopted
this resolution unanimously. It governs us. It is the
basis for our current action. But for the mechanism
provided for by resolution 1441 (2002) to function,
there is a vital element - a key element - which is, as
we have said time and again and as we repeat today,
immediate, active and complete cooperation by the
Iraqi authorities with the inspectors.

That is the only way for those authorities to
demonstrate their sincerity and good faith and to spare
the world another conflict. Such a conflict can only
worsen the suffering of the Iraqi people - the
principal if not the only victim of the evasion and
deception of the Baghdad authorities. As we have said
this in this Chamber, that is the only way for the Iraqi
authorities to enable their country to recover its
identity and once again to become faithful to its calling
and to its name, Iraq, which means the country of
water, and hence the country of life.

It is clear that further non-compliance by Iraq
with the demands of the Security Council would be one
violation too many, and the Iraqi authorities would

leave the Council, when its patience came to an end, no
other choice but to adopt, in unity and cohesion
appropriate measures to have its decisions respected in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter.

I wish in conclusion once again to appeal to
members of the Council for unity and cohesion in these
grave circumstances and at this crucial stage. The
credibility of the Council, and hence of the United
Nations, could suffer if in the future we cannot remain
reasonable. Cameroon agrees with the Secretary-
General:

"In my experience, it always [faces up to its
responsibilities] best and most effectively when
its members work in unison

"If the Council stands united - as it did in
adopting resolution 1441 (2002) - it will have a
greater impact, and a better chance of achieving
its objective, which must be a comprehensive
solution that brings the Iraqi people, who have
suffered so much, fully back into the international
community." (Press release SG/SM/8600)

The maintenance of peace and security is a very
delicate and serious mission. It requires that at all times
those who are responsible for it transcend their
differences and act only in the interest of peace.

