Ithank Deputy Special Envoy Matar and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator Rajasingham for their briefings and for their continued tireless efforts to resolve the conflict and help Syrians in need. Unfortunately, as we have heard today, both the process for achieving peace and the situation across the country remain in a precarious state. We welcome the news of the formal plans for the fourth and fifth rounds of the Constitutional Committee talks. However, it is now well over a year since the Security Council expressed its determination that this should be the beginning of a political process to end the conflict, and we remain concerned at the lack of substantive progress made by the Committee. While talks to resolve an almost 10-year conflict will be difficult and potentially lengthy, there is no excuse for the regime's obstructionism, which has artificially prevented the talks from discussing matters of substance. Resolution 2254 (2015) was explicit on the order of steps towards a Syrian- led and Syrian-owned political transition to end the conflict, designed to allow the Syrian people to decide the future of their country. Only once agreement has been reached on a new constitution can free and fair elections, as part of the political process envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015), take place. Elections that do not meet those requirements, that are not held pursuant to the new constitution and that are not administered under the supervision of the United Nations to the highest international standards of transparency and accountability, with all Syrians, including the diaspora, eligible to participate, would serve only to delegitimize and subvert the political process agreed by the Council and the wider international community. Surely a Syrian Government, confident of its prospects in a free and fair election, would not want elections to happen on such terms. The United Kingdom also calls for substantial progress to be made on the other facets of resolution 2254 (2015). Confidence-building measures are sorely needed in order to contribute to the viability of the political process. And progress on the release of those persons arbitrarily detained should be moving swiftly, but instead it remains stuck. We once again highlight the continuing shocking human rights violations in Syria, including the treatment of prisoners by all parties outlined in the Commission of Inquiry's September report (A/HRC/45/31). Particularly harrowing are accounts of detainees being beaten with sticks and cables and bound around tyres by the regime. The humanitarian situation across the country remains dire and is worsening, as we have heard today. Three million, one hundred thousand people require additional support to get through a harsh winter, and inclement weather is already having an impact. Only a few weeks ago, 10 internally displaced persons sites in north-western Syria suffered flooding, which destroyed 345 tents, impacting 1,733 individuals. As we heard today, when that happens, everything - people's possessions and people's lives - washes away. Nine million, three hundred thousand people are food insecure, with a further 2.2 million at risk. As Ramesh Rajasingham said, that is 1.4 million more people than a year ago and more than at any point during the crisis. Reports of three-hour queues for bread are deeply concerning. The consumption of bread exceeds production by approximately | million metric tons. There are some 25,000 confirmed cases of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) across the country. That number has doubled since the Council last met on this agenda item in October (see S/2020/1049). Given that 92 per cent of cases are not traceable to a known case, the actual number of cases is undoubtedly much higher. To address all these acute needs, it is essential that the United Nations and other humanitarian actors be given unimpeded access. The granting of access permissions in a timely manner is essential, and we reiterate the importance of a holistic humanitarian response. Cross-border access, which was unnecessarily cut by other members of the Security Council earlier this year, remains of prime importance to Syrians faced with another harsh winter. We need to see the issue of refugee returns in the context of these continuing dire conditions - a food crisis, a COVID-19 crisis, an access crisis for humanitarians and the complete disregard of the regime for the rights of detainees. While the need to build the conditions for a safe, dignified and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons remains, it is clear that these conditions are not even close to being achieved. All that illustrates what a sham the recent Russian-hosted refugee conference in Damascus was - motivated by a desire to promote the normalization of the Syrian regime over the interests of Syrian refugees and Syrian people. The issue of refugee returns is of the highest priority, but it must be discussed in a neutral location under the auspices of the United Nations. As resolution 2254 (2015) makes clear, the process needs to take into account the interests of those countries hosting refugees, as well as the views and interests of the refugees and internally displaced persons themselves. Indeed, if the regime and Russia were genuinely serious about facilitating returns, they would make genuine efforts to address the conditions in Syria of their making that make such returns unrealistic at present. In parallel, if they were serious about resolving the crisis that causes those conditions, they would have engaged in the discussions in Geneva over the past year in a more constructive and meaningful way.
