Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like at the outset to thank and commend the
delegation of Costa Rica for having organized an event
of such importance, especially for small countries, such
as Costa Rica, which has set an undeniable example of
following a pacifist policy - an example worthy of
emulation. Bolivia too has begun a process where we
are giving very clear signals that the only path
guaranteeing international peace and security is
precisely that of dialogue and of commitment to a
culture of peace.

Bolivia, like few other countries in the world, has
gone through periods of great violence and great
aggression. From 1810 to 1825, we experienced
15 years of armed struggle against the Spanish Crown,
and much blood was shed. Afterwards, during the
period of the Republic, Bolivia was the victim of wars
of aggression. As a result of these, just as it was
coming to life as a republic, it lost more than
1.2 million square kilometres - more than half - of
its territory, falling victim to aggression by some
neighbouring countries, and victim to the terror and
violence of dictatorial military Governments under the
umbrella of the cold war and, moreover, sponsored by
one of the most powerful countries in the region.

This period of violence has not ended. Barely two
months ago, we experienced a massacre, we hope the
last, caused by the opposition to the Government of
President Evo Morales, an opposition which feels
hatred and racism against those peoples that have
always been marginalized in Bolivian society. This
hatred and racism gave rise to a massacre against
defenceless farmers, which was condemned by
practically all countries in the world - except the most
powerful country in the region.

Convinced that the path to international peace is
based on dialogue, which itself is based on
disarmament, not only physical disarmament, but also
spiritual, Bolivia is about to adopt a new political
constitution, whose article 10 States that:

"Bolivia is a pacifist State which promotes
the culture of peace and the right to peace, as
well as cooperation among the peoples of the
region and the world in order to contribute to
mutual understanding, equitable development and
the promotion of interculturalism, with full
respect for the sovereignty of States. Bolivia
rejects all wars of aggression as a means of
settling differences and conflicts among States
and reserves the right to legitimate self-defence
in the case of aggression which threatens the
independence or integrity of the State.

"The installation of foreign military bases
on Bolivian territory is prohibited."

Article 10, clearly, expresses Bolivia's will to
begin a new era of building true peace in the world.

In the course of this debate, we have heard very
encouraging statements, such as that of the United
Kingdom, which clearly expressed the position that in
order to move forward in the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons, we also have to emphasize the
process of disarmament of those countries that possess
nuclear weapons. My delegation would like to hear that
same statement and we would like to see that same
decision among those States whose possession of
nuclear weapons is the real threat to international peace
and security. It is not true that in recent years the
greatest danger to peace has been something that is
local, limited to internal conflicts. It is not simply the
internal conflicts of every country that could possibly
threaten global peace.

Let us not forget the international conflicts - the
acts of war in Afghanistan and in Iraq. We will not ask
whether the reasons were good or bad, as for us, all
wars are bad. Furthermore, just a few days ago we
heard statements from a State official who suggested
that the war in Iraq should continue - and this was in
inverted commas - because he had just signed a major
arms contract with the country on whose behalf he was
speaking.

There has been a great deal said about the illicit
arms trade, but I wonder whether the licit arms trade
would be less deadly than the illicit arms trade. We all
aim to tighten the ban on the trafficking of illegal
weapons. We all agree that we have to combat arms
trafficking, but we also have to remember that many of
the armed conflicts are the result of the stinginess of
those countries that promote war and the industry of
war. Why does the United Nations not take the
initiative to generate a project that would make it
possible to systematically ban arms production? Arms
are the true cause of conflicts.

My country has experienced two wars that were
caused, not by hatred or conflict between brothers or
with neighbouring countries, but rather by the interests
of transnational firms, which organized and planned
the armed conflicts.

Lastly, even though there are many topics that I
would like to mention here, I simply want to conclude
by mentioning the need to analyze the consequences of
encouraging the arms race in regions where we have
less developed countries, countries with the greatest
needs. Many of these countries feel threatened by the
belligerent discourse of their neighbours, because the
neighbours receive contributions of millions and
millions (of dollars) worth of armaments, and because
their neighbours receive loans as well in order to arm
themselves. Of course, this forces every country to
naturally feel the need to find a mechanism with which
to defend itself, even at the cost of hunger for its
people.
I believe that, in the final analysis, the United
Nations must take measures that would be aimed at
eliminating this scandalous supply of arms.

