Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, and
the fraternal African State of Nigeria. When we speak
of peace in the Sudan we must mention the important
role of Nigeria with regard to the peace process in my
country, both with regard to previous negotiations
between the north and the south and the Abuja process,
which led to the Abuja Agreement, and recently
Nigeria's pivotal role in the political process and in
supporting the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, as well as its contribution to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), which is the subject of resolution
2148 (2014), adopted today.

We have carefully considered the reports of the
Secretary-General on UNAMID and we fully agree
with the efforts to enhance the Mission, given the
positive developments in Darfur, which require a review
of UNAMID's structure and priorities so that it serves
the stabilization process and contributes to reinforcing
the efforts to contain the recent tribal conflicts, which
have led to a deterioration in the security situation in
the Darfur region.

In the special report of the Secretary-General on the
review of UNAMID (S/2014/138), three scenarios were
presented. With regard to the resolution just adopted and
the recommendations of the review, the Government of
the Sudan supports the third scenario. Our objective
is for those goals - that UNAMID's efficiency and
performance improve and that we undertake actions
to include all the non-participating movements in the
peace process - to be met by February 2015.

I was keen to address the Council in this meeting
to inform it that we launched a national dialogue in
January. Our President's call was renewed in the Um
Jaras meeting held in Chad. That was the second
meeting organized by Chad through the generous
initiative of President Deby Itno. In that regard, we
appreciate President Deby Itno's efforts. We expressed
our full support for that meeting as a regional effort
to eliminate the root causes of conflict and to enhance
the dialogue in Darfur to persuade all the non-signatory
movements tojoin the peace process. That is in line with
the call for a comprehensive dialogue. We affirm that
such a dialogue would not exclude anyone, not even the
armed movements. There are no obstacles that would
impede those movements fromjoining the dialogue.

We have currently moved from the stage of
announcing the initiative to developing the practical
steps to manage that dialogue. We are looking forward to
next year, which is the deadline for the report reviewing
the inclusion of all parties in the comprehensive
political process.

In conclusion, we acknowledge that there has been
a deterioration in the situation recently, but that was
because ofthe intercommunal violence. We are working
to contain that violence at the regional level through the
meetings held in Um Jaras and through support for the
Doha process and the dialogue within Darfur.

Intercommunal violence in Darfur has a long
history. It is linked to land and water resources. We
thank UNAMID for its efforts in that regard, which has
undertaken many endeavours to contain the violence.
We have so far worked on six reconciliation agreements
between the tribes. Some of them were not successful,
but we will continue to work to contain all conflict-
based violence.

We hope that this will be a pivotal year and that
the Secretary-General will include indications of
improvement in his next report. In that case, perhaps
the Council could make recommendations as to how
UNAMID could focus on reconstruction and prosperity
in Darfur instead.

