Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): It is an
honour for me to speak at this meeting of the Security
Council on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh
Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
of Viet Nam. Allow me first to congratulate Chile
on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month. We have full confidence in your stewardship,
Mr. President. Please rest assured of Viet Nam's support.

We share the view expressed by many speakers today
that inclusive development and international peace and
security are intimately interlinked. They are two of the
main pillars of the work of the United Nations, which
are appropriately addressed by separate United Nations
organs in accordance with their respective mandates.

The active inclusion of all groups and stakeholders
in a country's political, social and economic life,
while ensuring that all legitimate interests, voices and
concerns are taken into account, will not only prevent
marginalization and possible radicalization but will
also promote stable and peaceful societies. That is
true in times of peace, and even more so in times of
challenges and crises and in any peacebuilding effort.

Peace cannot be sustained in the absence of
inclusive development. But peace is also a critical
enabler for development, and indispensable to attaining
sustainable development, as recognized in the Rio+20
outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex). The
maintenance of peace and security within nations, as
well as regionally and internationally, is a prerequisite
for development.

Mr. Olguin Cigarroa took the Chair.

Viet Nam is a nation of 90 million people
from 54 different ethnic groups and very diverse
socioeconomic, historical and religious backgrounds,
who have lived harmoniously and peacefully as one.
Viet Nam understands and believes in the values of
inclusion, equality, non-discrimination, conciliation
and tolerance. Our national strategies and policies are
based on those values, with special attention paid to
poor people, ethnic minorities, women and children
and people with disabilities, so that they can participate
in and share the benefits of development. Thanks to
those efforts, Viet Nam has been able to reduce poverty,
maintain the country's stability and continue along its
development path.

In our region, South-East Asia, which was once a
battlefield, the 10 nations ofthe Association ofSoutheast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) strive to unlock the potentials
of each and all of us to narrow the development gap and
reduce inequalities within and among our countries to
pursue the goal of an inclusive, peaceful and prosperous
ASEAN community. ASEAN works with all partners
in the region and beyond in a common endeavour to
maintain regional peace, stability and security to allow
for our region's robust economic performance and
social progress.

Lastly, inclusive development at the international
level and equality among nations are equally important
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Addressing the root causes of conflicts and crises must
include promoting sustained economic growth, poverty
eradication, sustainable development and the rule of
law at the international level, including the peaceful
settlement of disputes. That requires strengthened
international cooperation and partnership and the
creation of a favourable international environment for
all nations to thrive, especially developing countries.
At the same time, none of those things will be
possible without international peace and security, the
maintenance of which is the primary responsibility of
the Security Council.

Viet Nam continues to work closely with
other Member States for inclusive and sustainable
development for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

