Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Welcome Mr. Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. His regular briefing has
confirmed that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains stable, which we View as the basis for the
sustainable functioning of the country's institutions
in strict compliance with the equality of the three
constituent peoples, in accordance with the Dayton
Peace Agreement.

The establishment, on 31 March, ofthe new State and
entity ruling bodies, following the elections in October,
which took place democratically, has confirmed the
ability of local actors to resolve their problems without
the support of an international protectorate. It is
important to continue the process of transferring full
responsibility for the situation to Bosnians themselves.

The abolition ofthe Office ofthe High Representative
is long overdue. In that context, the primary task is to
conclude the implementation of the agreement of the
"5+2" programme. The problems that have not been
settled within that framework must be resolved by the
Bosnians themselves through an inclusive dialogue and
on the basis of agreement among all three constituent
peoples. The exclusive task of the High Representative
is to move the local parties towards such dialogue and to
seek points ofunderstanding, but instead ofreporting on
what has been been done towards the timely drawdown
of the Office of the High Representative, the current
report simply reiterates what happened in the country
during the reporting period.

It does not propose any constructive solutions. It
looks for people to blame. There is no end to the illegal
and unjustified accusations against Bosnian Serbs, who
are allegedly undermining the Dayton constitutional
foundations, sovereignty and integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Such a one-sided philosophical approach
will only distort the real state of affairs and aggravate
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It ignores in
practice the claims ofother sides. Bosniaks, for example,
speak in favour of unitarism, and Croats demand the
creation of a third entity, which can be interpreted as a
violation of the spirit of the Dayton Agreement.

The High Representative gives the impression that
his role is to find artificial reasons to continue the
existence of an Office that has become outdated. The
High Representative should shake the habit of shedding
factological light on what has taken place in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and focus on practical steps to wind
down this foreign protectorate, which is an insult to the
sovereignty of the country. Such an understanding of
the role of the international community is in keeping
with the spirit of the twentieth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. To achieve an objective
picture of developments in the country, we recommend
that the Secretary-General and the Security Council
carefully familiarize themselves with the regular
report of the Republika Srpska, which draws attention,
inter alia, to attempts to gradually revise the Dayton
Agreement towards greater centralization in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and to undermine the constitutional
autonomy of the entities and the functionality of the
State as a whole.

Recognizing the importance of extending the
European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea in order
to maintain the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
context of implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement,
we oppose the use of the international presence as an
instrument for accelerated integration of the country
into the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). In that regard, we are
concerned by the fact that the High Representative is
arbitrarily interpreting his mandate with respect to
fulfilling civil aspects of the Dayton Agreement, and
is pushing for integration into NATO and the EU. It is
unacceptable, first, for the High Representative to set
himself new tasks that go beyond the mandate of the
Peace Agreement, the decisions of the implementation
conference and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, such far-reaching decisions cannot be forced
from outside; they must be the result of the sovereign,
voluntary decision of the three constituent peoples.

In conclusion, I wish to draw attention to trends
that should raise real concerns, in the context not
only of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but of the region as
a whole. I refer to a growth of extremism among the
Bosniak population in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
other Muslim communities in the Western Balkans.
That threat must be seen and assessed appropriately.
The terrorist act in the city of Dvornik on 27 April,
when an armed Islamist attacked a police station, is
confirmation of that trend. Special attention should be
devoted to the participation of Bosniaks in the conflicts
in the Middle East on the side of international terrorist
organizations. Hundreds of citizens have joined the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Jahbat
Al-Nusra through Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
serves as a channel for fighrers from Western Europe.
We welcome the efforts of Sarajevo to increase the
accountability of foreign fighters and their facilitators
for their actions abroad.

Last year, amendments were made to the criminal
code to limit the recruitment of Bosniaks into
ISIL and other illegal formations abroad. Bosnian
law enforcement agencies are carrying out special
operations to identify such networks and arrest local
mujahids. At the same time, as practice has shown, such
actions and measures remain insufficient and do not
provide the necessary impact to reduce the influence
of Islamists. Of course, in the fragile post-conflict
situation in the Balkans, that phenonemon is especially
dangerous. That has been confirmed by the recent
outburst of inter-ethnic and interreligious confrontation
in multinational Macedonia and neighbouring regions.

