Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): My delegation
wishes to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
Azerbaijan's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for convening this
timely open debate on the Middle East.

On repeated occasions, the Holy See has clearly
voiced urgent concern for the peace and welfare of all
the peoples of the Middle East. On this occasion, my
delegation once morejoins its voice to those ofall people
of goodwill who stand ready to welcome with great
hope the re-engagement of Israelis and Palestinians in
direct, serious and concrete negotiations. Our hopes
are renewed that we are witnessing at present a newly
rejuvenated peace process.

This is a critical time for the region, and there
are many issues to be considered. A solution for each
and for all of the peoples of the Middle East must be
characterized, first and foremost, by respecting the
centrality and dignity of the human person, regardless
of race or creed, by a concern for every human life
and for human dignity and by the tireless pursuit of
the common good for the whole of society, while also
keeping in mind the regional and international context.
The recognition and respect of the inalienable dignity
of every human being is the road map to the unity and
stability of every nation.

Peacebuilding between the people of Israel and
the people of Palestine constitutes a lingering remnant
of the twentieth century, which proved to be the
bloodiest of centuries. Each side in the drama suffered
grave humanitarian crises, whether in declared
wars, extremist violence or the military responses
thereto. In many of the confrontations, sadly, it has
been the civilian population that has fallen victim to
declared and undeclared violence. The impact of the
humanitarian suffering ofboth parties as a result ofthis
ongoing conflict requires the international community
every year to donate more funds to sustain refugee
populations. The global economic picture, however,
warns us that the situation cannot be sustained
indefinitely. A political solution is also the best solution
to those economic pressures, because peace between
the parties generates stable economies and, in turn,
attracts development funds.

My delegation wishes to note that other unresolved
political issues have introduced yet further instability
into the region. Accordingly, we join our voice to those
expressing grave concern regarding the situation in
Syria, and encourage everyone involved to continue
moving forward in a sincere quest forjustice and peace.
As an imperative first step, the Holy See earnestly and
urgently calls upon all parties to put an immediate end
to violence and to begin a real process of dialogue with
the "Geneva 11" conference, planned for next month.

One of the consequences of the current violence in
Syria is the flight of non-combatants from their homes.
Added to the plight ofover 4 million internally displaced
persons within the borders of Syria itself, more than
2 million refugees, three quarters of them women and
children, have already sought refuge in neighbouring
countries and are now seeking peace, security and
safety in countries outside the Middle East.

The challenges faced, especially by neighbouring
countries, in assisting and protecting those refugees
could have a destabilizing impact on the entire region.
The situation is extremely grave and is worsening by
the day; many people are dying of hunger or from a
lack of access to basic and necessary medical care.
The Catholic Church remains committed and active at
the forefront in providing humanitarian assistance to
people regardless of their religious or ethnic affiliation,
with all the means at our disposal. In that regard, I
would like to recall that, on 1 September, Pope Francis
called for a day of prayer and fasting for world peace,
and particularly for peace in Syria.

From the beginning, the Middle East has been the
cradle ofthe ancestral faith ofChristians, and Christians
have lived peaceably in those countries for centuries,
indeed millennia. As citizens of their respective
countries in the Middle East, they desire to contribute
to their societies in the Middle East and to continue to
be part of the social, political, cultural and religious
landscape of the region and work for the common good
of societies to which they fully belong, striving for

peace and reconciliation and guided by those values
that can help society progress towards greater respect
forjustice, human rights and fundamental freedoms.

For that reason, my delegation wishes in this
Chamber to raise the issue of the worrying exodus of
Christians from the region of their birth. Extremist
and reactionary forces introduced into the region as a
result of political instability and conflicts are targeting
Christians and other groups that are suffering from
the consequences of their blind violence. Christians
see themselves forced to flee for the sake of life and
limb, leaving behind a 2,000 year-old tradition bound
up in the culture of the region. It is an unacceptable
recurrence of what happened in Iraq when sectarian
violence reduced the Christian population by 70 per
cent.

For those of us here at the United Nations, the
challenges of the Middle East to which I have referred
are a clarion call to the task of peacemaking, which is
the very reason for the existence of the Organization.
By mustering the needed political will, the international
community can make a difference in the life of the
peoples of the Middle East and help them fulfil their
long-deferred dream of peace in the Middle East.

