Mr. Saleh (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express our thanks and gratitude to you,
Sir, for organizing this public meeting on this
important issue. We fully appreciate your transparent
method, which includes the involvement of non-
members of the Council in its deliberations and the
deliberations of the ad hoc Working Group of the
Security Council. It is our hope that these deliberations
will be crowned with success and will contribute
constructive ideas that will assist in conflict prevention
and resolution in the African continent.

I also wish to express our appreciation to the
Chairman of the Working Group, the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius, for his comprehensive
report to the Council today and his ambitious
programme. We wish him every success in his
endeavours.
Mr. President, allow me to speak about three
important points that I believe need further
deliberation. The first of these is the strengthening of
coordination between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. In Chapter I of the
United Nations Charter, entitled "Purposes and
Principles", paragraph 1 of Article 1 lists the
maintenance of international peace and security as one
of the most important purposes of the United Nations.
It proceeds stating that the United Nations should "take
effective collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats" to international peace and security.
Taking these collective measures, as we understand it,
requires the coordination of efforts of all actors in the
international community and within the United Nations
organs themselves.

Chapter X of the United Nations Charter states in
its Article 65 that the Economic and Social Council

"may furnish information to the Security Council
and shall assist the Security Council upon its
request".

Hence, we can see that there is a clear and unequivocal
legal basis for cooperation and coordination between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Furthermore, the Secretary-General has
emphasized this objective in his report on the
prevention of armed conflicts, in which he says:
"A successful prevention strategy depends on the
cooperation of many United Nations actors,
including the Secretary-General, the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the International Court of
Justice and United Nations agencies, offices,
funds and programmes, as well as the Bretton
Woods institutions." (A/55/985, Executive Summary)

In this report, the Secretary-General refers to the
importance of the role of regional organizations, non-
governmental organizations and organizations of civil
society. Since the mandate of the Economic and Social
Council includes humanitarian affairs, it is our View
that there is wide scope for cooperation and
coordination to realize the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter.

Since the beginning of the 1990s, we also have
witnessed increased attention paid by the Security
Council to humanitarian situations and their impact on
international peace and security. This is attested to by
several resolutions adopted by the Security Council;
some of them were adopted under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter.

We can draw a similarity in the relations between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council and those between development and peace.
The relationship between these two terms is quite close
and a lot can be said in this respect. We believe that
investment in human capital contributes effectively
towards avoiding armed conflict. Development cannot
be achieved unless there is peace; peace is endangered
if there is a problem with development. Consequently,
we believe that the roles of the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council are complementary.
In this respect, I would like to refer to the high-level
segment ofthe Economic and Social Council. This year
it will be taken up as a subject at the Council's
substantive session. Next July it will discuss the
contribution of the development of human resources in
the process of development, including in the fields of
health and education. Furthermore, the proposal by the
Economic and Social Council to establish an ad hoc
advisory group on African countries emerging from
conflict, if adopted, will be a positive and effective
contribution by the Economic and Social Council to the
prevention of conflict on the African continent through
long-term development programmes or what we call
peacebuilding in the post-conflict era. It is our hope
that a specific mechanism for coordination and
cooperation between this advisory group and the ad hoc
Working Group of the Security Council on the
prevention of conflicts in Africa will be established.

We believe in the importance of effective
coordination between the two Councils in order to
realize the noble objectives in the United Nations
Charter. This cooperation and coordination may take
different forms and could be strengthened through
periodic meetings between the Presidents of the two
Councils. The President of each Council could be
invited to participate in the meetings of the other to
discuss issues of mutual interest. There can also be
strengthening through meetings between the two
Councils; and we hope that will be realized very soon.
In this respect, my country welcomes the initiative
taken by the Security Council under the Mauritian
presidency to address an invitation to the President of
the Economic and Social Council to participate for the
first time in a Security Council meeting dated 29
January 2002 regarding the situation in Africa. An
invitation was extended for this meeting, too. We
appreciate this constructive approach, because we
believe that both Councils can do a lot, especially in
the area of peace-building in the post-conflict era.
In view of the continent's suffering throughout
the previous decades and the serious implications of its
civil wars, we believe that the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council together can do more for
this continent if cooperation and coordination are
strengthened.

My second point concerns the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. The
experiment of previous years has shown the important
role played by these Special Representatives,
especially in the hotbeds of armed conflict. They
played a mediatory role between the parties to the
conflict and have provided the Secretary-General and
the Security Council with detailed information on the
situation in the field. This information is very
important for the decision makers. It would be
appropriate if some of the Secretary-General's Special
Representatives in Africa could be invited to attend
meetings on this item with the Council to exchange
views with them, to learn of the difficulties and
obstacles facing them now or those they faced in the
past and to find ways and means for alleviating and
solving those problems and difficulties.

My third point refers to cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and other
subregional organizations. It is indeed important for the
Working Group to continue cooperation and
coordination with the OAU, which has specific visions
and ideas and is close to the parties and the armed
conflicts in Africa. This applies to other subregional
organizations, such as the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), which plays an active role
regarding the question of Somalia. The Council and the
Working Group itself can enhance this role through
coordination and cooperation with these organizations
and exchanges of views on these problems.

The Community of Sahel-Saharan States
(CENSAD) is also playing an important role, as stated
by the Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya this morning. There is a need for better
coordination of efforts both among the organizations
themselves and with the United Nations.

Finally, I would like to express my support for the
statement by the President of the Economic and Social
Council, Ambassador Simonovie, regarding the
importance of considering the root causes of armed
conflict, because understanding them will facilitate the
task of finding appropriate solutions. It is our hope that
this meeting will yield ideas that will help the Working
Group to implement its ambitious programme.
