Mr. Howells: Mr. President, the United Kingdom
congratulates you on bringing this debate to the
Security Council, because Africa is central to the work
of the United Nations. There is much good news. Six
conflicts have ended in the past 10 years and, as the
Secretary-General observed, recent elections in Sierra
Leone are a shining example of a nation rejecting
violence and seizing democracy, moving from war
crimes and collapse to a peaceful transition of power
through elections in only seven years. It is a
remarkable story. And Africa is taking responsibility
for solving its problems, through developing the
African Union's political and peacekeeping capacity
and through cooperation with the United Nations.

Nowhere will this cooperation be tested more
than in Darfur. As President Bush has told us, the
world's greatest humanitarian disaster is happening
there.

The Secretary-General has identified three tracks
to solving the crisis. First, there is the peacekeeping
track, and I hope that the United Nations and the
African Union will agree on the composition of the
Hybrid Operation so deployment can get back on
schedule. The Sudan must do all it can to speed up the
process. Secondly, there is the political track. The
upcoming talks must be inclusive, and they have to
yield rapid results. We need a ceasefire at the outset
and a means to monitor and enforce it. Thirdly, there is
the humanitarian track. Sudan must lift the obstacles to
access - and they still are not lifted.

Let us not forget the need for justice. As the
Secretary-General said this morning in his speech to
the General Assembly (see A/61/PV.4), the age of
impunity is dead. There can be no impunity in Darfur.
Sudan should fully cooperate with the International
Criminal Court. Our Belgian colleague gave us a vivid
and tragic example of what happens when these war
criminals believe that no one will make them answer
for their despicable crimes. We have to make them
answer.

If progress is made in Darfur, the United
Kingdom stands ready to support reconstruction and
development. But any party that impedes progress must
face a robust response from the international
community. Darfur complicates progress on the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan, where
progress remains essential.

The crisis in Darfur, as we know, has also spilled
over the border into Chad, and resolution 1778 (2007),
adopted today, paves the way for a European Union
force to protect civilians there. Progress is needed also,
as we all know, in Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The United Nations should be actively engaged to
find a way forward in Zimbabwe and to relieve the
suffering of the people there. Three million refugees
have already fled - three million - threatening
instability across Zimbabwe's borders. We welcome
the efforts of President Mbeke and others to find a
political solution, and I hope the Secretary-General
will dispatch a humanitarian mission.

The United Nations has a unique role in Africa,
from ending conflict to delivering the Millennium
Development Goals, where we must all redouble our
efforts. The United Nations has done much for Africa.
But as the people of Darfur, Somalia and Zimbabwe
would tell us, there is also much more it urgently needs
to do.

