Mr. Duale (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to participate in this
discussion on Somalia at this Security Council
meeting. I hope to be very brief, although if I could
follow my emotions, I believe I would speak for an
hour

We are all aware that Somalia has been in deep
trouble since the collapse of the central Government in
1990-1991, and the Security Council has been seized
with the Somalia question ever since. It is no
exaggeration to say that the situation in Somalia has
been grave indeed for a considerable time, and is surely
a threat to regional and international peace and security.
In this connection, I also wish to highlight, with thanks
and appreciation, the issues raised in the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report (S/20lO/447), as well as
the departments and staff who participated in its
preparation. I also thank Special Representative
Mahiga for his frank, lucid and sincere presentation of
the current situation in Somalia. We fully subscribe to
the solutions he has just presented, to be acted upon, I
submit, with the urgency the situation requires. I do not
want to dwell on the details Mr. Mahiga has given;
they express the gravity of the situation so well that I
subscribe to them completely.

I also take this opportunity to express my
gratitude for the support that Somalia has received
from the United Nations to date, especially with regard
to the needs of the African Union Mission in Somalia
10-53641
(AMISOM). Those needs are, unfortunately, in the
economic, equipment-related, administrative and
financial areas, despite the fact that AMISOM. is
heroically defending a very critical situation, and that
without it the Somali Government would have
collapsed a long time ago. We therefore hope that
AMISOM. will be given all the support it needs to deal
with the real problems facing the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and Somalia in general.

On the issue of piracy and terrorist activities, we
see a clear link between the continuing instability on
land and the increased acts of terrorism and piracy.
Simply put, we cannot afford to treat piracy and
terrorism in isolation. We must look at the real root
causes and do something about those too.

We are deeply concerned about the constant
negative and hostile media coverage of the sincere
efforts of the African Union (AU), the United Nations,
the World Food Programme, AMISOM. and the
Transitional Federal Government and institutions. To
us, this negative, hostile coverage is not an accident,
but looks like part of a larger effort to keep Somalia
destabilized and give ammunition to the propaganda
machinery of the terrorists. We therefore hope that the
media will collaborate with the TFG, the AU,
AMISOM, the United Nations and the international
community in their support of all of Somalia's efforts.

I take this opportunity to call on the Security
Council to make some significant decisions on Somalia
that will enable my country to stabilize, rehabilitate
and reconstruct, bearing in mind Mr. Mahiga's
constructive presentation. We hope that we will see
more positive action this time than we have in the past
20 years.

