Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Arab Group.

The Security Council is holding this very important
open debate a few days after N'Djamena, the capital
of Chad, was stricken by heinous terrorist attacks that
resulted in many dead and wounded, including children.
I would like to express our sincere condolences and
deep sympathy to the families of the victims, and our
solidarity with the Chadian authorities.

I would also like to congratulate Malaysia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on its organization of today's debate
on children and armed conflict. I wish to commend the
work of the President in his capacity as Chair of the
Working Group on this very issue. I would like also to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/409)
on global trends related to the situation of children in
armed conflict. Our special thanks go to Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for her briefing and for her steadfast, faithful
and continued commitment to the cause of children.

The Arab Group would like to emphasize some
principles and elements that we deem extremely
important in dealing with the present issue. Above
all, we cannot support any difference of opinion
when children and their well-being and future are at
stake. Regardless of the situation, location or political
differences between States, or even in situations of
open conflict, children should be protected. That is a
moral and legal obligation.

We now have criteria that can be used to define when
a child is a victim and when violations are committed,
and it is a fundamental principle that we must act on
that - "we" meaning the international community,
and above all the Security Council, with the Secretary-
General as a whistleblower. The Secretary-General has
a responsibility to tell, and the Security Council has a
responsibility to act. Children's playgrounds must be in
their schoolyards and secure homes, not in battlefields.
Regardless of their religion, citizenship, ethnicity
or social position, we should make no distinction.
Children are children, and we should ensure that they
do not become victims, soothe them when required and
reconstruct their future when necessary. Children must
remain off limits with regard to adults' quagmires.

We continue to witness the increasing recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict, including acts
of sexual violence, killings, attacks on schools and/or
hospitals and recurring attacks or threats of attacks
on protected personnel, in violation of international
legal standards. This year, as we celebrate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
we should note that significant progress has been made
in seeking the cooperation and compliance of national
security forces on this issue, since almost all of them
now have their own action plans for addressing it.
However, we should also note that this did not stop
children from being the primary Victims of conflicts
in 2014.

(spoke in Arabic)

As we mark the first anniversary of the "Children,
Not Soldiers" campaign, and despite the significant
efforts of Governments and agencies of the United
Nations to demonstrate the harmful effects of terrorist
acts on children, this negative trend continues to grow.
The Arab Group believes the Security Council should
consider the possibility of expanding the criteria for
inscribing names of the perpetrators of such crimes
in the lists annexed to the Secretary-General's report.
Abduction is one of the criminal actions used by
extremist groups in various countries to intimidate
or influence local ethnic or religious communities.
Girls in particular are Victims of sexual slavery and
other indescribable violations. They are deprived of an
education, raped and forced into marriage. The recent
savage attacks on and abductions of girls by Boko
Haram and Daesh and the selling of girls to terrorist
fighters are other challenges we must overcome.

With regard to peacekeeping operations, the Arab
Group calls for the inclusion of child protection advisers
in the mission mandates. They must be on the ground
to ensure that children affected by armed conflict
are protected as they should be in the framework of
peacekeeping operations. We must submit reports on
those efforts.

The issue of the collective abduction of civilians,
including children, is one that we are seeing increasingly
in situations of armed conflict. The abduction of
children leads to other violations, such as murder,
maiming, recruitment and sexual Violence. The Arab
Group condemns such violations committed against
children in Syria and Iraq by the terrorist group Daesh,
which murders, rapes and forcibly displaces children,
as well as denying them access to education by closing
schools and using them for combat purposes.

While the Council is looking at the issue of children
and armed conflict around the world, the Arab Group
urges it not to forget the children of Palestine, who
are suffering under acts of aggression and oppression
and grave violations of human rights owing to the
Israeli occupation. That conflict has been going on
for more than 70 years, and Israel, the occupying
Power, has continued to seriously violate international
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Charter of
the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That situation systematically exhibits three
of the six criteria for evaluating violations against
children. The war in Gaza last year resulted in the
deaths of more than 500 Palestinian children who
were targeted and killed deliberately as they played on
the beach or sought refuge in United Nations centres.
Around 3,000 children were disabled for life, schools
were attacked, 54,000 children left homeless, and
at least 373,000 children in Gaza are now in need of
psychological and social support. None of what was
destroyed has been rebuilt yet.
The Arab Group reiterates its confidence in Special
Representative Zerrougui, which it demonstrated
recently when the League of Arab States and the United
Nations signed an agreement aimed at strengthening
the protection of children affected by armed conflict
in the Arab world. It constitutes an important measure
to ensure the protection of children. The Arab Group
believes it is essential that the mandate of the Office of
the Special Representative be strengthened by providing
the financial and human resources it requires.

