Ms. Amos: Mr. President, I thank you for the
opportunity to update the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

I would like to begin by thanking the Council for the
adoption of its presidential statement on 2 October on
the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/PRST/2013/15).
The statement demonstrated a unity of purpose in the
Council's response to the humanitarian crisis in Syria
and was a clear recognition that the appalling suffering
inflicted on ordinary women, children and men by the
conflict is completely unacceptable.

I regret to report that, despite the Council's grave
alarm at the significant and rapid deterioration of the
humanitarian situation and its call for urgent increased
humanitarian action, fighting continues to intensify
across the country and its impact on civilians continues
to grow each day.

Ongoing assessments reveal a substantial increase
in needs and in internal displacement. As winter
begins to fall across the country for a third year since
the conflict began, millions live in makeshift shelters
exposed to the elements and unprotected from the cold.
All Palestinian refugee camps have been affected by
the conflict; tens of thousands of Palestine refugees
have had their homes damages or destroyed, and more
than 50 per cent have been displaced.

Diseases, including those easily preventable by
basic hygiene and vaccination, are spreading at an
alarming rate. Just last week, we received reports of
polio cases in Deir-ez-Zor, which, if confirmed, will
mark the first polio outbreak in Syria in 14 years.
In Aleppo and other cities, leishmaniasis is rife,
disfiguring and scarring children's faces for the rest of
their lives. There are also worrying reports of rapidly
increasing malnutrition. People suffering from chronic
illnesses, such as cancer and diabetes, lack access to
treatment, and they also are dying e silently.

On 2 October, the Council called on all parties to
the Syrian conflict to immediately cease and desist
from all violations of international humanitarian law
and violations and abuses of human rights and to take
all appropriate steps to protect civilians. Yet three
weeks later, we continue to receive reports of both
Government and opposition military positions being
established in populated areas and ofthe occupation and
indiscriminate attacks against civilian infrastructure,
including schools, hospitals, power plants and water
points.

On Wednesday, a gas pipeline was hit, shutting down
power in Damascus and many other locations across the
country. Since the war began, over 3,000 schools and a
significant number of mosques have been damaged or
destroyed. Most flour mills and bakeries are no longer
operational. Medical facilities have been particularly
hard hit; around 60 per cent of hospitals, 38 per cent
of health centres, 90 per cent of ambulances and 70 per
cent ofpharmaceutical plants have been affected by the
crisis. The deliberate targeting of hospitals, medical
personnel and transportation remains a daily reality.

Despite the intensification of the conflict, United
Nations agencies and partners continue to work in
extremely dangerous and difficult conditions across
the country to reach millions of people with regular
humanitarian assistance. The World Food Programme
has scaled up its operations and now aims to reach
4 million people each month, half of whom are in
opposition-held or contested areas. UNICEF and
partners have provided around 10 million people with
access to safe water countrywide since the beginning
of the year, and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and partners have provided
core relief items, such as blankets and mattresses,
to almost 2.4 million people, around 40 per cent of
them in opposition-held or disputed areas. This year,
approximately 2.7 million people have had medical
consultations, treatments and interventions, and
2 million have been reached with emergency health
kits by the World Health Organization and health
partners. Ahead of the new school year, which began
on 15 September, UNICEF distributed schoolbags and
stationery to 1 million children in all 14 governorates
as part of its Back to Learning campaign.

In addition to our regular aid deliveries, since
January we have managed to provide one-off assistance
to nearly 2.3 million people in hard-to-reach areas,
including nearly 1.8 million in opposition-held or
contested areas, through United Nations interagency
convoys. In mid-October, we delivered food, medical
supplies, essential items and water and sanitation
assistance for the first time in many months to people in
the opposition-held areas of Ter Mallah and Al-Gantho
in Homs.

Yet despite our best efforts, the humanitarian
response in Syria remains severely insufficient
compared to growing needs. More than three months
since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7000),
we are still unable to provide assistance to an estimated
2.5 million people trapped in hard-to-reach and besieged
areas, despite our attempts to use the provisions of the
presidential statement to do much more. Many of the
2.5 million have not been reached for almost a year.
Opposition groups continue to besiege the towns of
Nubul and Zahra in rural Aleppo, while Government
forces continue to besiege the towns of eastern
Ghouta, Al-Hajar Al-Aswad and Moadamiyah in rural
Damascus and the old city in Homs. Other locations,
such as Yarmouk, Dara'a/Al-Balad, Khan Sheikh and
many others, remain difficult to access due to ongoing
fighting. Although over 3,000 people were evacuated
from Moadamiyah on 13 October, more remain trapped
and in need of urgent assistance. Despite my call on
19 October for an immediate pause in hostilities to
allow humanitarian agencies unhindered access to
evacuate the remaining civilians and deliver life-saving
assistance, we have still been unable to reach the area.

In its presidential statement of 2 October, the
Council urged the Syrian authorities to take immediate
steps to facilitate the expansion of humanitarian relief
operations and lift bureaucratic impediments and other
obstacles. We are engaging with the Government of
Syria on these issues but have, regrettably, as yet not
had any major breakthrough.

All humanitarian staff missions and convoys
continue to require written approval. The processing
of visas for United Nations and international
non-governmental organization (NGO) staff members
is unpredictable. More than 100 visas - 62 for United
Nations staff and 39 for international NGOs - remain
pending, Many receive single entry visas, and staff
are often issued visas for a duration shorter than
their contract. Only 15 international NGOs are
allowed to operate in Syria, and they face restrictions
in establishing sub-national presences. While the
number of national NGOs approved to work with
the United Nations has increased to 66, the number
approved to operate in areas with the greatest needs
remains extremely limited. There is still no progress
on the establishment of additional humanitarian hubs,
including in Aleppo, Qamishly and Dara'a, requested
more than one year ago. Lengthy customs procedures,
complications relating to the sanctions regime, and
border insecurity continue to delay the importation of
essential communication equipment.

We are now facing additional hurdles. The Council,
in its statement, called for the safe and unhindered
passage of humanitarian convoys, yet the situation on
the ground is increasingly complex and dangerous.
Some estimate that there are as many as 2,000 armed
opposition groups in Syria. Clashes among these
groups are increasingly common, and key humanitarian
access routes have been cut off by fierce fighting.
While we have been able to negotiate access to some
areas, command and control structures in others are
unclear and difficult to navigate. At the same time,
kidnappings and abductions of humanitarian workers
are increasingly common, as are hijacking and the
seizure of aid trucks. Last week, we had a convoy that
was ready to go, but we could not get enough drivers as
they feared for their lives.

I must reiterate that without real and sustained
pressure from the Council on the Government of
Syria and opposition groups on the ground, it will be
impossible to make further progress. We also need
additional funds. Many Member States generously
pledged more support in the lead-up to the new session
of the General Assembly, yet our appeal for the work
in Syria and neighbouring countries is only 54 per
cent funded. I know that we are not able to reach all
those needing help, but we must continue to support
those we can while continuing to seek greater access.
A winterization plan prepared for Syria requires
$1.8 million to meet the most urgent needs. This funding
must be received immediately, or it will be too late to
procure and deliver urgently needed supplies.

I and my colleagues have said repeatedly that only
a genuine political process can stop the horrendous
suffering of the Syrian people and that the status quo
must not continue. In the meantime, we need more
humanitarian action immediately to reach the ordinary
men, women and children who, through no fault of their
own, are caught up in this conflict. No one is taking
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and human rights law seriously. The Council must
make every effort to ensure that its recommendations
are implemented. It must ensure that the parties to
the conflict understand that they must take their
responsibilities and obligations under international
humanitarian law seriously.

We need humanitarian pauses immediately in all
locations where communities are being held hostage
by one party or the other to the conflict to deliver
food, medicine and shelter. People must be allowed
to move to safer areas without fear of attack. We need
those who control the checkpoints on both sides of the
conflict to ensure the safe and unhindered passage
of humanitarian convoys. We need the Government
to immediately lift all bureaucratic impediments to
humanitarian operations. There is simply no reason
why humanitarian staff, whose only interest is to help
those in desperate need, have not been granted visas to
scale up our operations.

This is a race against time. Three weeks have passed
since the adoption of the Council's statement, with
little change to report. Each day that passes without the
parties upholding their most basic obligations results
in more lives lost, more people displaced and more
people denied access to the most basic services. As we
deliberate, people continue to die unnecessarily. I call
upon all the members of the Council to exert influence
and take the necessary action to stop this brutality and
violence. The Council's leadership role is vital.

Words, despite their ability to shock, cannot really
paint a picture of the grim and gruesome reality of
Syria today. I am extremely disappointed that we have
not been able to make further progress.

