Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): First of all, I wish
to express our sincere appreciation to the Security
Council and particularly to India, the President of the
Council for the month of November, for convening
today's important open debate on the maintenance
of international peace and security, specifically on
the issue of piracy. My delegation aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The rise of maritime piracy over the past several
years is partly due to its being a low-cost, low-risk yet
high-profit venture that can provide a quick road to
riches for the perpetrators. The key to deterring piracy
is therefore to make the costs and risks of engaging in
piracy so high that it is no longer viable as a business.

Thailand, like many countries, has had its vessels
attacked and hijacked and their crewmen held hostage.
We have therefore joined the international efforts
to fight piracy off the coast of Somalia. Thailand
dispatched Royal Thai Navy counter-piracy task units
in 2010 and 2011 to join the anti-piracy operation in
Somalia under the banner of the Combined Maritime
Forces (CMF) in support of related Security Council
resolutions. Our previous commander of the Royal Thai
Navy Counter-Piracy Task Force was also appointed
Commander of Combined Task Force 151, one of the
three task forces under the CMF. We are considering
participating in such anti-piracy patrols continuously,
with our third counter-piracy task unit participating
once again in the latter half of 2012.

Apart from a military response, the disruption
of the illicit financial flows of piracy syndicates and
their networks is another effective measure to counter
maritime piracy. The intra - and interregional
exchange of information and intelligence in that regard
will significantly contribute to anti-piracy activities.

The prosecution ofthose suspected of acts ofpiracy
is no less important. However, different countries have
different legal systems, law enforcement capacities
and other constraints that influence the way they deal
with the issue of piracy and crimes at sea. Therefore,
Thailand encourages Member countries that have put
pirates on trial to share information, experiences and
best practices on related aspects of their judicial sector
development.

Our fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia
will not achieve real victory unless its root causes are
addressed. Thailand shares the view that piracy in the
Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia is deeply
rooted in decades-long instability in the country.
The situation needs to be addressed in a holistic and
sustainable manner. Thailand is a development partner
of several African countries. We are more than ready to
cooperate with Somalia in human resource development
and capacity-building in such fields as agriculture and
fisheries, public health, income generation and law
enforcement.

Apart from participating in deterrence activities
off the coast of Somalia, Thailand, as a coastal State
of the Straits of Malacca, has actively participated in
the Malacca Straits Coordinated Patrols and the air
patrol known as Eyes in the Sky. Both operations have
contributed significantly to the improvement of overall
maritime safety and security in the area. Thailand
also plays an active role in the Regional Cooperation
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP) and the Maritime
Forum of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
We also support more information sharing and
cooperation between ReCAAP and the three piracy
information-sharing centres in Africa, established
under the Djibouti Code of Conduct, as suggested by
the International Maritime Organization.

For all our efforts, the welfare and safety of
shipping and seafarers, the security of navigation and
the stability of global commerce are still at risk due
to piracy. Thailand remains committed to cooperating
actively with the international community to stamp out
maritime piracy.

