Ms. Lemos-Maniati: At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council in this open debate and
to make a few comments on this important aspect of
peacekeeping operations.

Allow me also to welcome the resolution adopted
today (resolution 2167 (2014)). This is yet another
significant resolution on peacekeeping that highlights
the role of effective partnership and cooperation in
enabling an early response to emerging crises.

In recent years, there has been a growing demand
for peacekeeping operations in increasingly challenging
circumstances. In that context, the Security Council
has asked for more prompt action to preserve peace and
protect civilians, with mandates that have become more
substantial and complex, all this against the backdrop
of serious resource constraints.

The United Nations is to be commended for seeking
to strengthen its central role in peacekeeping and to
ensure the effective functioning of collective security.
But, as the United Nations itself has recognized over
the years, enhancing global security and stability is a
task that no single organization can manage on its own.
It has to be done through a concerted effort based on
shared goals and common values, and partnerships are
critical in this endeavour.

NATO has been a long-standing partner to the
United Nations. We are committed to supporting
the United Nations and its ideals, a principle that is
enshrined in our founding Treaty of 1949. Our new
strategic concept, which we agreed in 2010, commits
the Alliance to helping prevent and manage conflicts
and to stabilizing post-conflict situations, including by
working more closely with the United Nations.

Over the past two decades, NATO has repeatedly
demonstrated a clear ability to plan, initiate and
conduct multinational operations of varying scale and
complexity, including upon short notice, at strategic
distance and over an extended period of time. The
operations have involved various combinations of skills,
assets and capabilities, and they have covered the entire
spectrum from peace enforcement to multifaceted
security assistance and from maritime embargo to
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.

We have also provided logistical assistance
to the African Union's United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping operations in Darfur and in Somalia,
and we have escorted merchant ships carrying World
Food Programme humanitarian supplies off the coast
of Somalia. Some of those operations have been carried
out in a relatively benign environment; others in a
decidedly hostile one. But all have been characterized by
tight political control, strict adherence to the mandate,
mission and rules of engagement, and a strong concern
for the protection of human life and the avoidance of
civilian casualties.

Over the years, NATO-United Nations cooperation
has extended to include cooperation on issues that are
at the very heart of operations, including mine action,
children and armed conflict and the role of women
in peace and security. We fully support a further
strengthening of United Nations ability to conduct
peacekeeping operations, and we fully agree that this
requires efforts on several fronts, including closer
cooperation with partners, greater sharing of experience
and expertise, and better training and education.

Partnerships have been essential to NATO. Over the
past 25 years, we have built a network of partnerships
that now includes more than 40 countries from all over
the world. Each has different backgrounds, tools and
expertise, but together, we have helped to preserve
peace, reinforce stability and promote progress across
and well beyond the Euro-Atlantic area.

Partnership with other international organizations
has been equally critical to our work. By working more
closely not only with the United Nations, but also with
the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and, increasingly, the African
Union, we seek to contribute to efforts aimed at
preventing crises, managing conflicts and stabilizing
post-conflict situations. And we very much feel that
this has to be based on a shared sense of responsibility,
openness and determination.

It is obvious that better preparedness is a powerful
resource of conflict management. In the context of
NATO-United Nations cooperation, we continually look
at ways to make our pragmatic cooperation even more
effective. We are encouraged by the growing practical
cooperation between the staffs of our organizations,
including exchanges of best practices and lessons
learned in operations, training and exercises and
sharing of expertise.

As the United Nations assesses the respective
strengths and roles of its partners, NATO's intention
would be to continue to support United Nations efforts
in peacekeeping by deepening what has been done so
far through the provision of enablers such as logistical
support, medical support or strategic airlifts, or the
sharing of expertise, such as lessons learned and
best practices on asymmetrical threat, countering
improvised explosive devices, planning, training and
aspects of standardization.

In just over a month, NATO Heads of State and
Government will hold a Summit meeting in Wales.
Partnership will be a key item on the agenda. We will
look to strengthen the interoperability between our
NATO forces and those of our partners so we can be
more effective in tackling security challenges together.
We will also look at how we can help partners and others
in need with defence and related security capacity-
building so as to help them to project stability in their
own regions. And of course, we will pursue that effort
in mutual complementarity with other international
organizations, including the United Nations.

When it comes to managing crises and building
security and stability, NATO has unique assets and
expertise to bring to bear. As the United Nations
continues to assess the respective roles and strengths of
its partners, the Alliance will continue to explore ways
to deepen our cooperation and reinforce our support.

