Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his informative
briefing on this very serious issue. The situation with
regard to North Korea is an issue on which we all have
a unified position.

First, we do not want to see the nuclear club expand
and we will not accept any State's aspirations to acquire
nuclear weapons. Kazakhstan has been and remains
an active supporter of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation, which we believe can be achieved
through confidence-building and reaching pragmatic
compromises aimed at building a mutually safe and
peaceful coexistence.

Secondly, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's reckless missile launches and nuclear tests
represent the most serious possible Violations of Security
Council resolutions. Kazakhstan has experienced all the
devastating consequences of nuclear tests and therefore
supports their prohibition in the twenty-first century.
To this day, unfortunately, we have still been unable
to achieve the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which could make ending all
tests a reality. We must outlaw nuclear testing in the
modern world.

Thirdly, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
should comply with the requirements of all the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Only thorough and strict
adherence to them will ease the sanctions regime
imposed on Pyongyang. It is in the interests of the
Government of North Korea to engage in a substantive
dialogue and resume the negotiation process in order to
avoid the potentially irreversible negative consequences
of its irresponsible behaviour. In this respect, we
recommend capitalizing on the recent contact between
the Secretariat and the Government of North Korea
with the aim of expanding the window of opportunity it
represents for peaceful cooperation and diplomacy. We
should also reduce the risk of conflict and any further
deterioration of the difficult humanitarian situation
created by funding cuts, which can seriously affect the
lives of ordinary citizens in the country.

The current situation on the Korean peninsula is
the most tense and dangerous there has ever been. We
must prevent all possible miscalculations and strive to
reduce the risk of escalating the conflict. All sides must
refrain from negative rhetoric and actions. We must
work to create the conditions necessary for continuing
the contacts initiated between the United Nations and
Pyongyang. Today's meeting of the Council sends a
clear signal to North Korea that its nuclear path will not
provide any guarantees for the security and well-being
ofits own people or anyone else.

Kazakhstan's non-nuclear path could serve as a
practical guide for the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and other countries striving to obtain nuclear
capabilities. We have built and strengthened our
independence and gained international respect by
renouncingnuclearweapons. My President demonstrated
strong political will in ridding our country of nuclear
weapons and tests in a very challenging environment at
a time of radical transformation of the world order. As
time has shown, it was the right decision. I would like to
thank Secretary of State Tillerson for mentioning that
fact in the recent debate on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in this Chamber (see S/PV.8053).
We therefore call on the leadership of North Korea to
renounce its nuclear weapons for the benefit of all.

