Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for calling this important meeting.
I welcome the many ministers joining us today.
I would also like to thank Administrator Steiner,
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Mr. Kabat and
Ms. Getschel for their contributions and helpful framing
of today's discussion.

Many of our nations have experienced devastating
natural disasters in recent years, from hurricanes to
floods to droughts, affecting 2 billion people worldwide
in the past decade alone. These events inflict loss of
life, the destruction of property and the displacement of
citizens. They increase the risk of food insecurity and
disease outbreak.

This past year, the United States experienced the
deadliest wildfire in the history of my home state of
California and one of the strongest hurricanes on record
to hit the United States mainland. We saw devastating
flash floods in Maryland and destructive mudslides on
our west coast. In Puerto Rico, the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration assesses Hurricane
Maria to have been the most destructive hurricane to hit
the island in modern times. That catastrophic hurricane
led to loss oflife and more than $90 billion in damage.

We have seen how natural disasters can
exacerbate existing vulnerabilities, threatening critical
infrastructure that citizens rely on to reliably deliver
food, water and shelter in the wake of such events. This
makes things harder for everyone - from relief workers
to police forces to national militaries - as they try to
access remote areas, supply their teams and deliver
needed services. Natural disasters also frequently lead
to breakdowns in social order and spikes in crime,
violence and instability.

Over time, incomplete recovery from repeated
severe natural disasters erodes and impedes
development, including of critical infrastructure and
institutions. Particularly in communities with a history
of conflict or civil violence, this can create conditions
that allow illicit activities to flourish.

It is the policy of the United States to provide
humanitarian and relief assistance to help countries
deal with extreme weather events and natural disasters.

The East Coast of the United States and our
Caribbean neighbours to the south have always been
subject to devastating hurricanes, and for generations
the United States has experienced and dealt with
earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, droughts, floods
and other environmental disasters. We are constantly
learning new and better ways to mitigate their effects
and to protect lives and property. When possible to
enact, good zoning laws in fire zones, flood plains
or areas vulnerable to coastal storm surges can
significantly reduce losses, as can good building codes.
Early warning has saved countless lives. The United
States has and will continue to share best practices
with its neighbours and friends who face extreme
environmental challenges.

Central America and the Caribbean have suffered
greatly from the follow-on effects of natural disasters.
Hurricanes have impacted national economies and
created huge recovery needs. Recent droughts have
exacerbated food and water insecurity and contributed
to new migration flows in the region. In response to
Hurricane Matthew in Haiti, the United States supported
recovery needs with $100 million of assistance,
including critical governance, health, shelter support
and food assistance for the more than 1.8 million people,
as well as cash to revive destroyed farms and restore
livelihoods. In response to drought in Central America,
the United States is working with partners to provide
support for new agriculture technology and to improve
the business environment for small scale farmers as a
means to boost productivity, incomes and resilience.

Beyond the Caribbean and Central America, the
United States is partnering with Governments and
regional organizations to bring relief and disaster
preparedness to those who need it most. It is the right
thing to do, and it also helps preserve order, maintain
basic services to populations suddenly in need, and
mitigate the threat of instability after a natural disaster.
Each nation must do its part, but we believe that the
Security Council and its member States can and should
play an especially important role in this common effort
to assist with disaster preparedness and response.

As other speakers have done, we encourage the
Security Council member States and United Nations
agencies to increase information-sharing and identify
best practices for post-disaster recovery. We each focus
on a small piece of this challenge, and aggregating data
will improve our overall understanding.

As Lindsay Getschel and other speakers have
suggested, we would also like to see Security Council
members explore ways in which the United Nations
special political missions can place a greater focus
on post-disaster resilience. The United States will be
assessing how best to incorporate this work into relevant
mandates, and we encourage our friends around this
table to do the same.
