Mr. Danon (Israel): Every three months, we meet
here to discuss the situation in the Middle East. As I
am sure will happen today as well, the members of
this organ will choose to talk about Israel, despite the
horrific events that are taking place in the region.

Since our last meeting on this item (see S/PV.8583),
Erdogan has invaded northern Syria and caused
instability in the region. As shocking as Erdogan's
recent aggression is, it should come as no surprise.
For years now, Erdogan has been destabilizing the
region through violence and by supporting terror
organizations. Erdogan is dragging Turkey down a
dangerous new Ottoman imperialist path. He threatens
journalists, persecutes religious minorities and
promotes anti-Semitism. It was not enough for Erdogan
to persecute the Kurdish citizens of his own country.
He has now sent his troops to massacre Kurdish people
in Syria as well. He is responsible for the deaths of
many innocent people and for the displacement of tens
of thousands.

The violence that he has caused in Syria has also
led to the strengthening of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS). While he was busy murdering those
who had helped keep the world safe from the threats of
ISIS, he allowed ISIS members to break out of prison
and subject the world to future attacks. That, too, should
come as no surprise, as Erdogan has a long history of
supporting terror. Erdogan has granted Hamas, a terror
organization, political and financial support. He has
allowed Hamas to continue to build its leadership and
infrastructure on Turkish soil. He has turned Turkey
into a safe haven for Hamas terrorists and a financial
centre for funnelling money to subsidize terror attacks.
Erdogan's Turkey shows no moral or human restraint
towards the Kurdish people. Erdogan has turned Turkey
into a regional hub for terrorism.

As Erdogan expands his terror campaign in Syria,
the Security Council focuses on Israel. It is a disgrace
to the Council's mandate that it continues to target
Israel instead of the atrocities that are being committed
by Erdogan. As we sit here today, recycling old
arguments against Israel over and over again instead
of focusing on the devastation caused by Erdogan will
not save the lives of the Kurdish people. Israel warns
against the ethnic cleansing of the Kurds and calls on
the international community to take action and provide
aid to the Kurdish people.

Unfortunately, Erdogan's support for non-State
terror organizations does not stand alone. For years,
the region has experienced the growing influence of
such organizations, and they now play a substantial
role in shaping the reality of the Middle East. These
terror organizations have been able to grow and act in
an increasingly bold manner because they have been
backed by countries. It is no secret that some in the
region wish to pursue policies and develop capabilities
that put the international community at risk. In some
cases, countries blatantly defy the international
community and pursue their weapons capabilities, as
we have seen with Iran's continued development of its
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. However,
in other cases those countries wish to further their
dangerous ambitions without appearing responsible
for doing so. That is why Turkey supports Hamas
and recklessly strengthens ISIS. That is why Iran has
formed militias. The Iranian regime, whose nuclear
ambitions represent the biggest threat to world peace,
uses organizations as proxies to further its dangerous
plans. Those organizations are doing Iran's dirty work
and granting it a form of plausible deniability.

These organizations have multiplied and spread
like a dangerous virus. They are now present in Syria,
Iraq, Lebanon, Yemen, Gaza, the Sinai peninsula,
Libya and other locations. For example, the Al-Hashd
Al-Shaabi Shia militias have long stopped focusing on
fighting ISIS and have since, under Iranian influence,
been challenging the stability of Iraq. The militias'
stronghold on the Iraqi-Syrian border, an area that serves
as a crucial part of the Iranian land-bridge through
the Middle East, poses a threat to the security of the
citizens of Iraq and to the stability of the Government.
In northern Syria, ISIS has recently been strengthened
by Erdogan's attack on the Kurds and continues to pose
a threat to peace and stability in the region. Hizbullah
continues to strengthen its hold in western Syria and
arm itself in Lebanon. Ansar Allah Houthis continue to
be a source ofviolence, both in Yemen and in the rest of
the region, as we recently witnessed in Saudi Arabia. In
Gaza, Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad continue to
target innocent civilians on both sides ofthe border and
defy the efforts made by parties in the region to bring
the Violence to an end.

These terrorist organizations do not all share
the same ideology and they differ in their perverted
interpretation of religious text. However, they all share
one main goal - to rid the region of nation States
and inaugurate a single religious leadership to preside
over the world. These organizations undermine the
sovereignty of States, disregard the rights of citizens
and cause instability. They do not believe in the rights
of women, the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender community, or the freedom of religion.
These organizations have been using brutal force
against civilian populations to pursue their agendas.
They have been murdering and raping. They have
been looting towns and using children as soldiers
and human shields. When one of these organizations
represents a single party to a conflict, its willingness to
do whatever it takes can be dangerous; but when many
parties act that way in a region that is already volatile,
the consequences can be and have been horrific. These
are the actors that are now playing a substantial role in
shaping the reality of the Middle East.

Many of these organizations have set up camp
on Israel's borders. Up north in Lebanon, there is
Hizbullah; in Syria, there are Iranian militias and
Hizbullah; in Gaza, there is Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad; and in the Sinai peninsula, there is ISIS.
Israel will continue to do everything in its power to
defeat those organizations and keep our Civilians safe.
However, it is not the safety and well-being of only one
country or even one region that are on the line. The
lack of stability has grave consequences for the entire
international community.

The recent Iranian attacks on Saudi Arabia, for
which Iran got the Houthis to claim responsibility, did
not only cause unrest in the region, but also affected
the world economy. The price of oil jumped after the
attacks on the oil facilities. Consumers worldwide bore
the literal cost of the harm to the global supply of crude
oil. The non-State terror organizations of the region act
in ways that are dangerous to the world economy and
their effects are felt far beyond the region.

The economy is not the only way in which those
organizations affect the international community.
When citizens are persecuted in their own homes
and are terrorized by those organizations, they do not
stay home. They seek to flee as far as they can and
they become refugees. Sometimes they stay in the
Middle East, but, as we have seen in recent years,
many make their way to Europe. By the end of 2016,
nearly 5.2 million refugees and migrants had reached
European shores after enduring agonizing journeys
from Syria, Iraq and other countries.

Unfortunately, many more did not manage to reach
those shores. In 2018, more than 138,000 people risked
their lives trying to reach Europe by sea. More than
2,000 ofthem drowned. In Yemen, 3 million people have
been forced to flee their homes because of increased
violence. Many flee to neighbouring countries such as
Saudi Arabia, Djibouti and Ethiopia. The immigration
crisis is a direct result ofthe growing power ofnon-State
terrorist organizations in the region. The proxies of
Iran and other terrorist-supporting States are forcing
people out of their homes, leaving the rest of the world
to take care of them.

This organ was created to promote stability and
safety in the world. However, the world in which this
organ was created - a world in which violence was
played out among States - no longer exists. The
international community is trying to win again new
players, using an old strategy in a game that has long
since evolved. If this organ wishes to truly serve its
mandate of promoting safety and stability, it must adapt
itself to a world with non-State actors.

For years, Israel has had to deal with non-State
terrorist organizations that seek to destroy it. Through
its experience, Israel has developed methods for dealing
with them and looks to share those methods with
the world. The international community must come
together to return stability to the region by immediately
taking the following four steps.

First, we must all recognize such non-State
organizations for what they are - terrorist
organizations. The international community must
designate them as terrorist organizations and publicly
condemn them and their actions.

Secondly, we must prevent the funding of such
organizations, which includes using our intelligence
forces to find all sources of revenue that they hold and
cutting them off. It also means forcing regimes to stop
providing funding to those organizations and applying
more sanctions.
Thirdly, we must encourage the countries in which
those terrorist organizations live to take action against
them, and we must assist them in those efforts.

Finally, if all else fails, we must take military action
to stop those terror organizations. Israel congratulates
our dear friend the United States on its recent, successful
operation. Al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, posed a threat to the safety and
security of the entire world. We thank the United States
for making our world safer.

The four steps I have mentioned are not enough. If
this organ wants to serve its purpose of promoting safety
and stability in the new world order, it must adjust. We
must work together to promote new methods and forms
of cooperation. The Council was created to ensure the
security and stability of the United Nations Member
States. Non-State terrorist organizations represent
the biggest threat to both security and stability. It is
our human obligation to fight for the lives of innocent
civilians; it is our moral obligation to fight for human
rights for all; it is our mandated obligation to ensure
that nation-States are not held hostage by terrorist
organizations and the countries that support them. I
call upon my fellow members to join forces in the fight
against this threat.

