Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I should like first of
all to thank the German presidency for organizing
today's meeting. I wish to extend our gratitude to the
delegation of France for its important initiative of
holding the ministerial meeting on this issue last
month, which in fact gave new impetus to our common
endeavours.

Despite the fact that the world's attention is
focused today on the Iraqi issue, the question of
combating terrorism remains a top priority on the
international agenda. Moreover, under the present
circumstances, it is of critical importance to take
further steps towards achieving the unity and coherence
of the global anti-terrorism coalition.

Terrorism continues to be a major threat to
international peace and security. After the events of 11
September 2001, the outbursts of terror in Moscow,
Bali, Mombasa and Bogota reminded us that the
problem of terrorism requires sustained, long-term and
global action. In our view, the Security Council should
continue to play a central role in promoting
cooperation between Governments in the fight against
terrorism, as was reiterated in the recently adopted
ministerial declaration of the Council.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for its
part, is making an extremely important practical
contribution to the strengthening of anti-terrorism
capabilities at the national, regional and global levels.
We are pleased that the CTC has established
constructive dialogue with Member States, first of all,
in the spheres of strengthening national legislations and
of combating terrorism financing. I should like also to
express the full support of Ukraine for the efforts of the
Committee to help countries to improve their counter-
terrorism capabilities, specifically by developing the
directory of sources of advice and expertise in the areas
covered by resolution 1373 (2001).

However, this is only one part of the complex
task confronting the Organization in its multifaceted
undertaking. Others include addressing such global
afflictions as arms smuggling, drug production and
trafficking, and money-laundering. Every effort should
be exerted to eliminate hatred and ethnic and religious
intolerance, which continue to constitute a breeding
ground for numerous conflicts. Recent developments in
the world have underlined the importance of
strengthening the regime of non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related technologies. The delegation of Ukraine
welcomes the fact that these issues were underlined in
the recently adopted ministerial declaration of the
Security Council. We consider it to be an important
step towards ensuring the universality of all our
endeavours in these directions.

As terrorism is a threat of a complex character,
the issue of combating the legalization of proceeds
from crime - which constitute one of the major
sources of terrorism financing - has become
especially vital. In this regard, the high requirements of
the Financial Action Task Force, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund represent a strong
contribution to the consolidation of the efforts of the
world community to prevent and rebuff these socially
dangerous phenomena.

The Government of Ukraine fully supports the
international measures in this sphere, demonstrating its
openness and readiness for cooperation. Paramount
attention is being paid to the establishment of a
comprehensive national system of combating money-
laundering and terrorism financing. Most recently, the
Ukrainian Parliament adopted a set of laws on the
prevention of and counteraction to the legalization of
the proceeds from crime. The Government has
approved a programme of counteraction to the
legalization of proceeds from crime for 2003. Today,
the main task for Ukraine is to implement effectively
its new anti-money-laundering legislation in order to
eradicate any kind of possible support for terrorism.

In our view, the exchange of information and
sustained interaction between States, first of all on the
regional level, has great potential for strengthening the
global anti-terrorism coalition. In this context, various
international conferences, forums and symposia greatly
help to facilitate inter-State cooperation. One such
international conference, of the Central and Eastern
European States' experts on illegal immigration, was
recently held in Kiev. It worked out a set of proposals
for an international strategy to limit the spread of
terrorism by strengthening immigration regimes. We
believe that the conclusion of this and many other
conferences will further deepen and contribute to our
struggle against terrorism and deepen regional
interaction aimed at combating terrorism, organized
crime, illegal immigration and other threats.

I will not focus on our national reports, which
were submitted to the Committee, but let me stress one
point. With the entry into force for Ukraine of the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism in January this year, my
country has become a party to all universal conventions
and protocols on international terrorism.

Finally, I should like to express our gratitude to
the Committee and to Ambassador Greenstock for his
outstanding contribution to its work. I also wish that
important body and its new Bureau every success in
their future work. Let me reiterate Ukraine's readiness
to continue closely cooperating with the CTC for the
benefit of our common cause.

