Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to extend to you, Sir, the
most cordial congratulations of the Government and
people of Ecuador on Argentina's well-deserved
election to the Council. In my capacity as
representative of a former non-permanent member of
the Council, I express my delegation's gratification at
addressing you as President of this United Nations
organ.

I also wish to thank my colleague and friend
Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes for his briefing and
his efforts.

I further wish to thank you, Sir, for convening
this very timely open debate so that the international
community can understand the magnitude of the
problems besetting Haiti and get a clear picture of the
crisis affecting that Caribbean nation.

Ecuador fully supports the Haitian democratic
institutions and reiterates the appeal made to them and
to the political leadership and people of Haiti - issued
at the 49l7th meeting of the Council in February 2004,
almost a year ago - to establish channels for dialogue
and democratic understanding that would allow them to
resolve their country's ongoing problems peacefully
and to achieve a national reconciliation that would
strengthen the roots of democracy and bolster the
country's efforts to improve political, economic and
social conditions with a view to ensuring the prosperity
and sustainable development of future generations in a
framework of peace, tolerance and national harmony.

While Ecuador is aware of the efforts being
deployed in Haiti to stabilize the situation, preserve the
legal and political order, protect human rights and
prevent a humanitarian crisis, it believes that, in the
current circumstances, the international community
must make a greater and more decisive contribution to
assisting and strengthening the institutions of that
country.

However, as my delegation has underscored on
other occasions, we fully agree with the statement,
made on behalf of the Rio Group in the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee, that peace
cannot last without development, that we must counter
the underlying causes of conflict, and that the
promotion of development, the rule of law, the
establishment of reliable transitional mechanisms of
justice, attention to the special needs of women and
children in armed conflict, and the success of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are,
inter alia, crucial to the consolidation of democratic
institutions in post-conflict countries.

Ecuador, a firm defender of the United Nations
Charter, believes that we must all commit ourselves to
peacebuilding. Aware of its responsibilities as a
Member of this Organization to contribute to the best
of its abilities to the establishment of peace and
security throughout the world, Ecuador has decided to
participate in Haiti. On 29 September 2004, we signed
a memorandum of understanding to contribute to the
United Nations reserve forces in that brotherly
Caribbean country by dispatching a company of 66
military engineers and trucks in a joint operation with
Chile.

In resolution 1576 (2004) of 29 November 2004,
the Security Council underlined that political
reconciliation and economic reconstruction efforts
remain key to the stability and security of Haiti and
urged the Transitional Government to continue to make
progress in the implementation of the Interim
Cooperation Framework, including by developing
concrete projects for economic development, in close
cooperation with, and with the full assistance of, the
international community, in particular the United
Nations and international financial institutions. At the
same time, the Council urged the relevant financial
institutions and donor countries to disburse promptly
the funds pledged at the International Donors
Conference on Haiti held in Washington, DC. on
19 and 20 July 2004.

My delegation therefore stresses the spirit of that
resolution and recalls the Security Council's call on the
international financial institutions and the donors to
disburse without delay the funds pledged in
Washington, DC. We cordially appeal to them
resolutely to cooperate to resolve the situation in Haiti
in all its aspects.

Ecuador is ready to confront the challenges of
stabilizing Haiti and endorses a multidimensional
approach to peacekeeping operations. We are prepared
to contribute to such operations and to world security
under United Nations auspices, but we feel that the
international community should demonstrate greater
sensitivity and resolve in facing the threats to
democratic institutions, human rights and economic
development in Haiti. That is all the more important
when we consider that countries with scarce economic
resources, like Ecuador and others in the Latin
American and Caribbean region, have demonstrated
their profound commitment to the success of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti by
offering their assistance and contributing military
personnel in solidarity and cooperation with the
Haitian nation.
