Mr. Chull (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by thanking you, Sir, for convening today's meeting
to follow up on our discussion of three weeks ago in
response to North Korea's launch of a ballistic missile
on 29 November. I also very much appreciate your
invitation to this important meeting.

Exactly one week ago in this very Chamber
(see S/PV.8137), delegations and representatives
from 16 countries, including my own, reiterated our
condemnation of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's provocative behaviour as one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security
and a flagrant violation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. We also reaffirmed our unwavering
commitment to the denuclearization of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. The stark contrast that
we witnessed last Friday between the representative
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
Council revealed once again how isolated the regime
is and how unconvincing its claims have been. We as
the international community must continue to stand
united and demonstrate our resolute determination
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that a
nuclear North Korea will never be recognized and, that
if it continues down this path, there will continue to
be consequences.

In this context, the Republic of Korea welcomes and
fully supports the adoption of resolution 2397 (2017),
which introduces robust measures that build on and
tighten the existing sanctions against the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. I would like to thank each
and every member of the Council, including the United
States, for their hard work to unanimously adopt the
resolution. I should like to take this opportunity to
emphasize loud and clear the importance of seamless
and complete implementation. The Republic of Korea
remains committed to supporting any other Member
State in its efforts to fully and effectively implement
all relevant resolutions, including the resolution
adopted today.

I wish to draw the Council's attention to a view
widely shared by the participants at last week's Security
Council ministerial meeting. Sanctions are not an end
in themselves but an effective means to bring North
Korea back on track towards a peaceful, diplomatic
and political solution. However narrow and bumpy it
may seem, the road towards peaceful denuclearization
through dialogue is still open and available. The
Government of the Republic of Korea urges the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to participate
in the PyeongChang Winter Olympic Games and to
stop its destabilizing provocations in the lead up to the
Olympics of peace.

I sincerely hope that the Democratic People's

Republic of Korea will take this message seriously and
seize the opportunity to create a conducive atmosphere
for sincere dialogue towards denuclearization. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea should abandon
the delusional idea of pursuing security through the
development of illegal nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles. Instead, it should engage in constructive
dialogue and redirect its efforts to deliver prosperity
and a better livelihood to its people. The choice is up to
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

