Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2339
(2017), which renews the sanctions regime, or rather
the restrictive measures, against the Central African
Republic and in support of the political process in that
country. This renewal was justified even though the
situation in the Central African Republic is stabilizing
progressively, even though the capital, Bangui, is today
in general peaceful and even though the President-
elect - supported by his Government - is at work.
We know that the overall situation remains precarious.
That is why there is a need for the renewed, unanimous
support of the international community through the
Security Council.

Armed groups are fighting one another and
maintaining a high level of violence. Many of them
take advantage of the weaknesses in the justice
system to continue their criminal activities, and some
have not given up the hope of spoiling the political
and reconciliation processes in an attempt to drive
the Central African Republic back into crisis. The
resolution renews the same sanctions measures, which
include an arms embargo, a travel ban and an assets
freeze. However, it changes the designation criteria.
Sexual violence is now fully recognized, which makes
it possible to increase the visibility of such crimes and
to send a strong message.

The resolution also seeks to strengthen the
application of the travel ban, as Member States are
encouraged to step up collaboration with airlines in
order to identify individuals subject to travel ban. It
also requests Central African Republic authorities to
strengthen oversight over Central African Republic
passports to ensure that expired or outdated passports
are not used for prohibited travel. And, finally, the
resolution paves the way for the development of
criteria aimed at adjusting the arms embargo at the
appropriate time, based on the developments on the
ground. However, given the current situation and the
flow of weapons in the country, such changes must be
considered carefully.

The position of France is that the restrictive
measures should support a political process and change
in accordance with the situation on the ground. We
are also sending the message to the Central African
Republic authorities that the arms embargo could be
modified in due course, in particular in accordance with
progress made in the area of security sector reform.
This message is important to our follow-up action in
the Central African Republic.

I would once again like to welcome the unanimous
adoption of the resolution, which bears witness to
the firm and unanimous commitment of the Security
Council to support the political and reconciliation
processes in that country, and in support as well as
of the progress made daily thanks to the efforts of the
people and the Government of the Central African
Republic. This is a very clear signal to those who would
undermine the ongoing political process, which the
entire international community is watching.

