Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The developments in
Angola over the last few weeks have been a source of
concern for the international community. Despite the
establishment of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation last April, the situation in Angola remains
tense. With many difficult tasks yet to be completed, the
Angolan peace process is still suffering from persistent
political divisions and mistrust between the parties and
serious logistical and psychological problems. UNITA' s full
cooperation with respect to military matters is all the more
urgently called for in the light of the recent developments
which vividly show that it still maintains a significant
military capability.

We are concerned that these problems, unless properly
addressed, may once again hamper the peace process.
Under these circumstances, we believe that United
Nations presence in Angola should be maintained to
ensure further progress in the peace process. In this
context, we support the establishment of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
succeeding the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III), as recommended by the
Secretary-General, and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.

Today, as we open a new chapter in the Angolan
peace process by establishing MONUA, we would like to
underline once again that genuine national reconciliation,
the consolidation of peace and development lie in the
hands of the parties and the people of Angola. The
international community can help the Angolan people to
promote their well-being in peace, but it can never
replace the firm commitment and determination required
of the Angolan people, which are essential for their
nation-building.

Indeed, the consolidation of peace and reconciliation
in a country torn by more than 20 years of civil war will
be an arduous and time-consuming process. However, this
will not be an impossible thing to achieve. We urge the
Angolan parties not to try to win the war with weapons,
but to win peace through dialogue. It is in this regard that
we attach great importance to a prompt tete-a-tete
between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi, as
mentioned in paragraph 14 of the draft resolution before
us.

We trust that the mandate of MONUA will be
carried out in a well-planned and coordinated manner to
lay a solid basis for the new stage of the Angolan peace
process. In this regard, we believe that the Security
Council should continue to monitor closely the situation
in Angola and the activities of MONUA.

We would also like to use this occasion to urge the
Angolan parties, in particular UNITA, to desist from any
action, including the use of force, which may adversely
affect the future of the peace process or endanger the
safety of MONUA or any other international personnel.

In closing, we congratulate UNAVEM. III on having
successfully discharged its mandate despite the delays in
the Angolan peace process that it has faced during its
existence over the last two-and-a-half years. A lasting
peace in Angola is close at hand. We pay tribute to the
valiant men and women of UNAVEM. III for this
achievement. We also pay tribute to the Special

 

Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Beye, the
troika of observer countries and all others who have
devoted themselves to the cause of peace in Angola.
