Mrs. Ogata: Really, what I would like to say is to
express my appreciation. If I was too direct and precise, I
would like you to understand that it came from a sense of
desperation. We cannot solve the refugee problems without
the Council's input, and it is in this sense that I was
enormously encouraged by several delegations who said
that the time for concrete action is here - that the time is
now. We do want action, because we are an agency
working in the field. Eighty per cent of our colleagues are
on the front lines, and this is why it is a privilege for me
to be able to present my appeal to the Security Council.
We do have enormous expectations that the Security
Council will come up with better conflict resolution
proposals. It is a very complex issue.

I would just like to say that, on the question of
internally displaced persons and refugees, I fully agree
that solutions to their problems are the same. The
refugees are given a certain international status to be able
to get asylum and protection in the countries where they
seek asylum. I do not think this should be dismantled. It
is very, very important. However, when it comes to the
question of how we can do more for the internally
displaced, I am certainly prepared to examine what more
we can do or what are some of the expected actions that
the Security Council would like the UNHCR to examine.

On the question that the Ambassador of the
Netherlands has asked about voluntary repatriation, the
answer is "yes". We have always thought that people who
were forced to leave should not be forced to return. I
think the two important factors for returnees are that they
have a sense of security when they go back to their
countries of origin, and - there is more to it than that -
maybe a sense of expecting a better world to come. I
think this is why we have always held their willingness to
return as the most important factor, and I think this is
recognized.

On the subject of voluntary repatriation, however,
very often, and especially these days, we cannot provide
full voluntariness. There is a range of choices that we can
usually provide, and the greater the range, the better. I
still remember how during the war in Zaire we had really
no choice but to say "If you stay on, you will die".
People were very uncertain about going back to Rwanda,
which was undergoing enormous conflict and instability;
they were very hesitant, but it was a choice between life
or death. I hope I do not have to come up with these
stark choices as we move on in the next few years.
As far as return is concerned, however, I find that
the internally displaced persons have a much easier time
going back. This was true in Mozambique, where there
was an enormous population of internally displaced
persons. We brought back 1.7 million refugees from the
neighbouring countries. Internally displaced persons
returned sort of naturally, from one village to another.
This also shows that the closer you are to home, the
easier it is to return. I think, in this sense, today, with an

 

enormous number of internally displaced persons, we must
deal with the problem. The solutions - human solutions -
are the same, but the means to get there may not be the
same.

I would just like to say how happy my colleagues in
the field will be to hear that the Security Council has taken
enormous interest in solving the refugee problems. They
will be very much encouraged.

