Mr. Morejon (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for having convened this
meeting to address the very important issue on the
United Nations agenda. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. Ecuador
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
10-45934

The Government of Ecuador once again reaffirms
its position on the Middle East conflict: there must be
full compliance with the norms and principles of
international law, in particular those relating to the
peaceful settlement of disputes. The 1 June statement
of the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2010/9) and resolution 14/1 adopted by the
Human Rights Council on 2 June urge Israel to lift the
blockade imposed on the Palestinian population of the
Gaza Strip, to open all Israeli border crossings so as to
allow free movement of people and goods to and from
the Gaza Strip, and to comply with the norms of
international humanitarian law and with United
Nations resolutions.

Ecuador is gravely concerned about Israel's
systematic violation of those provisions, which simply
blocks any rapprochement by the parties with a view to
achieving a negotiated solution. Ecuador reiterates its
determination to support all necessary efforts to
prevent Israel from continuing to take illegal measures
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem.

It is the duty of the United Nations to take action
towards a fair and satisfactory resolution of the Middle
East problem. Here, the Security Council bears an
inescapable responsibility to act. The States Members of
the United Nations await such action, and now is the
time to achieve positive results. We urge the parties to
pave the way towards a peaceful, just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the conflict on the basis of
ongoing dialogue and fulfilment of their commitments
under the Road Map. That would unquestionably lead
to stability and peace in a region where the parties
must coexist within agreed borders.

