Mr. Guterres: We are all longing for a shred of
hope and some good news, but since my last briefing to
the Council (S/PV.7394) things have only gotten worse.
The regional spillover effects of the Syrian conflict are
taking on dramatic proportions. Fourteen million people
are now displaced due to the interlinked crises in Syria
and Iraq. Security threats to neighbouring countries are
growing. As a result, we have been observing a steady
deterioration in the protection space for Syrians trying
to escape the conflict. Security concerns in the region
have led to border management measures that also limit
refugees' chances of reaching safety.

It is my duty as United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to ask Governments to continue letting
civilians seek protection, but the conflict and the
resulting refugee influx, in the absence of sufficient
international solidarity, have had such an enormous
impact on neighbouring countries that we are now
seeing a growing host fatigue, as the Ambassador
from Jordan said at our last meeting on this issue, and
harsher policies imposed on refugees in some areas.
There are increasing tensions between communities
as local families struggle harder to cope the longer the
conflict drags on.

As humanitarian agencies, we are doing the best
we can, but what we are able to provide is far out of
proportion with the needs. Living conditions across
the region are deteriorating, and there is insufficient
international support to cover even the most basic
humanitarian necessities. The World Food Programme,
our privileged partner, was forced to reduce its food
voucher programme by 30 per cent, with far-reaching
consequences for refugee families. Our own cash-
assistance programme in Jordan, for instance, targets
only those most at risk, but with current funding levels
we reachjust 22,000 households - less than two-thirds
of those that should qualify, even with the strictest
criteria. With an estimated 100,000 urban refugee
families in Jordan living below the absolute poverty
line, these interventions are little more than a drop in
the ocean. As a result, dangerous coping mechanisms
are on the rise, with more and more families forced to
send their children to work or marry off their teenage
daughters. There are also increasing reports ofrefugees
resorting to survival sex to make ends meet.

With conditions in the neighbouring countries
worsening and refugees growing increasingly
desperate, more and more are attempting the dangerous
journey across the Mediterranean. This month alone,
twice as many people drowned as during all of 2013. We
have long been calling on Europe to reinstate a robust
search-and-rescue capacity and to focus on saving lives
at sea, crack down on smugglers and traffickers, and
create more legal avenues to safety for persons needing
protection. These include expanded resettlement,
humanitarian admission, flexible visa policies, family
reunification, or academic and sponsorship schemes.
The unbearable tragedy in the Mediterranean can be
tackled only through genuine international cooperation.
I sincerely hope that the measures announced in
Brussels yesterday will represent a first step towards
collective and effective European action.

One thing is clear - the situation in the region has
become utterly unsustainable. After Iraq became so
dramatically engulfed in the Syrian conflict with the
attacks on Mosul and Tikrit last year, I do not know
where the next disruptive shock will take place. I know
only that it will come, and that things risk getting even
worse. We all know that, ultimately, the only way to
stop this from happening is a political solution to the
conflict. There is no way around this, and it is high
time that all those who have an influence on actors in
Syria put aside their differences and come together to
create the conditions to stop the fighting. But as long as
that remains a distant prospect, we must do everything
possible today to prevent a further deterioration of the
regional situation - a descent that could otherwise
become irreversible.

First, some immediate priorities must be addressed:
providing more humanitarian aid to refugees and
vulnerable host communities, and stopping the horrific
loss of life in the Mediterranean. Secondly, there has
to be massively increased support to the neighbouring
countries. The funding announced in Kuwait last
month to support the Regional Refugee and Resilience
Plan is an important signal of hope and must now
be disbursed quickly. But it is also essential for the
structural investment programmes presented by the host
Governments to receive development funding from the
international community. This requires a fundamental
review of development cooperation policies. Because
Lebanon and Jordan are middle-income countries,
the World Bank is not allowed to give them grants to
help deal with the severe demographic shock they have
endured. We have to redress this and other serious
inadequacies in the global development cooperation
architecture.

Bilateral and multilateral development aid
policies should include among their first priorities the
countries that not only host large refugee populations,
but are also fundamental pillars for regional stability
and a first line of defence in ensuring the collective
security of the international community. This is true
for not only Syria's neighbours, but also for countries
like Cameroon, the Niger and Chad that border north-
eastern Nigeria, or for those around Somalia. The fact
that some of these are middle-income countries should
not exclude them from this priority.

The World Bank is now exploring various
possibilities of making large-scale concessional
financing available to Lebanon and Jordan, combining
bilateral grants with its own usual loans. Ifthat strategy
shift can materialize, it could go a long way towards
helping those countries cope, and even to supporting a
more positive attitude towards refugees' self-reliance
and economic participation. I very much hope that with
Governments coming together later this year in such
forums as the annual meetings of the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the Group of 20 and the
Group of Seven will support these and other proposals.
Now is the time to adapt to today's fundamentally
changed reality, in which conflict, stability and
development are linked.

Thirdly, we must recognize the increasingly
protracted nature of this refugee crisis. The ultimate
priority objective of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees remains voluntary
repatriation in safety and dignity, in line with what
most refugees prefer, but we have to recognize that for
Syrians this option is not immediately in sight. In the
meantime, Syria's neighbours need help that is adequate
to managing the vast economic, demographic and fiscal
impact of the refugee influx. The extraordinary efforts
made by Turkey, where Syrians now have access not
only to free education and health care but also to the
labour market, are an enormous step forward. With
more support across the region, we could help turn
the refugees' situation around from one of dependency
and unsustainability to one in which their economic
self-reliance becomes an option that enables them to
contribute to their host societies" development.

The situation in the Middle East is a cancer that
risks spreading and metastasizing. If things continue
this way, we could see future developments spin out of
control independent of our will, and with increasingly
dangerous global consequences. We cannot let that
happen. This is not just a question of solidarity with
those who are bearing the brunt of this crisis. It is a
matter of preserving the very foundation of who we are
and ensuring our common interests.

