Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): 1
should like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for February and for your initiative of convening on
open debate on such a complex and vital issue as that
of peace-building. We also wish to thank you for the
drafting ofthe document before us, which I believe is a
very good basis for this exchange ofideas.

I also wish to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Singapore, Ambassador Mabhubani,
and his delegation for their excellent guidance of the
work ofthe Security Council in January.

Argentina attaches special importance to all
issues relating to peacekeeping. It is our understanding
that, in the framework of providing a comprehensive
approach to conflicts, the concept of peace-building
complements the traditional idea of peacekeeping.

By virtue of resolution 1318 (2000) of 7
September 2000, which was an outcome of the
Millennium Summit, the Security Council pledged to
improve the effectiveness of the United Nations in
considering conflicts at all their stages, ranging from
prevention to settlement and post-conflict peace-
building, and it encouraged the formulation of broad
and comprehensive strategies aimed at remedying the
fundamental causes of conflict, including their
economic and social dimensions.

For its part, the Millennium Declaration, adopted
by the General Assembly, decided to enhance the
effectiveness of the United Nations in the maintenance
of peace and security by providing the Organization
with the resources and the instruments that it needs for
its tasks of conflict prevention, peaceful settlement of
disputes, peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-
building and reconstruction.

The evolution of the concept of peace-building
has demonstrated the close relationship between this
concept and conflict prevention. Viewed from this
angle, what we call peace-building is aimed on the one
hand at eliminating the deep-rooted causes of a given
conflict and, on the other hand, at adopting a range of
different types of measures to prevent the outbreak of a
conflict. Currently the elements of peace-building are
present in all peacekeeping initiatives. The
international community has understood that a lasting
peace must be accompanied by an extended complex
and effective process following the conflict. Peace-
building is essentially a political process, taking into
account its objectives.

The challenge of implementing a strategy of this
type requires, in every specific case, a coordinated
effort on the part of the international community in the
preparation of a range of different types of measures:
political, diplomatic, economic, social and institutional.
This range of measures can be implemented only if
there is political will and a commitment on the part of
the international community to do so through both the
United Nations system and the competent regional
organizations in each case.

The components of a strategy would include the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants, the situation of refugees and displaced
persons, the eradication of poverty, the promotion of
sustainable development, the protection of human
rights and the strengthening of the rule of law and of
democratic institutions. From this standpoint, my
country attaches special importance to the promotion of
development and of human rights, for we understand
this to be the greatest contribution that can be made by
the international system to prevent future conflicts.

In his statement at the Millennium Summit, my
country's head of State, Mr. Fernando de la Rua,
emphasized the close relationship between
development and peace. He said, "poverty elimination
is a fundamental factor in conflict prevention".
(A/55/PV6, p. 13). He went on to say that it was
necessary that countries become aware of that
relationship in order to refine a system of conflict
resolution in keeping with the new international
setting.

For Argentina, the most efficient way of
preventing conflicts is to tackle their real causes. In
this context, we understand the eradication of poverty
to be one of the principal responsibilities of the United
Nations in this century. In other words, we seek a
reaffirmation of the role of development in all of its
dimensions. At the same time, we understand that the
promotion of pluralistic and tolerant societies that
ensure the protection of human rights and that are non-
discriminatory and respectful of political, ethnic or
religious minorities creates a natural barrier to the
outbreak of new conflicts.

Any strategy for peace-building that is not
structured around these fundamental concepts could
fall short when it comes to acting on the real causes of
conflicts. This could even affect confidence in the
United Nations system and its future involvement in a
given region. Likewise, the coordinated participation of
all competent international actors should be
encouraged, with special emphasis on the regional
organizations, international financial organizations and
the States affected. In this respect, we hope that the
meetings with the regional organizations that will be
starting tomorrow will benefit current and future
processes.

The development of a comprehensive strategy
should take into account the specifics of each concrete
case. It is our understanding that in peace-building, no
conflict is the same as another, and it is only through a
clear understanding of the causes of a conflict that it
will be possible to prepare a strategy for peace-
building. As was mentioned in "An Agenda for Peace"
in 1992, "Preventive steps must be based on timely and
accurate knowledge ofthe facts. " (S/24III, para. 25)

Lastly, it would be appropriate to analyse the
Security Council's role in the peace-building process.
The Presidential Statement of 30 November 1999
recognized the importance of building a culture of
prevention of armed conflicts and the need for all the
principal bodies of the United Nations to contribute in
this regard. Likewise, on that occasion, the Council
emphasized its ongoing commitment to deal with the
prevention of armed conflicts in all parts of the world,
and it recognized the important role played by regional
organizations and arrangements in conflict prevention.

In recent years, and in the exercise of its
competence in the peace-building process, the Security
Council has incorporated elements in some
peacekeeping mandates that relate to the peace-
building process. In other cases, peacekeeping missions
have been succeeded by United Nations support offices
for peace-building programmes; such cases are Liberia,
the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau and Haiti.
In any event, it should be pointed out that the
Security Council has an important role to play in these
peace-building processes - a role of coordinating the
work of the many players that participate in order to
avoid unnecessary duplication of effort and to
maximize efficiency.

The preservation of peace by its very nature is a
long-standing process that requires from the
international community an action that is sustained
over time, sufficient resources and a shared and
coordinated political will. In this joint effort, we must
not lose sight of the priorities of the affected States.
The success of a peace-building strategy will depend
on the will of the States concerned to participate, on
the level of coordination of those involved and on the
availability ofthe needed resources.

