Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I take the floor again
on behalf of the humanitarian co-penholders on
Syria - Kuwait, Belgium and Germany.

As caretakers of the humanitarian situation in
Idlib, we are deeply disappointed with the result of
the voting. Once again, the Security Council will
not be able to fulfil its duty to protect the lives of
3 million people, mainly women and children, in Idlib
governorate. How can we explain to them and the world
that, even on a purely humanitarian draft resolution,
no consensus could be reached? We the co-penholders
tried to achieve consensus among the members of the
Council. As an honest broker, we tried to reach out
and engage in a transparent and constructive manner.
We were aiming for a focused text, built around clear
humanitarian objectives, namely, the cessation of
hostilities, the protection of civilians and the alleviation
of human suffering. We received plenty of support for
our initiative and thank everyone who has supported
our efforts, especially those Council members that
voted in favour of draft resolution S/2019/756.

Other members did not support us, and we regret
that. Divisions are visible and ongoing. We tried hard in
recent days to bridge gaps, which revolved around the
issue of counter-terrorism. While we all stand firm in
our resolve to combat terrorism, we once again reiterate
our position that counter-terrorism operations do not
absolve parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law. That is what we tried to reflect in
the draft resolution we put forward. Unfortunately, that
was not acceptable to some.

On the other hand, we saw another initiative put
forward only yesterday without any transparent process.
It was neither shared nor negotiated beforehand. We
have seen such tactics in the past and regret their
use. They can never lead to the unity in the Council
that is so desperately needed. In terms of content, the
other initiative does not focus on the protection of
civilians or on human suffering and it does not prevent
a humanitarian catastrophe - core issues the Council
has to address.

Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, in
her briefing this morning (see S/PV.8622), clearly
described what all this is about. She gave us numbers
and examples in a bid to measure a humanitarian
disaster. We promise today that we will not stop here.
The draft resolution was not adopted, but our work and
our responsibility do not end here. We will continue to
use the instruments of the Council to address the most
urgent humanitarian issues in Idlib and other places
in Syria.
Let us join our efforts as we look ahead to the
renewal of the cross-border mechanism at the end of
the year. The mechanism is crucial for the survival of
millions of Syrians. Being united on this upcoming
issue is the least that we can do for the Syrian people,
who have suffered greatly for the past eight years.

Finally, there is no military solution to the crisis
in Syria. The only solution is a political one based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). We reiterate our strong support for
the efforts of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen.

