The Secretary-General: Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this timely high-level debate.
Let me begin by recognizing the global leadership of
Australia, which this month successfully chaired the
Group of 20 Summit in Brisbane, Australia, in which
I had the honour of participating, and is also presiding
over the Security Council this month. Therefore, this
month Australia is leading on all the issues: peace and
security, economic development and human rights.

I welcome the Council's increased attention to
the growing threat to international peace and security
posed by terrorism and violent extremism. Less than
two months ago, this body adopted resolution 2178
(2014), which calls for stronger international efforts
to address the challenge of foreign terrorist fighters.
That followed closely on the heels of resolution 2170
(2014), adopted in August under the presidency of the
United Kingdom. I commend the Council for its unity
of purpose.

Despite strengthened efforts to combat the threat,
the number of foreign terrorist fighters in the conflicts
in Syria and Iraq has grown to over 15,000 from more
than 80 countries. In addition, terrorist groups spurred
by violent extremist ideologies, such as Daesh, the
Al-Nusra Front, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, continue
to carry out brutal acts and cause profound suffering.
Millions live under the control of such groups.

Technology and globalization have made it easier for
them to cause disproportionate harm, exploit narratives
and profit from illicit financing. Daesh, for example,
has been illegally trading in oil. We are increasingly
seeing terrorism, drug trafficking and transnational
crime grow in intensity and feed off each other.

The international community and the United
Nations must ensure the full implementation of our
many tools for action, including Security Council
resolutions and the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014),
we have taken a number of specific steps. First, the
Al-Qaida Monitoring Team provided an oral briefing
to the Council's relevant Committee on the foreign
terrorist fighters threat. That will be followed by a
report in March 2015. Secondly, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) has prepared
a preliminary analysis of the principal capacity gaps
in Member States' implementation of resolution
2178 (2014). Thirdly, in order to address those gaps,
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) has established a United Nations coordination
mechanism to mobilize action to support the needs of
Member States. Fourthly, the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre has initiated a United Nations system-
wide programme on foreign terrorist fighters to develop
inter-agency projects to assist Member States.

Two major projects have been launched. The Centre
is helping Member States analyse the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon and develop policy responses.
I encourage all Member States to participate in this
project, particularly those countries most severely
affected.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is
also working to strengthen the legal and criminal justice
capacity of Middle East and North African countries to
address the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.

Resolution 2178 (2014) also recognizes that violent
extremism poses a broader threat to international peace
and security, affecting political stability, national
cohesion and the very foundations of some Member
States. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force is stepping up efforts to assist Member States in
addressing the multidimensional challenges of extremist
ideologies and violent extremism. That includes a
concrete follow-up programme to an international
conference convened in Geneva last year by the CTITF
office to encourage States to implement practical
measures to counter violent extremism, as prescribed in
pillar I of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. I know that CTED, a member of the CTITF, is
also looking at that challenge on behalf of the Council.

Ultimately, violent extremism is a multidimensional
challenge that needs to be effectively addressed at the
grassroots level. We are therefore examining how best
to strengthen the counter-terrorism capabilities of
United Nations special political missions, peacekeeping
operations and United Nations country teams. This will

be among the areas for review under the new High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations.

The threat of foreign terrorist fighters and the
scourge of violent extremism are not just security
challenges, they are also political and development
challenges affecting the stability and social fabric of
communities, countries and regions. We must continue
to think more deeply about the fundamental conditions
that allow extremism to thrive. Looking at these
challenges solely through a military lens has shown its
limits. People need equality and opportunity in their
lives. They need to feel included by their Governments
and trust from their leaders.

As we work together to address the challenge, we
must also strive to avoid responses to terrorism that are
carried out in a way that exacerbates the problem, such
as when efforts are not sufficiently targeted and entire
communities feel victimized by human rights abuses
committed in the name of counter-terrorism. Such
abuses are not only immoral, they are counterproductive.
Through our collective efforts, we must ensure that all
counter-terrorism actions and policies are consistent
with international human rights and humanitarian laws.

This rights-centred approach to counter-terrorism
must be up-front in our planning, not merely an
afterthought. I cannot stress this strongly enough.

I remain fully committed to working with the
Security Council to ensure that we effectively respond
to this challenge in a comprehensive manner.

