Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): My delegation has been
engaged over the past two weeks in negotiations within
the framework of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General on Georgia in an effort to reach

agreement on a substantive new resolution for the
Mission there. We share the concerns of the Secretary-
General that the overall fragility of the situation could
further deteriorate as a result of the erosion of the
ceasefire regime. On this basis, we have advocated for
a resolution with an enhanced mandate for United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) in
line with the proposal in paragraphs 65 and 66 of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/254).

We believe that an agreement on a revised
security regime applicable to all forces on the ground
is crucial to the long-term stabilization of the country
and a Viable United Nations role in Georgia. In
addition, we would have liked to see the creation of
conditions conducive to the swift and safe return of all
refugees and internally displaced persons.

However, the Group of Friends was not able to
reach a compromise. There has been some progress on
a number of issues regarding the possible new regime,
but we felt that we needed more time to iron out the
outstanding points. Taking into account the differing
positions regarding the status issue, we have showed
willingness to accommodate Russian concerns, but we
were not ready to trade away the principles of
territorial integrity and sovereignty.

Therefore, we, together with other sponsors,
decided to submit a draft resolution that would extend
the mandate for two weeks so as to allow us more time
to finalize our discussions. We regret the Russian
Federation's decision to veto this technical rollover
resolution and bring to an end the United Nations
operation in the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict zone,
especially as it may have adverse effects for both the
people on the ground and the security situation in the
region.

As the United Nations presence in Georgia draws
to a close, we continue to urge the participants in the
Geneva talks, co-chaired by the United Nations, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, to strengthen their discussions
and to engage constructively with the aim of yielding
concrete results. We also express our gratitude to all
UNOMIG personnel who, since the establishment of
the Mission in 1993, have performed their duties
admirably in difficult conditions. In particular, we
remember those who gave their lives while serving
under the United Nations flag.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
Croatia supports the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders and is aligned with the European
Union foreign policy towards Georgia.

