Mr. Morales (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this debate.
I also wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, for
her briefing and to recognize her tremendous efforts in
support of the people and authorities of Haiti.

In recent days, we have witnessed significant
progress on the path towards the consolidation
of democracy and the strengthening of Haitian
institutions. While the domestic political situation
remains complex, it is remarkable that the Electoral
Council, after broad consultations with Haitian political
actors, has now proposed an electoral calendar, after
repeated postponements, that can lead to the realization
of the aspirations of the Haitian people. We also
recognize that President Martelly has welcomed the
proposal and has officially announced three rounds of
elections for presidential, legislative, municipal and
local authorities. Carrying out a successful election
process poses significant challenges for the Haitian
authorities, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the international community.
The magnitude of the task is significant, if we take
into account the number of polling places in which the
elections will take place, the logistics involved and the
extent of the elections, which will take place throughout
the entire national territory.

However, the elections must be conducted in a free,
peaceful and inclusive manner and in accordance with
the established regulatory framework. That will be
crucial not only for the standardization and legitimacy
of Haitian institutions, but also for the population to
have a voice through their representatives with regard
to the future of the country. Haiti must focus on priority
areas, and the international community must provide
the needed support and assistance. That is why the
election timetable should be followed strictly. The
authorities responsible for the preparation and conduct
of elections must have the resources necessary for the
proper performance of their duties. Equally important
is the joint work, cooperation and constructive dialogue
with all Haitian political sectors. The work they carry
out with the national authorities must maintain the
credibility of the electoral process, for which a peaceful
and stable environment must be established. In that
regard, any differences among political actors should be
addressed through the appropriate existing institutional
means and avoid polarization, which would threaten the
country's stability and the outcome of the elections.

In supporting the elections, MINUSTAH and the
international community play a fundamental role, as the
elections provide a key opportunity both to overcome
the political crisis and to normalize the democratic
system in the country so as to support the creation and
strengthening of national capacities and institutions in
electoral matters in the long term. Given that fact, we
must define clear and timely areas in which to work
together and provide the necessary support in response
to needs of the national authorities. There must be a
recognition of national ownership and leadership in
the conduct of the electoral process. In addition, the
international community must be prepared to provide
the necessary support to the national authorities on
technical issues relating to the elections and respond
to the Government's call for the implementation of
election monitoring missions, the presence of which can
be decisive in ensuring the legitimacy of the process.

While the Secretary-General mentions in his report
(S/2015/ 157) that the security situation in the country
remains stable and that significant progress has been
made by the Haitian National Police, it is essential to
recognize that the country is far from achieving its
goal of security, as President Martelly stated in his
recent communication to the Secretary-General. The
complex security situation, which has seen spikes in
certain types of crime and civil unrest, must now also
be understood through the lens of such security risks,
particularly those that arise during a relatively long
electoral process that will take place in an environment
characterized by political polarization. That is why
we cannot be complacent. The Security Council and
MINUSTAH must be vigilant with regard to threats
and developments on the ground and be sensitive to
the requests of the Government of Haiti, pursuant to
resolution 2180 (2014), so that the Mission can act at
any time to adapt its mandate and force levels and
maintain the country's current level of stability and
security. It is equally important that the Secretariat be
able to promptly take the necessary actions to make full
use of the authorized police strengh, and that troop-
contributing countries be prepared to answer the call
in that regard.

The challenges facing Haiti will not end with the
conclusion of the elections. As important as they are,
we cannot lose sight of the need to continue efforts to
strengthen the rule of law, the promotion and protection
of human rights, and socioeconomic development
in the long term, among other matters. MINUSTAH
must therefore continue to support national efforts and
evolve according to the realities on the ground, while
promoting adequately the transfer of responsibilities
to the national authorities and the country team when
conditions are favourable.

