Mr. Fall: As members know, since my last
briefing to the Security Council on the Central African
Republic on 2 December 2008 (see S/PV.6027), an
inclusive political dialogue was successfully held, from
8 to 20 December 2008.

The dialogue was the result of tremendous efforts
over the past two years by national stakeholders,
supported by their international partners, including the
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States. The dialogue
brought together around 150 participants from the
Government, pro-President political parties, opposition
and moderate political parties, rebel movements and
civil society. Former President Ange-Felix Patasse', as
well as a number of other exiled political actors,
09-2601]
participated in the dialogue. It was chaired by the
former President of Burundi, Pierre Buyoya.

Three committees were established, which covered
political and governance questions; security and
politico-military movements, including rebel groups;
and socio-economic questions. While the security and
socio-economic committees worked according to
developed blueprints - which came in the form of a
national security-sector-reform plan of action, developed
approximately eight months earlier, and a Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper, finalized a year before -
the political and governance committee had to deal
with the most contentious issues. These included the
legitimacy of the current regime, which came to power
through a coup d'etat in 2003 and was legitimized in
the contested elections of 2005, as well as ways to
include in the governance of the country all political
actors who had influence there.

At the end of the 12-day-long discussions, a
number of important agreements were reached. In the
political and governance area, they included: the
establishment of a broad-based Government, including
all the entities that participated in the inclusive
political dialogue, to implement the outcomes of the
dialogue and prepare for the 2009 and 2010 municipal,
legislative and presidential elections; the commitment
to hold municipal, legislative and presidential elections
in 2009 and 2010; the revision of the electoral code
and the establishment of an independent electoral
commission; the conducting of independent audits of
revenue-generating State institutions; and the
establishment of mechanisms to promote permanent
dialogue among the country's political and social actors.

In the area of security and armed groups, the
agreements reached during the dialogue included: the
implementation of security sector reform in accordance
with the plan of action developed during the national
security sector reform seminar in April 2008; the
restructuring of the national armed forces; an immediate
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme; combating the proliferation of small arms;
and the introduction of measures to identify and
indemnify victims of past conflicts.

In the socio-economic area, the agreements
included: the implementation of the poverty reduction
strategy for the period 2008-2011; the reform of public
finances; the reform of the management of natural
09-2601 1

resources; and the development of national human
resources.

(spoke in French)

As members can see, the recommendations of the
dialogue cover a broad range of issues. That reflects
the national vision of putting an end to conflict in the
Central African Republic. I am pleased to see that the
dialogue's conclusions are at the centre of an integrated
peacebuilding framework such as that being developed
by the Peacebuilding Commission.

I wish to emphasize that there have been other
positive developments since the conclusion of the
dialogue. A new, inclusive Government was established
in January. The steering committee responsible for
DDR, which is currently operational, has already
engaged the rebel movements with a view to the
possible implementation of a DDR programme. It is
envisaged that rebel groups will submit their respective
combatant lists by 15 March. A dialogue follow-up
committee has been established and is scheduled to
begin its work, with the participation of a number of
international organizations, including the United
Nations, the African Union, the European Commission,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the International Organization of la Francophonie, the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States and the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC).

However, the progress made thus far is precarious
owing to the deterioration in the security situation in
various localities in the Nana-Gribizi and Bamingui-
Bangoran prefectures, in the north of the country.
Those localities recently saw intensive fighting and
some very bold attacks against governmental
institutions and military facilities in Ndele, Markunda,
Bossembe'le' and Batangafo. Last week, riots erupted in
several neighbourhoods of Bangui following an attack
carried out against a chief of police by elements of the
presidential guard.

The increase in the number of security incidents
in the north of the country has been attributed to a
rebel group unknown until now, called the Convergence
des patriots centrafricains pour la Justice et la Paix
(CPJP), and Abdoulaye Miskine's rebel group, the
Front democratique du peuple centrafricain. Both
movements have issued press releases claiming
responsibility for these attacks. They have also accused
the Central African Government of reneging on its
commitments concerning the implementation of the
3
dialogue's recommendations and have threatened to
join their forces to resume armed combat. It is
important to note that former Minister Charles Massi
has resurfaced as Assistant Coordinator General of the
Political Council of the CPJP.

Despite those setbacks, the prospects for
stabilization of the Central African Republic offered by
the dialogue remain solid. The dialogue provides a new
opportunity to take significant steps towards sustainable
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic. Here, it
should be noted that Central African actors have stressed
the need for support from the international community
as they try to implement the recommendations of the
dialogue. In that connection, it is encouraging to note
that a number of the Central African Republic's bilateral
and multilateral partners have already responded
positively to that request for support. I welcomed
CEMAC's decision to contribute 8 billion Central
African francs - approximately $16 million - towards
the DDR process in the Central African Republic.

In that context, and as members will have noted
in the letter of the Secretary-General dated 3 March
2009 addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2009/ 128), the United Nations intends to review its
presence on the ground in order to provide more
consistent and better coordinated support for the
implementation of the dialogue's recommendations.
Such a coordinated presence will undoubtedly help to
strengthen the efforts to stabilize the Central African
Republic.

