Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): We offer our thanks to the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this open
debate. I wish to add the following to the European
Union (EU) statement, which has already been delivered
and to which we fully subscribe.
As a conflict State and a beneficiary of the long-
running good offices mission of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, entrusted to him by the Security Council,
Cyprus has insights and lessons learned to share, even
though the role of the United Nations in our conflict is
limited to facilitating agreement by the parties.

Mediation is an important tool prescribed by the
Charter of the United Nations for the peaceful settlement
of disputes, provided it is used in line with the Charter
and in respect ofthe special role assigned by the latter to
the Security Council. Experience has shown that there
is sometimes a disconnect between the Council and the
mediator appointed as part of the United Nations effort
to contribute to the peaceful settlement of a dispute.
For such mediation efforts to be effective, the Council
must be able to assume responsibility for the work of
the mediator. That would require that the two to work
in tandem.

Experience has also shown that we could benefit
from more clarity as regards the framework of the
United Nations engagement in mediation and the code of
conduct of United Nations officials acting as mediators
on behalf of the Organization. We believe that a more
consistent and rules-based approach is required and
that the Council could develop a manual to that end.

At the core of the United Nations involvement in
mediation should be the inviolable rule of conducting
the process on the basis of the Organization's values and
principles, the United Nations Charter and international
law. Those norms and principles mean that the United
Nations does not operate in a vacuum and that, while it
should, of course, be impartial, it should not be neutral.

As a mediator, the United Nations must not
be intrusive, but should respect the boundaries of
third-party facilitation and assist the parties as they
themselves shape the resolution of their dispute. The
parties should own both the dispute-resolution process
and its outcome, as they are the ones who will have
to live with the outcome and ensure its durability and
successful implementation.

As experience has also demonstrated, acrimony and
blame games can arise as a result ofmediation proposals
that the parties are called upon to accept or reject,
and therefore United Nations mediators must tread
carefully, be cognizant of the complexities of a dispute
and know the realm of the feasible. That is why the
importance of selecting a mediator based on substantial
criteria cannot be overstated. Successful mediation
requires deep knowledge of local circumstances,
not only those pertaining to the root causes and the
particulars of a conflict, but the entire political,
strategic, socioeconomic, cultural and historical
context and circumstances underpinning a dispute and
its resolution process. When acting as a mediator, the
United Nations is well-placed to provide examples of
good practices in dispute-resolution processes, but
should always keep in mind that what works in one
context may not be transplanted to another, even if two
situations present commonalities. In addition, sharing
good practices should not be a vehicle to manoeuvre the
parties towards a specific direction or outcome.

The United Nations should be especially cautious
with enhanced mediation methods like arbitration as a
tool for political or non-judicial third-party intervention.
The endorsement of the Council should be required in
such cases, while it should bear in mind that, even if
the consent of the parties is present, the latter can be
coerced. Elaborating parameters for United Nations
mediation would enable the Council to make greater,
yet prudent, use of mediation as a tool for exercising its
overall responsibility to maintain international peace
and security in combination with other tools under
its direct supervision. The Council can also strive for
subsidiarity when there is a well-placed regional or
local actor close to a conflict who can ably contribute
to its resolution. That could also be done before the
Council is seized of the matter, in line with the spirit
of Article 33 of the Charter, without prejudice to the
role of the Council as the eminent organ responsible
for peace and security, while respecting established
principles, such as the voluntary character of mediation
and the consent of the parties.

Before concluding, I should like to make two equally
critical points. Peacekeeping is a crucial component
of conflict resolution. Enabling environments in
which peace processes can be conducted depends on
peacekeeping operations, as does preventing escalation
within a conflict by establishing channels with relevant
actors on the ground and developing an understanding
of local circumstances. Last but not least, the
participation of women in conflict resolution is now
universally supported, and it can be a game changer.
For that to happen, however, such participation needs
to be meaningful, and the way for it to be meaningful is
by achieving gender equality more broadly in a society
and reflecting that in the participation of women across
public life and in core political decision-making.

