Mr. Barkin (United States of America): The United States thanks Council members and the Permanent Mission of South Sudan for their engagement in renewing and improving the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). For the first time in many years, the UNMISS mandate was renewed in the context of positive developments. The United States reiterates its support for the decision by South Sudan's leaders to form a new transitional Government. We also recognize that the hard workof implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is just beginning, and we urge the transitional Government to begin this reform process immediately. As the new transitional Government begins operations, UNMISS will continue to have a critical role to play in maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan. The mandate before us today reinforces the core mission of UNMISS: to protect civilians, support the delivery of humanitarian assistance, support the implementation of the peace agreement, and monitor and investigate human rights. The mandate also encourages UNMISS to be more mobile and responsive to emerging threats, including in areas to which people may return after years of fleeing violence. The leaders of South Sudan must remain focused on addressing the urgent humanitarian needs of their people, respecting human rights and ensuring accountability, including for sexual and gender-based violence. There are too many people, especially women and children, whose rights have not been adequately safeguarded during this conflict and who have lived in fear as a result. The current UNMISS mandate enables it to be an important partner in protecting those rights and in meeting the needs of the country's people. There is no greater supporter of the people of South Sudan than the United States. We want the very best for South Sudan, and we believe that the renewed UNMISS mandate will help to create a path towards the long- term stability and security for which the people of South Sudan have longed over these many years.
