Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): As is customary at
this time of year, Mr. President, allow me to begin by
wishing you all the best for 2018, welcoming the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council and,
of course, wishing your country, Kazakhstan, all the
best for its presidency for the month of January.

I welcome this opportunity to address the Council
once again on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
(S/2018/16), which has been submitted to the Council,
takes stock of the situation and makes recommendations
on the steps to be taken.

A year ago the Council met (see S/PV.7856)
to welcome with great hope the signing, under the
auspices of the national Episcopal Conference of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Comprehensive
and Inclusive Political Agreement 0f3l December 2016,
which made it possible to defuse political tensions in
the country and chart a course towards the holding of
transparent and credible elections by the end of 2017.
One year later, I regret to inform the Council that
implementation of the agreement has been only partial.
Although non-negligible advances have been made
in preparing the elections in the past year, the acts of
violence that took place during the demonstrations
on 31 December last in Kinshasa and in the country's
interior are reminders of the fact that the political
situation remains very fragile.

The security situation is also cause for grave
concern. As the Council is aware, United Nations
peacekeepers suffered their heaviest losses in 20 years
when the advance base of the Tanzanian contingent in
Semuliki, North Kivu, was attacked, presumably by
rebels of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). The
deaths of those Tanzanian peacekeepers following
several hours of combat underscores, as if we needed
to be reminded, the volatility of the security situation
in certain parts of eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I must also remind the Council that United Nations
civilian personnel are also exposed to security risks in
certain parts of the country. The deaths in March last
year of the two members of the United Nations group
of experts in the Kasai region is a tragic reminder of
the situation.

Given this backdrop, I will focus my statement on the
political and security challenges facing MONUSCO in
the coming months and identify potential ways forward.

The delays in the electoral process, the legitimacy
crisis of the institutions of the Republic and the lack
of progress towards implementing defusing measures
have led to frustration, impatience and tensions, which
led to acts of violence last December. Let me take
this opportunity to condemn the violent repression
by the national security forces of the demonstrations
organized by civil society on 31 December last. It is
key that the competent national authorities conduct the
necessary investigations to identify the perpetrators
and bring to justice those presumed responsible for
human rights violations.

I also deplore the fact that the national security
forces created obstacles for the MONUSCO troops who
were patrolling on 31 December. Activities related to the
monitoring of the political, security and human rights

situation are part and parcel of MONUSCO's mandate
and should be fully supported by the authorities.
Given these challenges, it is vital that all sectors
of the Congolese political class refrain from any acts
leading to confrontation or to violence. Dialogue
remains the only way to resolve the political challenges
facing the country.

(spoke in English)

Although political tensions persist, electoral
preparations are advancing. The long-awaited electoral
calendar was published on 5 November 2017, the
amended electoral law was promulgated by the President
on 24 December 2017, and the voter registration process
is expected to conclude in February.

It is essential that all political actors play a
constructive role in the implementation of the electoral
calendar. The Government, the ruling majority, the
opposition and civil society, and the Independent
National Electoral Commission must all play their part
in in ensuring that electoral preparations proceed in a
timely fashion.

It is imperative that the political leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo adhere to the
Constitution, the 31 December 2016 Political Agreement
and the electoral calendar, which together provide the
political and legal framework for the holding of free, fair
and credible elections, leading to a peaceful transition
of power and the consolidation of the country's
democratic institutions. Political brinkmanship and
a refusal to compromise would only result in further
delays and a deepening of the political crisis.

The concerted support of the Council, key
international partners and regional actors remains key
to advancing the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Through his good offices,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Maman Sidikou, working in close collaboration with
Special Envoy Said Djinnit and regional actors, has
worked tirelessly to ensure that the main political
actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain
committed to the 31 December 2016 Political Agreement
despite their many differences. Thanks to their efforts,
the United Nations has strengthened its cooperation
with the African Union, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community in support of the political
process. It is essential that the region continue to
impress upon the Congolese political leaders the need
to pursue dialogue and place the legitimate aspirations
of the Congolese people above their own interests.

At the same time, it is imperative that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's partners, working
in close collaboration with the Government and the
electoral authorities, provide the necessary political,
financial, logistical and technical support to ensure
the timely holding of credible elections. Further delays
in the electoral process risk not only fuelling political
tensions but also compounding an already fragile
security situation.

In recent months, armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo have launched
repeated attacks on positions of the Forces arme'es
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC),
inflicting losses on the FARDC and capturing, albeit
temporarily, resource-rich territories. These attacks,
mainly involving Mayi-Mayi groups, are taking place
in a context of competition for natural resources and
continued intercommunity violence, often fuelled by
local political actors seeking to take advantage of the
current situation.

The impact on the civilian population has been
severe, with more than 4 million persons internally
displaced as a result of violence and humanitarian
agencies predicting that this figure could rise
significantly this year. It is, however, encouraging to
note that the FARDC is gradually regaining the initiative
against the Mayi-Mayi groups and taking control of
territories previously lost to the armed groups.

MONUSCO remains actively engaged, in line with
its strategic priorities, in the protection of civilians. As
the Council will recall, in late September MONUSCO
acted decisively in support of the FARDC in repelling
an attack by Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba on Uvira, the
second-largest city in South Kivu. The actions of
MONUSCO, which were critical in preventing the
fall of the city, were a tangible demonstration of the
Mission's readiness to take robust action against armed
groups that pose a threat to the civilian population.

In Beni territory, North Kivu, after being dormant
for months following major operations by the FARDC
and MONUSCO in 2016, the ADF resurfaced in the
summer of 2017, carrying out deadly attacks against
civilians, the FARDC and MONUSCO. The killing
of 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers of MONUSCO'S Force
Intervention Brigade and the wounding of 44 others on
7 December 2017 was the latest in a string of deadly
attacks perpetrated by suspected ADF elements.

When I visited Semuliki, shortly after the incident,
I witnessed the particularly difficult terrain in which
the Brigade operates and the violence of the attack
that the assailants carried out against the base. Despite
the heavy losses sustained by the Tanzanian troops, I
was reassured by the Tanzanian authorities in Dar Es
Salaam that they remain committed to addressing the
threat posed by the ADF and other armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish to
take this opportunity to once again convey my deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
Tanzania for this tragic loss.

The asymmetric nature of the threat posed by the
ADF requires a combination of military and non-military
means. Neutralizing the ADF will require much closer
regional cooperation, enhanced information-gathering
and analysis, disruption of the political and economic
support networks of the group, strengthened cooperation
among MONUSCO and the national security forces,
and targeted military operations.

As part of the Secretariat's response to the
Semuliki incident, the Secretary-General has appointed
former Assistant Secretary-General Dmitry Titov to
lead a special investigation into the circumstances
surrounding the Semuliki incident that will provide
recommendations on actions required to address the
ADF threat and enhance the ability of MONUSCO to
address the threat posed by armed groups. Mr. Titov
and his team, which includes senior representatives of
the Tanzanian armed forces, have already begun their
work and will be in the region in the coming days with
a view to presenting their findings to the Secretary-
General by the beginning of next month. Naturally, we
look forward to engaging closely with the Council once
the investigation team has completed its work.

Meanwhile, MONUSCO, in line with the
strategic priorities reaffirmed by the Security Council
following the strategic review, has enhanced its
support to the political and electoral processes and
is making the necessary adjustments to its civilian,
police and military components in order to enable a
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians,
including by monitoring and reporting on the human
rights situation. Efforts are also ongoing to increase the
mobility and flexibility of the force and the Mission's
police and civilian components to enable protection
through projection.

Specifically, preparations are under way for the
deployment of a third rapidly deployable battalion,
which will be operational by next month. We are
reviewing the statement of unit requirements for
rapidly deployable battalions so as to ensure that the
two that will be deployed later this year are lighter and
more flexible. Within the framework of the Secretary-
General's recommendation to review United Nations
air assets, MONUSCO has conducted a review to assess
how to obtain air assets that are more suitable for its
operations and enhance their use.

Regarding the Force Intervention Brigade, efforts
are ongoing to train the units in jungle warfare with a
view to responding more effectively to the asymmetric
environment in which they operate. Steps are also
being undertaken to improve information gathering
and analysis.

Regarding the police component, the redeployment
of a Senegalese formed olice unit (FPU) from Goma to
Kinshasa is almost complete, and the unit is expected
to be fully operational by the end of this week. Some
forward bases have been closed, including in the Bunia
area, as the MONUSCO force continues to optimize its
presence on the ground. We are also working on the
review of statement of unit requirements for FPUs to
enable the swift redeployment of FPU elements to other
areas of operations based on the evolution of the situation
on the ground. I look forward to engaging closely with
Council Members and troop- and police-contributing
countries over the coming weeks and months to ensure
that MONUSCO continues to evolve in response to the
challenges on the ground.

On the political and electoral front, I should note
that MONUSCO continues to provide logistical and
technical support to the Electoral Commission for the
voter registration and other electoral activities. As
requested in the electoral calendar, MONUSCO has
submitted to the Electoral Commission its logistical
support plan for the upcoming presidential and national
and provincial legislative elections, which would be a
major undertaking requiring adequate resources.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
highlight the importance of the continued support of
Council members and Member States to MONUSCO.
While acknowledging the need to rationalize resources
by making better and more efficient use of available
assets, it is vital that MONUSCO be afforded the
necessary means to effectively support the political
process and address the daunting security challenges
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to face.

The coming months will be critical in safeguarding
the collective investment made by international, regional
and national actors in stabilizing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo over the past two decades and
in preparing the ground for the consolidation of peace
and stability in the country and the wider region. The
United Nations, through the good offices of the newly
appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, will continue to be fully
committed to working closely with all concerned actors
in achieving this objective.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Maman
Sidikou, who is completing his assignment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his tireless
efforts in good offices initiatives and in supporting
the promotion of human rights and the protection of
civilians over the past two years.

