Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). The full text of my statement is
available, but due to time constraints I will present a
shorter version.

At the outset, I would like to welcome and thank
the Chinese presidency for its initiative in convening
today's open debate on an important issue. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

I would like to underscore the validity and relevance
of NAM's principled positions on terrorism, which
are reflected in the Algiers Final Document of the
seventeenth NAM. Ministerial Conference and include
the following points.

Terrorist acts constitute one of the most flagrant
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, in particular the
right to life. They lead to the lack ofthe full enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms of peoples and

endanger the territorial integrity and stability of States
as well as national, regional and international security,
destabilize legitimately constituted Governments or
the prevailing constitutional order and political unity
of States, affect the stability of nations and the very
basis of societies. Terrorist acts also create adverse
consequences for economic and social development
and cause the destruction of the physical and economic
infrastructure of States.

NAM. strongly condemns and rejects terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, as well as all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism wherever, by
whomever, against whomsoever committed, including
those in which States are directly or indirectly involved,
which are unjustifiable whatever the considerations or
factors that may be invoked to justify them.

Terrorism cannot and should not be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
and these attributions should not be used to justify
terrorism or counter-terrorism measures that include,
inter alia, the profiling of terror suspects and intrusion
on individual privacy.

At the same time, terrorism should not be equated
with the legitimate struggle of peoples under colonial
or alien domination and foreign occupation for self-
determination and national liberation or in order to
prolong occupation and oppression of innocent people
with impunity. In this regard, and in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the struggle
of peoples under colonial or alien domination and
foreign occupation for self-determination and national
liberation does not constitute terrorism.

The financing of terrorism is a matter of grave
concern that must be fought with determination. In this
regard, NAM. strongly condemns criminal incidences
of hostage-taking with resultant demands for ransom
and/or other political concessions by terrorist groups
and calls upon all States to cooperate actively in order
to address this issue in all its aspects, including its
legal aspects. NAM. invites Member States to take
the necessary measures to prevent terrorists from
benefiting from hostage-taking, including ransom
payments and political concessions.

Finally, I reaffirm the Movement's principled
position on combating international terrorism,
while stressing the need to respect international law,
including the respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all States. In
the light of the previous initiatives and considerations
adopted by NAM. and of our conviction that multilateral
cooperation, in conformity with the United Nations
Charter, international law and the relevant international
conventions, and under United Nations auspices, is
the most effective means to combat international
terrorism, I reiterate the Movement's call for an
international conference under the auspices of the
United Nations to formulate ajoint organized response
by the international community to terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, including identifying its
root causes.

