Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, and to the delegation of Germany for
initiating this important debate. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his remarks. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy
for his insightful briefing. We welcome the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Riek Machar Teny-
Dhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic of South
Sudan, and of His Excellency Ambassador Daffa-Alla
Elhag Ali Osman, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of the Sudan to the United Nations.

I would like to join others in congratulating the
Government and the people of South Sudan on
independence and the formation of a new State, the
Republic of South Sudan. The Republic of South
Sudan is the result of the aspirations and the will of the
people of South Sudan, who exercised their right to

self-determination in a referendum in January this year,
in accordance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, which ended the longest civil war in
Africa. The new State symbolizes their determination
to govern their future and build a successful and
prosperous nation.

Like every new nation at the beginning of its
journey, the Republic of South Sudan requires the
adequate support of the international community,
which should be based on real needs and conditions on
the ground. At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina
firmly believes that international assistance must be
accompanied by strong national ownership, particularly
when it comes to capacity-building and economic
development.

Bearing in mind that the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan has requested the continued
presence of the United Nations following the
declaration of independence, it is important to establish
an effective partnership between the authorities of
South Sudan and the United Nations at an early stage
in order to make the complex task of peacebuilding and
stabilization more efficient. It is evident that that will
require a long-term commitment, in which the
international community and the United Nations
system must ensure sufficient resources in providing
support to South Sudan.

Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS). We are convinced
that, within its mandate, the Mission will significantly
contribute to the stabilization and consolidation of the
State. We would like to encourage UNMISS, in close
cooperation and coordination with the African Union,
the African Development Bank, the European Union
and the World Bank, to provide assistance to the
Republic of South Sudan in strengthening its capacity,
as well as in supporting the reforms necessary for long-
term stability and South Sudan's economic, political
and social development.

As for relations between the Republic of South
Sudan and the Sudan, which are the cornerstone of
subregional stability, the two States should remain
committed to the peaceful resolution of outstanding
issues. The nature of future bilateral relations will
depend directly on the resolution of outstanding issues.
In that regard, we call upon the Governments of the
Republic of South Sudan and the Sudan to continue
their commitments to negotiations and to laying a
foundation for friendly and dynamic relations between
them. Two viable and prosperous States, living in
peace and security, would significantly contribute to
the stability and economic development of the entire
region.

Furthermore, we are convinced that every open
issue should be resolved on the basis of mutual
understanding of and respect for the interests of both
sides. The interconnection of people on both sides of
the border in their everyday lives dictates Vibrant
cooperation between the Republic of South Sudan and
the Sudan. For that reason, mutual trust and sincere
cooperation must be the crucial ingredients of future
bilateral relations.

From the regional perspective, it is important
that, from the very beginning, the Republic of South
Sudan engage constructively with neighbouring States
to address the major threats to peace and security in the
subregion. Coordinating the activities of the countries
of the region will significantly contribute to the
consolidation of peace and the prevention of conflicts,
and will be essential to addressing cross-border
challenges, including arms trafficking and the activities
of illegal armed groups. The international community
must also stand by to support the development of the
Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan as an
important element in the stabilization of that part of
Africa.

In conclusion, I would like to call upon the
international community and Member States to extend
their support to the people of the Republic of South
Sudan as they endeavour to meet existing challenges in
consolidating peace, building their State and laying a
foundation for the socio-economic development of
their country.

