Mr. Deng (South Sudan): As this is the first time
that I speak before the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on
your leadership of the Council this month and to
pledge to you our full cooperation. I would also like to
acknowledge the role of your predecessor in leading the
Council last month.

I have addressed the Council on this issue on so
many occasions that there is not much more to be said,
other than to reiterate some important points.

I would like to welcome the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) and its extension to 15 December 2015.

As I have said on numerous occasions, UNISFA
is the best thing that has happened to Abyei Area
for decades. Without international protection and
assistance, the Ngok Dinka have always been victims
of unrestrained attacks from their northern neighbours,
supported by successive Governments of the Sudan.
Despite blatant atrocities, no one has ever been held
accountable. Although UNISFA by no means provides
full protection, at least the threat of uncontrolled
and unaccountable attacks from the north has been
reduced. I know that, whenever attacks take place and
the Ngok Dinka fall victim - such as the well-known
case of the assassination of the Paramount Chief under
the protective escort of UNISFA - the Ngok Dinka
understandably see more of the negative than the big
picture of protection. It should be remembered that,
before UNISFA was deployed, Abyei was massively
invaded in 2008, and then again in 2011, by the forces
of the Sudan Government, which forced the civilian
population to flee. That had the effect of depopulating
the Area. Most of the civilian population has not yet
been able to return, out of fear of further attacks from
the north.

Despite the shortcomings of the protection role of
UNISFA, it is the only source of protection for the Ngok
Dinka. In View of the fact that the impasse on the final
status of Abyei between the Sudan and South Sudan
has now reached a deadlock, and considering that the
present arrangement under UNISFA cannot continue
indefinitely, the Security Council is called upon to find
a workable solution that will be acceptable to both sides
in the conflict.

I believe that some refinement of the present
arrangements under UNISFA would turn the Area
into an international protectorate so as to ensure
security, provide services and generate socioeconomic
development is the most practical way forward. The
issue of a final status for Abyei can then be negotiated
within a reasonable time frame and in an atmosphere
of relative cooperation between the two Governments,
reinforced by the constructive engagement of the
international community.

In reading the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/439), I believe that considerable progress has
been made in providing protection and assistance. But
the challenge of security, stability and development
for the Area remains formidable. In that context, I
would like to reiterate what I have said on a number
of occasions, that is, that the nine chiefdoms of Abyei
have always been administered autonomously. Just as
the Misseriya are self-administering within their area
of normal residence, the Ngok Dinka now need to have
all the organs of Government - legislative, executive
and judiciary - under their autonomous control. An
institution of cooperation between the Ngok Dinka
and the Misseriya, whether through a committee
or a council or through the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee, could then manage bilateral relations and
resolve conflicts between them. Any idea about a joint
administration whereby the Misseriya, while fully
self-governing, participate in the administration of
Ngok Dinka areas would be unacceptable by normative
standards and would be rejected by the Ngok Dinka and
the Government of South Sudan.

In addition to the security imperatives of the Area,
the people of Abyei are in desperate need of services,
infrastructure and socioeconomic development.
That can be achieved in partnership with United
Nations agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and local community-
based structures, alongthe continuum fromhumanitarian
assistance to relief, recovery and development. Without
those essentials, it is unlikely that the people of Abyei
will return to their normal areas of residence and will
remain refugees and internally displaced persons
indefinitely. The Ngok Dinka of Abyei are currently
virtually stateless, and therefore their displacement
remains a source of instability for the region.

In developing a solution for the Area, I would hope
that the Security Council, in collaboration with the
African Union, will find these suggestions useful in
formulating a programme of interim stabilization for
the Abyei situation.

Finally, the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya have
lived as friendly and cooperative neighbours under their
respective leaderships for centuries. What is needed
now is to restore those erstwhile cordial ties between
the two communities and to turn the adversarial posture
of national authorities into promoting cooperation
between the two communities.

