Mr. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your commendable work as
President of the Security Council for the month of
April. In particular, we wish to thank you for the
highly valuable assistance your Government has
provided at this difficult time in Haiti.

The Dominican Republic welcomes the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime
Minister of Haiti, and expresses its gratitude for the
comprehensive briefing given by our friend,
Ambassador Edmund Mullet, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, who also introduced the highly
valuable report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2010/200).

The Dominican Republic commends the
Secretary-General for the leadership and commitment
to Haiti he has shown time and again, especially in the
aftermath of the devastating earthquake of 12 January,
whose resultant tragic human and material losses were
unprecedented for the United Nations system and for
the entire region. Through his efforts, the Secretary-
General has garnered the broadest support from the
international community.

The Dominican Republic agrees with the
recommendations the Secretary-General makes in
paragraph 52 of his report on MINUSTAH. Following
the earthquake that hit Haiti on 12 January,
MINUSTAH should broaden the scope of its existing
mandate to assist the Haitian authorities by fostering
political stability, coordinating and enabling emergency
aid efforts, maintaining a secure and stable
environment, assisting in the strengthening of Haitian
State capacity and in decentralization, and helping
Haiti build its human capital through the promotion of
a balanced social agenda.

As the representative of the United States said,
the cooperation of Organization of American States
(OAS) is essential for ensuring property rights and the
rights of individuals to elect and be elected. The
Dominican Republic therefore welcomes the statement
we have just heard from Ambassador Ramdin,
Assistant Secretary General of the OAS.

The Dominican Republic believes that
broadening the scope of the mandate of MINUSTAH as
proposed by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 49 to
75 of his report would be an appropriate tribute to the
thousands who lost their lives in a catastrophe whose
consequences could have been avoided had better
governance been in place. It is only with a functional
Government, a cohesive political system, a population
that enjoys employment and education and lives in
peace, and a civil society that complements rather
competes with the efforts of the Government that we
will be able move from emergency assistance to
reconstruction and from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
in Haiti.

In his report, the Secretary-General recognized
the logistical support provided by the Dominican
Republic to the international community's emergency
assistance efforts for the people and the Government of
Haiti. While we are grateful for this recognition, the
Dominican Republic views the provision of such
support, following such a catastrophe, as nothing less
than our duty.

However, in the long term, a logistical support
centre should be established for the emergency
assistance needed to respond to the sorts of climatic
and seismic natural disasters that will inevitably
continue to hit the Caribbean basin. As the Secretary-
General notes in paragraph 25 of his report, some 200
MINUSTAH staff are working temporarily in Santo
Domingo, carrying out functions that do not require
them to be physically present in Haiti. This presence is
the embryo of a possible initiative that would go
beyond the specific peacekeeping needs of Haiti, given
the challenge facing the whole region: to prevent,
mitigate and respond more quickly to the risk of
natural disasters in the future in Central America and
the Caribbean.

In view of the fact that the work being carried out
by the MINUSTAH staff in my country needs to be
placed within a legal framework, the Dominican
Republic urges the relevant departments of the United
Nations to finalize the details of the memorandum of
understanding by which this presence will be made
duly official, while an devising a significant
institutional mechanism for the management of
emergency operations from a country that has
demonstrated its willingness and commitment to do so.

The Dominican Republic welcomes the successful
and generous outcome of the Haiti donors conference
held at United Nations Headquarters on 31 March.
There is no doubt that the pledges made then will be
honoured in the near future given that the Interim
Haitian Reconstruction Commission is already in place,
under the joint direction of Prime Minister Bellerive
and President Clinton and with the World Bank as fiscal
agent.

The Dominican Republic has collaborated closely
with the Haitian authorities to draw up a new economic
development plan for Haiti. In this context, together we
held a preparatory technical conference in Santo
Domingo on 17 March to evaluate the needs
assessment, which was drawn up with the assistance of
the United Nations, as mentioned by the Secretary-
General in paragraph 16 of his report.

The Dominican Republic welcomes the emphasis
placed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 10 of his
report on the transition from the provision of
humanitarian aid to the creation of conditions to ensure
food security in Haiti. We urge changes in ancestral
slash-and-burn agricultural practices and efforts to
restore the fertility of the soil and resolve land
ownership issues through the adoption of a plan for
farming cooperatives. The Dominican Republic is also
working on the installation of greenhouses in Haiti to
accelerate and ensure increased agricultural output and
productivity.

The Dominican Republic welcomes in particular
the priority given by the Secretary-General to building
human capital in Haiti. Only in that way will Haiti be
able to leave behind its status as a least developed
country - the only such country in the Western
Hemisphere.

Since 90 per cent of Haitian university
infrastructure collapsed during the earthquake, the
Dominican President, Leonel Fernandez Reyna,
announced the construction of a new university in
Haiti, with capacity for 10,000 students and with the
latest equipment and information and communications
technology.

To conclude, the Dominican Republic will
continue in the long term to promote Haiti's cause
internationally. Together with the Government of Haiti
and under the auspices of the European Union,
President Fernandez Reyna will convene a world
summit on the future of Haiti, "Solidarity Beyond the
Crisis", in Casa de Campo in the Dominican Republic
on 2 June. The Dominican Republic counts on the
representation of all United Nations Members there at
the highest levels. That would be the best way to
demonstrate that, in the wake of the crisis, we will
continue to work together to achieve the Haiti of our
dreams.

