Mr. Mohamed (the Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Sudan aligns itself with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait on behalf of the
Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

Kindly allow me to express our great appreciation
for Egypt's initiative in convening this important
debate on an issue that concerns the international
community and requires our true will power and
immense determination to confront. I would also like
to express our heartfelt condolences to the victims and
families of the recent terrorist acts in Egypt and Iraq.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations has
become an imminent threat to all of humankind. It
follows no rules. It is a global phenomenon that threatens
peace and security and forces the world to live in fear and
terror. The acts committed by terrorist groups have to
date killed thousands, destroyed institutions and spread
hatred, conflict and tension everywhere. The world is
called upon, now more than ever, to review the existing
strategies and plans, which have focused solely on the
security aspects, with a view to developing strategies to
deal with the socioeconomic and humanitarian issues
thought to be among the root causes of terrorism,
thereby taking effective steps to contain, combat and
prevent the phenomenon of terrorism.

The international efforts aimed at dealing with
terrorism, violent extremism and terrorist acts have not
yet achieved the desired impact. We have a duty to review
our actions aimed at putting an end to the phenomenon
and eliminating its destructive consequences. In that
context, the utmost priority should be given to efforts
at the national and regional levels, where the factors
and root causes of terrorism may be identified.

The Sudan reasserts the importance of the role
played by regional organizations and stresses the
need for coordination among them and international
organizations when focusing on the international factors
that give rise to the spread of terrorism. While efforts
at national and regional levels have been undertaken to
confront the national and regional causes of terrorism,
there must also be international efforts to address the
international causes of the phenomenon. Only in this
way can we truly confront all forms and manifestations
of violent extremism and terrorism.

Regrettably, terrorism is an ancient phenomenon
that has existed throughout the ages. Indeed, terrorism
has been present at every turn of human history. That
is not a reason, however, for us not to hold accountable
those who commit terrorist acts or encourage the
spread of terrorism. Terrorism should not be linked
to any religion, civilization or culture. We should be
bound to this perspective and make no exceptions to it.
Terrorism cannot be countered by terrorism. Reactive
terrorism begins with a state of mind that distorts
religious, cultural or intellectual groups and provides
terrorists with justifications, pretexts and excuses for
their acts. We have seen this time and again throughout
history.

I would now like to share with the Council some
of the Sudan's efforts in the fight against terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. In the context of
implementing our national plan of action to fight
terrorism, we have emphasized the importance of
coordination and cooperation with the international
community. Accordingly, and in cooperation with the
Muslim World League, on 28 and 29 April the Sudan
hosted the International Conference on Combating
Terrorism and Sectarian Extremism in Africa. Our
President, His Excellency Mr. Omar Hassan Al-Bashir,
made an introductory statement at the conference in
which he called for greater coordination and cooperation
among all stakeholders in the fight against terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations and expressed the
readiness of the Sudan to fully cooperate in such an
effort. He also stressed the serious dangers that Boko
Haram poses in West Africa and the necessity of
finding effective ways and means for dealing with it.

The Conference considered the following issues:
terrorism in Africa: its causes and consequences;
communal extremism in Africa: the dangers and
consequences; countering terrorism and sectarian
extremism: responsibilities and efforts; and countering
terrorism and sectarian extremism in Africa: the means
and mechanisms. We will distribute the text of the final
document of the Conference to all States Members of
the United Nations, as we believe it would assist in
international efforts to combat this scourge.

Once again, we welcome today's important debate
and thank the delegation of Egypt for its timely
initiative. We welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/6 and the collective message
it sent with regard to countering acts of terrorism. We
also welcome the practical recommendations contained
therein for dealing with the phenomenon of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, preventing terrorist
acts and cutting terrorists' access to resources.

