Mr. Zebari (Iraq): Since the liberation of the
Iraqi people in 2003, Iraq has charted a path towards
stability and democracy with the support of the
international community under Security Council
resolutions 1483 (2003), 1511 (2003), 1546 (2004),
1637 (2005), 1723 (2006) and 1790 (2007). My
Government thanks the member States of the Security
Council for their continued support and welcomes the
opportunity to provide an update on the current
situation in Iraq and the way forward.

The timing is particularly significant as resolution
1790 (2007), due to expire on 31 December 2008,
marks the termination of the mandate of the
Multinational Force in Iraq, and prompts a review of
the arrangements to manage Iraq's financial resources
in accordance with our international obligations.
Furthermore, as we further emerge as a peaceful and
responsible democracy, my Government believes Iraq's
status in the international community is due for review.

I am pleased to report that this year we have
achieved remarkable progress and turned a vital corner
towards the stabilization and recovery of my country.
The constitutionally elected national unity Government
has pushed ahead with its program of national
reconciliation, and the Council of Representatives has
successfully passed key laws on justice and
accountability, provincial elections, amnesty and the
national budget through a process of compromise and
political accommodation. We are currently preparing to
hold open and fair provincial and national elections
this coming year, marking a major step toward political
stabilization and the completion of one full
constitutional, democratic electoral cycle,
08-66593
However, we still face many challenges,
including undertaking constitutional review; finding
sustainable solutions to power and resource sharing,
including adopting hydrocarbons legislation; achieving
the resolution of disputed territories; building
government capacity on service provision and
facilitating the safe, dignified and sustainable return of
over two million refugees and internally displaced
persons.

Our political and democratic progress is, to some
extent, a product of, and a contributing factor towards,
trends in improving security that have emerged over
the previous 12 months. It is the responsibility and
priority of the Iraqi Government to guarantee security
and stability for all Iraqis. We are at present effectively
maintaining the steadiest levels of stability in four
years. Attacks and civilian and military deaths have all
decreased by over 80 per cent since last year.

This has been achieved by the undoubted success
of the surge strategy, bolstered by the commendable
performance of Iraqi security forces and backed up
with economic and political measures at local and
provincial governance levels. Contributing factors also
include the Awakening movement, as former insurgents
turn against terrorist elements, and widespread public
support for the Government's demobilization of
unlawful militias and for our imposition of the rule of
law on those who challenge the sole legitimate
authority of the State. Iraq has stepped back from the
brink of civil war. Terrorists and outlaw groups have no
place to hide in Iraq. Iraqi civilians have embraced
initiatives to protect their communities and livelihoods;
they have fundamentally disrupted the networks of
Al-Qaida and forcefully rejected extremist attempts to
incite sectarian conflict, lawlessness and hatred.

The central strategy of my Government and the
coalition has been to bolster the capacity of Iraqi
security forces with a view to transferring full
responsibility for Iraq's security and defence to Iraqi
security forces. Today, the increased training,
capabilities, size and confidence of Iraqi security
forces has led to a dramatic improvement in the
security situation. 13 out of 18 provinces are now
under Iraqi Government control, including areas of
former insurgent and terrorist strongholds. Iraqi forces
are increasingly planning, implementing and leading
security and peacekeeping operations independently of
the Multinational Force in Iraq. The professionalism of
our national army and police has also won them the
08-66593
trust of the Iraqi population, which has helped lead to
the arrests of key operatives in terror and militia
networks and significant confiscation of weapons
caches.

However, much work still needs to be done, first
and foremost in air force and navy training and border
control to extend Iraqi authority over its borders,
waterways and airspace, in addition to ongoing
strengthening of democratic institutions, including
commitment to human rights, the supremacy of the rule
of law and the total rejection of sectarianism.

In pursuit of Iraq's strategic vision for the secure
and stable future of our country, and reflecting security
conditions on the ground, Iraq and the United States
have negotiated a new security arrangement to direct
the future bilateral partnership between our two equal
and sovereign nations, which share common goals and
objectives: to protect and promote the interests of our
two nations and to reinforce Iraqi sovereignty and
independence.

There are two key aspects to this important
bilateral security agreement. The first is agreement on
the withdrawal of United States forces from Iraq and
the organization of their activities during their
temporary presence in Iraq, detailing the procedures
and legal protections that govern the presence of
United States troops in Iraq. The second is the higher-
level strategic framework agreement for a relationship
of friendship and cooperation between the Republic of
Iraq and the United States of America, which covers
the long-term principles guiding our overall political,
economic and security relationship. It further
normalizes the relationship between Iraq and the
United States with strong economic, diplomatic and
cultural ties. The agreements were approved by the
Iraqi Cabinet and the Council of Representatives on
27 November and endorsed by the Presidency Council
on 4 December. We are already negotiating further
agreements with other international coalition partners.

Security Council resolution 1546 (2004) and
subsequent annual resolutions extending the
multinational force mandate, in addition to the Iraqi
Government's request to retain the multinational force
presence, have been based on the premise that any
continued multinational force presence would remain
until Iraq can assume full responsibility and be self-
sufficient in maintaining security for the country and
the people of Iraq. At present, according to the
3
agreements with the United States, 2011 would be a
realistic date for the withdrawal of all United Sates
forces from our country. Noting the significant
progress achieved and the conclusion of the security
accord with the United States, Prime Minister Nuri
al-Maliki's letter dated 7 December 2007 was therefore
the final request to extend the multinational force
mandate, which will thus expire at the end of this year.

The termination marks a turning point for Iraq
and the end of an important era for the United Nations
and all those countries that have contributed to the
multinational force. The multinational force in Iraq has
contributed vital support to the process of building
security and stability in Iraq and to our transition
towards a sovereign, federal and united democracy.
Iraq wishes to extend its deepest thanks and
appreciation to all those countries which contributed to
the coalition and which have had the vision, the resolve
and the brave leadership to stand alongside the Iraqi
people in our fight for our shared values of democracy
and freedom.

On behalf of the Government and people of Iraq,
I wish to convey a very important message of thanks to
the men and women of the multinational forces who
have fought courageously with us on the front line.
Iraq owes them a debt of gratitude, and we share our
condolences with them for the sacrifices that this
historic struggle has required. Our joint losses have not
been in vain, nor will they ever be forgotten. Their
countries may be justifiably proud of their
accomplishments.

It is with cautious confidence that we enter into a
new phase of security arrangements beyond United
Nations-mandated support. And the Government of
Iraq reminds the international community that the
struggle for peace is still far from over. We recognize
that a significant level of security and military support
continues to be necessary and that it will take time for
our security forces to reach full capacity. Recently, we
have succeeded in making gains in security, even as
coalition troops have withdrawn to pre-surge levels and
continue to depart the theatre as security conditions on
the ground permit.

But our hard-won achievements need to be
pressed on and made durable. The threats to our
fledgling democracy persist. Although appalling terror
attacks fail to ignite the same spirals of sectarian
conflict we experienced in recent years, any premature
military withdrawals would leave behind a vacuum of
vulnerability that would be exploited to destabilize Iraq
and threaten the entire region. Iraq urges gradual,
measured and responsible security transitions.

As we move forward, Iraq continues to need the
active support and consistent commitment of the
international community, the United Nations and the
States and organizations involved in key forums,
including the International Compact with Iraq and
neighbouring countries' mechanisms. Iraq's relations
with its neighbours have improved, and there are a
number of bilateral agreements to further improve
relations with all neighbouring countries. Last year
also witnessed the opening of a number of Arab
diplomatic missions in Baghdad, including that of
Kuwait, as a further sign of Iraq's integration into its
regional environment.

On behalf of my Government, I would like to
extend our appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
to his colleagues at the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for the crucial work they
are undertaking to support my Government and the
people of Iraq. I would like to highlight and commend
UNAMI for several things: its role in assisting in
election preparations and contributing to the successful
adoption of the elections law, its invaluable work on
the reintegration of Iraqi refugees and the internally
displaced and its engagement in seeking resolution on
Iraq's disputed internal boundaries. My Government
has pledged $25 million towards planning for the
proposed United Nations facility in Baghdad and an
equal contribution upon commencement of the work.
We remain actively committed to assisting the United
Nations in any way necessary for it to continue and
expand its mission in Iraq in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 1770 (2007) and 1830 (2008).

As the Iraqi Government pushes forward with
extensive national reconstruction and economic
development, we need assurances that Iraq's resources
and financial assets are available for the country's
recovery programmes. Without such assurances, the
functioning of the Iraqi Government and the current
stability could be seriously endangered. Iraq therefore
requests the extension until next year of the
arrangements established in paragraph 20 of resolution
1483 (2003) for depositing the proceeds from export
sales of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas
into the Development Fund for Iraq and of the
arrangements of paragraph 12 of resolution 1483
(2003) and resolution 1546 (2004) for the monitoring
of the Fund by the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board. Iraq supports the open and
transparent process of review of these arrangements.

Iraq has inherited immense debt and international
legal claims from the wars and aggressions of the
Saddam Hussein regime. Since 2003 we have managed
our resources responsibly, as acknowledged by the
international community and its international financial
institutions. Indeed, Iraq has been awarded the last
reduction of its Paris Club debt, amounting to 20 per
cent of its debt, after successfully completing its
programme with the International Monetary Fund.

My Government is fully committed to the
resolution of all legitimate claims and to complying
with its obligation under international law. We have
worked diligently to fulfil our commitments with
regard to settling this debt to countries and to paying
compensation. In particular, Iraq is fully committed to
implementing all binding resolutions concerning
Kuwait with respect to the border, sovereignty and
settlements for the aggression of the former regime.

In further commitment to our international
obligation, the Iraqi cabinet has waived 100 per cent of
the debt owed by more than 12 developing countries in
Africa and Asia.

There has been a marked improvement in the
situation in Iraq. We are at a crucial transitional stage
of stabilization, and our ongoing and steady progress
must not be undermined. The process of qualifying and
settling legitimate claims will take time. Therefore, to
continue this critical progress, Iraq needs protection for
its assets. We request the support of the international
community through the continuation of current
protection and arrangements for Iraq's resources and
the proceeds therefrom until the situation in Iraq
normalizes and the Government is able to implement
the necessary measures it is committed to taking to
settle outstanding debts and claims.

The situation in Iraq today is fundamentally
different from the situation prevailing at the time of the
adoption of resolution 661 (1990). Iraq is no longer a
rogue State flouting international law and posing a
threat to international peace and regional security. Nor
is it an instrument of oppression against its own
people. Now we have our own democratic institutions,
a constitutional Government accountable to and a

parliament representative of the Iraqi people. Iraq
seeks peaceful coexistence with its neighbours, stands
as a steadfast partner in the fight against global
terrorism, continues to pursue full reintegration into
regional and global economies and seeks reinstatement
as an equal, peaceful and responsible member of the
international community that upholds and respects the
universal principles of human rights and the rule of
law.

Finally, my Government requests a review of all
Security Council resolutions pertaining to Iraq to be
undertaken jointly by the Secretary-General and Iraq
and reported to the Security Council as the final arbiter
to take stock of our remaining obligations and to assess
the relevance and the validity of all such resolutions to
Iraq's current situation. We are fully committed to
abiding by our obligations under Security Council
resolutions and look forward to recognition by the
United Nations of the positive development in our
country so that Iraq can resume its legal and
international status that prevailed before the adoption
of resolution 661 (1990) and the burdens of Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

As stability improves, Iraq is embracing a new
phase of economic development and cooperation and
revitalized reconstruction and energy sector
development and is improving the livelihoods and
prosperity of the Iraqi people. It has taken time and
sacrifices, but we are stepping forward, with a real
hope for the future, towards a peaceful, democratic,
united and flourishing Iraq that plays a pivotal and
positive role in regional stability. The support of the
international community for our success is vital. In
turn, our success will prove critical to promoting peace
and stability in the region and the world.

