Mr. Thornberry (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
commend your initiative, Madam President, to convene
an open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council, and I wish also to express our gratitude for the
very comprehensive concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
prepared to orient our exchange of ideas today. We
also wish to thank the Ombudsperson of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), Ms. Kimberly Prost, and the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
for their statements. My delegation also expresses its
support for the statement made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group.

At the outset, Peru would like to highlight the active
work of the delegation of Argentina as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions for almost two years, during
which period six presidential notes were adopted. Those
six instruments are an attempt to continue making
progress in building a more democratic and transparent
Security Council, making it possible for non-member
States to have access to more information, which is an
indispensable requirement for accountability. It should
be recalled that the mandate of the Security Council,
namely, to monitor international peace and security,
was given to it by all States Members of the United
Nations, and we have also committed ourselves to
comply with Council resolutions.

This meeting provides us the necessary opportunity
to express our interest in staying informed about the
Council's deliberations. That is why we believe in
the importance of that issue on behalf of the entire
membership of the Organization. My delegation
therefore reiterates the urgent need to make progress in
reforming the Council's working methods with a view
to enhancing its legitimacy, the requisite transparency
in terms of multilateral relations and the effectiveness
and efficiency of its work. In that vein, my delegation
joins in supporting some of the initiatives already
mentioned by certain previous speakers, which shows
the range of agreement on those ideas.

First, in seeking transparency Peru believes it is
necessary for the Council to further convene more open
meetings. Such meetings should be of a substantive
nature and take place in a timely fashion. My delegation
also encourages the scheduling of open debates
such as today's, as they make it possible for States
non-members of the Council to express their opinions.
We also believe it is important that documents to be
adopted at open debates result from the ideas stated
during the debate, and not be prepared beforehand.
My country also believes it is important to continue
the positive practice of conducting wrap-up sessions
at the end of each working month. We are grateful to
the countries that have opted to hold such meetings in
the course of their presidencies. We note the enormous
participation by non-members at those meetings, which
demonstrates their interest in having more information.

Secondly, with regard to the much-needed
democratization of the Security Council, Peru has
steadfastly supported a position of principle whose
ultimate purpose is the elimination of the right of the
veto. We are aware of the difficulties entailed in doing
that, which is why my delegation supports, as a first
step, the adoption of a code of conduct whereby the
veto would not be used in cases of genocide, crimes
against humanity or persistent flagrant violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law. In that
context Peru, commends the proposal made by France
and calls on other permanent members to work on that
basis. We reiterate that without genuine reform of the
Council's working methods in terms of the use of the
veto, the Council's effectiveness will be at risk and
highly important principles such as those related to
international humanitarian law and the responsibility
to protect will remain unprotected.

Thirdly, in order to foster greater interaction
and participation in meetings of the Council, Peru
believes it is essential to consolidate the practice of
the Council's consultations with troop-contributing
countries involved in peacekeeping operations.
It is true that the increasingly complex and often
multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping operations
call for close coordination between the Council and
troop-contributing countries, with a view to ensuring
that the expectations and opinions of those countries
in terms of the design, implementation and renewal
of mandates be duly heard, since it is their uniformed
troops who will bear the responsibility for effectively
implementing in the field the mandates adopted by the
Council.

Lastly, I wish to mention that although the
implementation of such measures would substantively
improve the work of the Council, we believe that it is also
necessary to reform the Council's work culture, moving
from the current reactive stance to one that favours
prevention. My delegation believes it is necessary that
the Council adopt a comprehensive, holistic focus on
security and peacekeeping matters that is not limited
to conflict situations. The Council should develop
preventive diplomacy strategies and early-warning
systems in order to avoid conflict and reduce the risk of
such conflict spreading or reigniting. That is the only
way to ensure full compliance with the main goal for
which the Organization was created, namely "to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war".

