Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the Chinese presidency for organizing this open debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the African
Union (AU) Commissioner for their shared vision for
enhancing African capacities for peace and security.

Bangladesh values its association with Africa and
cherishes a number of instances in which its engagement
has played an instrumental role in achieving sustainable
peace on the ground. In our role as spokesperson for
the least developed countries, we have consistently
advocated for the particular needs and challenges of the
countries affected by, or emerging from, conflicts in
Africa. Bangladesh therefore feels encouraged to see the
AU assuming enhanced responsibility and ownership
so as to prevent conflicts and promote durable peace
in the region. In the spirit of finding African solutions
to African problems, we appreciate the important
strides made by the AU-led peace support operations
in Somalia, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel region
in particular. Bangladesh continues to express its
readiness to further cooperate with the AU, preferably
through the United Nations and in full respect of the
AU's ownership of its mandated operations.

The joint AU-United Nations review authorized
by the Council identified a range of opportunities
and outstanding challenges inherent in the strategic
partnership that has evolved over the past 15 years. The
adoption of resolution 2320 (2016), the AU's decisions
and overtures concerning its Peace Fund and the signing
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security
provide a broader context for further broadening
and deepening that partnership. The African Union's
sustained initiatives to live up to its commitment to fund
25 per cent of the cost of its peace support activities
have added further momentum to consolidating the
partnership, including through flexible yet sustainable
financing modalities.

With regard to the Secretary-General's
comprehensive report (S/2017/454), my delegation
wishes to underline five general points.

First, we stress the importance of improving
capacities forjoint appraisal, assessment and analysis of
conflicts by the United Nations and the AU, including
in the context of the Secretary-General's peace and
security architecture reform initiative. It remains critical
that suchjoint assessment and analysis be conducted in
an objective, consultative and inclusive manner.

Secondly, in view of the challenges of obtaining
financing through assessed contributions by United
Nations States Members, flexibility and diversity with
regard to the various options presented by the Secretary-
General in his report could help address the prevailing
financing gaps and the uncertainty surrounding the
trust-fund model based on voluntary contributions. It
would be advisable to exercise caution with regard to
financing models that have not been sufficiently tested.

Thirdly, in terms of mission support, we
recognize the importance of harnessing the respective
comparative advantages of the United Nations and the
AU in a flexible, case-by-case manner. The experience
of the United Nations support offices to the African
Union Mission in Somalia and of the Organization in
Somalia provides a useful template that could be further
strengthened and improvised, with the aim of avoiding
duplication and ensuring compliance and oversight.

Fourthly, the notion of doctrinal flexibility,
especially with regard to peace enforcement and
counter-terrorism, needs to be invoked on the basis of
the African Union's ownership and decisions in that
regard. We reiterate that the support for African peace
support operations should not stretch the mandate
and competence of United Nations peacekeeping and
support missions or endanger the safety and security of
its civilian and non-civilian personnel.

Fifthly, and lastly, we reaffirm the overriding
priority of seeking political solutions to conflicts in
Africa and elsewhere as a critical precondition for
sustaining peace across the continuum of conflicts.
The importance of involving women and youth in
peace processes, including in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, remains paramount in the interest of
enhancing inclusive national ownership.

Bangladesh appreciates the forward-looking thrust
in further strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the AU in the areas of peace and
security, and wishes to see further concrete decisions
by the Council later this year, while upholding the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

