Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation expects that the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 2453 (2019)
will facilitate the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus to
create security conditions conducive to a settlement on
the island.

A Cyprus settlement is one of the few issues on
the agenda of the Security Council where the united
position of its members provides for solid international
support for the efforts of the Cypriot parties to reach an
agreement on a comprehensive settlement on the basis
ofUnited Nations resolutions. The key to this consensus
is the balanced position of the Council and the attention
it pays to the concerns of the Cypriots themselves.

However, we regret the fact that one delegation has
attempted to use the sensitive situation on the island to
promote its own position on issues that are not directly
related to a settlement, which is beginning to hamper
the search for consensus and the effectiveness of the
Council's work. We recall that general peacekeeping
issues that affect all United Nations peacekeeping
missions should be discussed in the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, with the participation of
troop-contributing countries. Such issues also pertain
to the Secretariat's unfinished strategy to enhance the
effectiveness of peacekeeping, which has not yet been
settled. We support the need for such work, but the
decision on how such comprehensive documents are
applied should be made by the Special Committee after
it has reviewed the documents. Bypassing that body is
unacceptable, especially since the Secretariat has not
yet completed its work on the document.

We recall that the Secretary-General's instruction
to apply the unfinished document to the missions in
Cyprus, Abyei and the Syrian Golan does not supersede
current practice. Established procedures must be
followed, including respecting the expertise of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. That
body is

"the only United Nations forum mandated to
comprehensively review the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects,
including measures aimed at enhancing the capacity
of the Organization to conduct United Nations
peacekeeping operations" (A/72/19, para. 19).
For our part, we will ensure that this issue is given
priority attention at the next session of the Special
Committee. However, this applies to all documents
that require the approval of States Members of the
United Nations, including the collection and analysis
of information for peacekeeping purposes. We trust
that Council members will take a more responsible
approach to discussing sensitive country issues and
show greater respect for the prerogatives of specialized
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations. That
will also help us to improve the effectiveness of the
Security Council's work.

