Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this meeting. I am also grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report. I further wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Dhanapala for his detailed
introduction.

In recent years, the excessive accumulation and
illicit trade in small arms have exacerbated conflicts in
many countries and regions, impeded smooth post-
conflict reconstruction and fuelled criminal activities,
including terrorism and drug trafficking. They have
also given rise to many humanitarian problems. The
problem of small arms has, moreover, seriously
affected United Nations peacekeeping and peace-
building operations in post-conflict regions.

As a result, the international community has
taken concrete actions in various aspects of the issue.
Last year, the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects adopted the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. In less than two
years, the international community drafted and adopted
the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
These are all very important measures taken by the
United Nations in this regard. We are pleased to see
that, at present, the Group of Governmental Experts is
undertaking a further study on the marking and tracing
of small arms. We hope that its efforts will achieve
positive results.

In recent years, the question of small arms has
become increasingly related to the work of the Security
Council. The Council's work on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in post-
conflict areas and on the protection of civilians, women
and children in armed conflict all involve this issue. In
1999 and 2001, the Security Council held open debates
on small arms, the outcomes of which were very
encouraging. We believe that, as the process evolves
further, appropriate solutions will be found to the
excessive accumulation and illicit trade in small arms.

China agrees that the Security Council should
continue, within its purview, to focus attention on the
problem of small arms. We believe that, in addressing
this question, the Security Council needs to focus on
the following questions.

First, the Council's work on small arms is an
important contribution and complement to global
efforts in this regard. The Security Council is not
duplicating the work of others, much less substituting
its work for that of other relevant agencies. Secondly,
weapons collection and disposal measures taken during
peacekeeping operations or post-conflict peace-
building must be in strict accordance with the Security
Council's mandates. It is also necessary that
agreements and arrangements voluntarily undertaken
by parties to a conflict be respected. Thirdly, the
Security Council should support the efforts of all
countries and regions and encourage the relevant
United Nations agencies to be involved in the
implementation of its disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes.

The Secretary-General's report contains some
important observations regarding the ways and means
of addressing the issue of small arms. These include
the strengthening of exchanges with the General
Assembly so as to promote the formulation of long-
term strategies; the establishment of a small arms
advisory service; and the provision of adequate
resources for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. All these recommendations
are very good points of reference for the Security
Council's further consideration of this issue.

Of course, some issues merit further study and
discussion. For instance, the first recommendation
refers to the development of an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace, in a
timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light
weapons. This question was actually discussed at last
year's United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, at
which there was no consensus on the matter. At the
moment, the United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts on Small Arms is carrying out a feasibility
study on the development of such an instrument. The
measures to be taken by the Security Council in this
regard need to be considered after the Group of Experts
completes its work and must be based on the Group's
final report.

With regard to recommendation 9, as pointed out
in the presidential statement adopted by the Security
Council in 2001 (S/PRST/2001/21), in addition to
weapon-exporting countries, all other countries also
have a responsibility to take measures to prevent the
flow of legal arms into illegal channels. We hope that
such a consensus can be reflected in a more
comprehensive and balanced manner.

With regard to recommendation 12, we believe
that the feasibility of transparency in armaments is
closely related to both the global and the regional
security situations. The countries concerned should
base their decisions on the political, military and
security situations in which they find themselves in
implementing - either voluntarily or on the basis of
consultations - transparency measures in conformity
with the actual situations and their needs.

The causes and manifestations of the world's
armed conflicts vary. The Security Council should
therefore bear that in mind in deciding to impose or
strengthen an arms embargo or to incorporate the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
dimension into the mandate of a peacekeeping
operation.

China has always attached great importance to the
regulation and control of the production of, and trade
in, small arms. At present we are seriously
implementing the measures contained in the
Programme of Action. We are also actively studying
the possibility of signing the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition. Along with all
the members of the Council, the Chinese delegation is
prepared to make an effort to try to solve the problem
of the illicit trafficking in small arms.

