Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his comprehensive
briefing. I also welcome Ambassador Tanin's
contribution to today's debate.

We welcome the recent development in the security
transition. The announcement by Afghan President
Karzai this week to launch the fifth and final phase of
the security transition is a significant milestone in the
history of Afghanistan. The Afghan National Security
Forces will now take full responsibility for leading and
conducting all operations throughout the country. As
the transition moves forward, continued international
support will be all the more vital to ensure that the
transition is irreversible and sustainable. However,
an increase of 25 per cent in civilian casualties
during the reporting period shows that grave security
challenges remain. We are deeply concerned about the
targeted killings of civilians, including international
humanitarian workers.

Moreover, the recent terrorist attacks by the Taliban
against judiciary institutions, including the Supreme
Court in Kabul, are worrisome. They constitute a direct
challenge to the establishment of the rule of law. The
perpetrators must be brought to justice. All parties
must take every feasible steps to ensure the protection
of civilians and comply with their obligations under
international law. Increased efforts to train the
Afghan National Security Forces and provide it with
all the necessary support will remain crucial tasks to
effectively protect civilians and ensure accountability.

My delegation recognizes that the transition is
not only a security process but also requires the full
assumption of Afghan leadership and ownership
in governance. In that regard, the presidential and
provincial elections in 2014 will be an important
landmark for the political transition. It is critical that
the Afghan Government develop a credible electoral
framework and ensure a transparent and participatory
process, including the participation of women.

Gender equality and women's empowerment should
continue to be a priority policy for the Government of
Afghanistan to pursue. To that end, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has a crucial role
to play in providing capacity-building and technical
assistance to Afghan institutions. An Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led national reconciliation process is
another important step in moving forward the political
transition. In that regard, we are encouraged by the
Afghan Government's initiative on peace negotiations
with the Taliban and by the opening of a Taliban
office in Doha. It should serve to promote peace, not
complicate the process.

We hope that further progress will be made towards
achieving sustainable and lasting peace in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan and the international community now
stand at a critical juncture in achieving the agreed
goals for 2014. The timely and faithful implementation
of commitments is all the more crucial. The Korean
Government will continue to support the international
efforts for the capacity-building of Afghanistan.
Following the contribution of $150 million to the Afghan
National Army Trust Fund and the Law and Order
Trust Fund for Afghanistan over the past two years,
the Republic of Korea plans to contribute an additional
$100 million this year to support capacity-building in
the security and development sectors. We will strive
to work closely with the Afghan Government and the
international community towards a more prosperous,
stable and democratic future for Afghanistan.

