Mr. Bouchaara: (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, allow me in turn to welcome Mr. Jan Kubis,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and to thank him for his briefing. I also
take this opportunity to welcome Mr. Rassoul, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and to thank him
most sincerely for his statement.

During the period covered by the Secretary-
General's report (S/2012/703), the international
community reiterated its commitment to supporting
Afghanistan at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan,
held on 8 July and co-sponsored by Afghanistan and
Japan. In this context, Morocco welcomes the fact that
the international community has undertaken to earmark,
in the years ahead, more than $16 billion for assistance
to Afghanistan, which attests to the importance that the
international community attaches to that country and
to the need to stand with it in its efforts to bring about
stabilization and reconstruction. The Conference also
saw the adoption of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, which reiterated the commitment of the
Afghan Government with respect to presidential and
legislative elections in 2014 and 2015.

On the political front, the presidential decree
adopted on 27 July laid out the priorities of Mr. Karzai's
Government for the two years ahead, in particular the
fight against corruption, the renewal of State institutions
and the establishment of a mechanism providing for
better management of State institutions.

On the security front, we note that the number of
incidents has declined considerably since last year. Still,
it is higher than it was in 2010. This slight improvement
took place at a time when the third transition phase
allowed for a transfer of responsibilities to the Afghan
security forces, who new control an area in which 75 per
cent of Afghanistan's population lives. In addition, we
have seen an increase in the number of Afghan fighters
who have joined the Afghan peace and reintegration
programme, which by mid-August included more than
5,000 new ex-combatants. This will clearly have a
positive impact on security in Afghanistan.

Regional cooperation during this period was
significant, as shown by the Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference held on 14 June in Kabul, which involved
14 countries and seven regional and international
organizations, and identified priority confidence-
building measures linked to such areas as counter-
terrorism, the fight against drug trafficking, trade
opportunities and regional infrastructure.

Beyond the Conference, Afghan authorities have
purused their efforts to strengthen cooperation in
areas of common interest with neighbouring States.
We welcome the fact that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has undertaken a number of
visits to the region in order to increase cooperation with
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and between those States and Afghanistan.

In a different vein, the humanitarian situation,
particularly that of women and children, calls for the
collective commitment of the Afghan authorities and the
United Nations to providing the necessary assistance to
vulnerable populations. The issue of refugees is also
a problem, both for Afghanistan and for neighbouring
States. As such, additional efforts must be undertaken
in order to repatriate refugees and ensure that they are
reintegrated into their countries of origin.

Afghanistan is a country that has pulled back from
the brink and come a long way towards extricating itself
from fratricidal and deadly conflict. It still has a long
way to go to stabilize, to rebuild itself and to build State
institutions in order to finally ensure the rule of law. To
that end, the role of UNAMA, neighbouring States and
the entire international community is vital in assisting
a country that continues to endure the agony of war.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNAMA
for their efforts as they fulfil their mandate.

