Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We too
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, and we
commend him for his determination and optimism
in carrying forward a very difficult process. We also
commend the United States of America and Russia
for steering through the cessation of hostilities, which
should have taken effect a few minutes ago.

The backdrop to today's discussions is five years
of devastation and failure in Syria. Late last year, the
Syrian parties were about as far apart as they have
ever been. There have been moments of promise, in
particular the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015), and
subsequent agreements by the International Syria
Support Group. Sadly, after each of those moments of
promise, we have seen an escalation of fighting as the
Syrian Government and its supporters have tried to
leverage the situation to their advantage. That has been
deeply disturbing and disappointing.

At last, we have an agreement around a cessation
of hostilities, which is due to take effect in the coming
hours. We welcome that agreement, and were pleased
to vote today in support of resolution 2268 (2016),
endorsing it. If the cessation of hostilities holds it will
be the first time in five years that there has been an
agreed pause in the fighting in this bloody civil war.
The cessation of hostilities is an important step towards
a lasting ceasefire. It gives hope for a reduction in the
horrific violence and humanitarian suffering in Syria.
If it is to serve a meaningful purpose, parties to the
conflict and relevant International Syria Support Group
members must demonstrate a sustained commitment to
making it work in practice.

We recognize that the fight against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front
and other Security Council-designated terrorist
organizations must continue, but that will inevitably
open the risk that the wrong targets may be struck, be it
deliberately or inadvertently. That in turn could trigger
an unravelling of the cessation of hostilities and a
return to widespread conflict. All those who subscribe
to this agreement must act with extra caution to prevent
such an outcome, and in particular to avoid military
activity against non-designated groups, civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

Today's resolution affirms the close linkage between
a lasting ceasefire and a parallel political process. We
hope that the cessation of hostilities agreement will be
remembered in history as the beginning of the end of
mass violence in Syria. We were pleased, therefore, to
hear from Mr. De Mistura that will inter-Syrian talks
will resume on 7 March and that that process will be an
inclusive one.

We think it right that the Council has today sent a
message to the Syrian parties that they must participate
in those negotiations on a political transition, and
that they must engage in those negotiations in good
faith. We have sympathy for those who promote
confidence-building measures to build the strength of
the platform upon which these negotiations must take
place. At the same time, the parties should not insist
on preconditions designed to scuttle negotiations before
they begin. All those involved in the conflict have a
responsibility to bring about and sustain conditions that
are conducive to constructive negotiations.

The full implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, including the one we have adopted
today, remains critical. That will require a genuine
commitment in the coming days and weeks to ceasing
hostilities, in accordance with the terms ofthe agreement
the Council has endorsed today. It also means urgently
allowing full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
aid to those who need it. That must include urgently
needed medical assistance. We hope we will also see
the release of detainees, particularly women, children
and the elderly.

Now is when the rubber meets the road, when there
must be hard decisions on difficult issues. Now is not the
time for political red lines. No side will get everything
it wants, and that includes the Syrian Government, the
opposition and regional and international supporters.
Any viable solution will be imperfect. Any political
solution will require compromise. We stand ready to
support Mr. De Mistura in his efforts to resume the
negotiations in Geneva, and we encourage the Council
to do all it can to assist him.

