Mr. Choi: In 2008, the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) focused much of its
attention on the electoral process in Cote d'Ivoire, in
particular with regard to the identification and voter
registration operation, for which it has provided
technical, logistical and financial support. Despite the
slow pace of the electoral management body, strong
political will among the Ivorian political leaders for
early elections enabled the electoral process to move
forward.

Yet, at the outset of 2009, the momentum for an
early election appears to have considerably weakened.
In the background is the change of political priority
among the protagonists of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement. The fourth supplementary agreement to
that Agreement, known as Ouaga IV, has reversed the
priority between elections and the reunification of the
country. Under Ouaga III, which provided the political
framework for the electoral momentum in 2008,
elections were to take place before reunification. Under
Ouaga IV, to the contrary, the de facto reunification is
to take place before the elections.

Within the framework of Ouaga IV, the measures
to be taken at least two months prior to the elections
include, inter alia, the transfer of authority from zone
commanders to pre'fets, the centralization of the
treasury, the completion of the profiling and integration
of Forces nouvelles elements into the military, police,
gendarmerie and ex-combatants, and the payment of
about $1,000 to each ex-combatant and militiaman.
Those are tall orders. Consequently, any new electoral
timeline is now predicated on the progress of the
reunification process.

The experience of the year 2008 has proved that,
given the electoral management body's slow pace,
speedy progress in the electoral process would be
possible only if there were strong political
encouragement and urging. The events of 2009 so far
have confirmed such a pattern. For the past four
months, since the signing of Ouaga IV in December
2008, the protagonists of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement have been focusing on the reunification
issue. As a result, the electoral process has been
struggling with a slower pace, which has resulted in
further delays.

To repeat, progress in the electoral process is now
contingent upon the evolution of the reunification
issue. UNOCI has been assisting, as best it can, to
09-31542
move the reunification issue forward. Unfortunately,
however, critical elements of the reunification, such as
the transfer of authority from zone commanders to
prefets and the centralization of the treasury, are not
progressing as envisioned in Ouaga IV. Deadlines and
target dates have repeatedly been missed. The main
reason for that can be found in the difference in the
vision for and strategy of reunification among the
protagonists of the Ouagadougou Agreement. In sum,
as it stands now, the prospect for early elections and
reunification cannot be described as encouraging.

However, this rather sombre reality regarding
elections and reunification should not eclipse the
continuing positive developments that have occurred in
the field of peace and stability. In Cote d'Ivoire, we are
witnessing an ever higher degree of return to normalcy
of daily life, including of commercial activities. The
restoration of peace is also evident in that not a single
major incident has so far occurred in the identification
process, which to date has crossed the threshold of
6 million people.

In that respect, the contribution made by the
impartial forces in providing the general framework for
security is important. Yet, within that framework, it is
the Ivorian Government and the Ivorian people
themselves who have made the real difference with
their refined political culture of compromise. Although
hampered by the transitional and coalition nature of the
Government, various ministries and State institutions
remain in place, and there exist around 40,000 State
security forces, supported by about $200 million out of
a total annual budget of over $5 billion.

The international financial institutions have made
a positive move. Cote d'Ivoire has begun to benefit
from the financial support programme of the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Already in April 2009, a first batch of over $200
million of direct budget support was delivered to Cote
d'Ivoire. In addition, a Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries debt cancellation process for Cote d'Ivoire
has been initiated by the World Bank and the IMF.
Money being fungible, that input will lessen the
financial burden of the C6te d'Ivoire Government in
the field of elections and the identification process.

This complicated and mixed picture of the
Ivorian political and electoral map requires some hard
thinking on our part. It is now necessary for us to focus
our attention both on progress in the elections process
09-31542
and on the negotiations on reunification. The
international community and UNOCI, by Virtue of their
significant contribution, including my certification
mandate, have been deeply engaged in the electoral
process. On the other hand, in the field of
reunification, our involvement has been much less,
principally because of the sensitivity involved in
military and security matters.

Now that the electoral process is predicated on
the reunification issue, we may have to engage in some
deep reflection on the Ivorian reunification problem,
with a view to making some meaningful contribution to
the reunification of the country and, by extension,
accelerating the electoral process.

