Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to convey our
gratitude and appreciation to you for convening this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing
on the most recent developments in the region, and
welcome Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Foreign Minister of
Palestine. We wish to associate ourselves with the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, of Syria on
behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
and of the Sudan on behalf of the Arab Group.

We would like to focus in our statement on the
dangerous recent practices in the occupied Palestinian
territory and especially the city of Al-Quds, where
Israel has continued its illegal policy by confiscating
more land in Silwan and other Arab districts through
the creation of additional settlements in the Al-Jarrah
neighbourhood and the construction of the separation
wall that isolates Al-Quds from its natural
surroundings. These activities are aimed at Arab
citizens, who are then expelled and whose residency
permits are confiscated and homes destroyed.

Excavations are continuing, tunnels are being
bored under and around the Al-Aqsa mosque, and
Islamic civilization's heritage is being confiscated.
These provocative acts, which are ultimately aimed at
changing the demographic and legal status of Al-Quds
in a systematic and unprecedented way, are all likely to
increase tensions in the region and create a new reality
on the ground, undermining and indeed hindering any
possible progress in the peace process and towards the
two-State solution agreed by the international
community.

The Kingdom of Morocco, whose sovereign
chairs the Al-Quds Committee, has reiterated its
unreserved condemnation of the recent violations of
the Al-Aqsa mosque and other dangerous practices,
which run counter to the values of peaceful coexistence
and religious tolerance and constitute a rejection of
international resolutions and instruments.

His Majesty the King has drawn the attention of
influential international stakeholders to the dangers
arising from Israel's illegal practices. He has done so
to ensure that these countries fulfil their
responsibilities and intervene immediately to put an
end to these practices, including the violations of the
mosque's esplanade and other holy sites. His Majesty
is following developments in the situation closely and
is in constant communication with Arab and Islamic
leaders.

In the light of the daily suffering of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Al-Quds Committee
continues to back the resistance there through social
projects funded by the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif
Agency. To highlight the central importance of the
issue of Jerusalem in the context of the wider conflict
in the region, on 28 and 29 October the Al-Quds
Agency, in partnership with the Arafat institute, will
hold a workshop in Morocco on the subject of
Jerusalem. It will be sponsored by the King of
Morocco, with the participation of eminent academic
personalities, religious leaders, non-governmental
organizations and representatives of civil society.

Morocco continues to support the Arab Peace
Initiative as the definitive path to follow on this matter.
In addition to the role it plays in negotiations, the
Kingdom of Morocco takes an active part in the efforts
of the international community to advance the peace
process. We note with appreciation the intensification
of international efforts, and welcome the efforts of the
United States Administration to overcome the obstacles
to the peace process. We also welcome all other
international efforts in this area, including those of the
European Union. The Kingdom of Morocco hopes that
the recent endeavours of the United States special
envoy to the Middle East will lead to a resumption of
peace negotiations on the basis of existing agreements
between the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative, a
realistic initiative that reflects the genuine Arab will to
achieve a just and comprehensive solution in the
Middle East.

Peace in the Middle East is not the sole
responsibility of the parties to the conflict, as the
Permanent Representative of Australia affirmed earlier,
but an issue that the international community must also
address, because stability in the region has an impact
on international peace and security. That is why the
parties to the conflict must fulfil all their
responsibilities, alongside the international community,
and seize this historic opportunity to achieve peace in
the region.

With the support of the Arab Group and the
international community, the Palestinian National
Authority has worked to meet its international
obligations, acted boldly and made sacrifices, and has
fulfilled its commitments to the international
community. The Palestinian people should therefore be
able to enjoy the fruits of those promises instead of
having to watch Israel continue to question and
undermine all agreements and terms of reference upon
which the peace process is based. International efforts
to revitalize the peace process are being stepped up,
and in this regard the Kingdom of Morocco hopes that
the efforts of the brotherly country of Egypt will lead
to unification within Palestinian ranks for the benefit
of all sectors of Palestinian society.

We have also learned, with a great deal of
satisfaction, of the initiative of the Palestinian National
Authority aimed at laying the foundations necessary to
fulfilling the dream of the Palestinian people to live in
their own independent State, with Jerusalem as its
capital, side by side with Israel in peace and security.
We hope that this meeting will lead to measures and
initiatives that will alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinian people and open up new prospects for the
continuation of a genuine and comprehensive peace
process.
