Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs for his briefing and the Kingdom of
Jordan for requesting this meeting.

We firmly condemn the series of attacks and
clashes in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip in recent weeks that have killed and wounded both
Israelis and Palestinians. Such acts of extreme violence
testify to a polarized atmosphere whose tension must
be reduced. Chile appeals urgently to the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to act in ways conducive to
peace. In that regard, we feel it is important to insist
on the importance of respecting the agreements and
established practice concerning the use of and access to
the Temple Mount. The continuing policies ofexpanding
settlements are helping to undermine every effort to
reach a rapprochement and dialogue, and we are also
concerned about actions on the part of the authorities
that violate minimum standards of procedure and the
right to fair and dignified treatment.

We continue to maintain that a two-State solution is
the alternative that has the greatest potential for enabling
the peoples of both countries to live in peace. We
reiterate our conviction that it is impossible to continue
to pursue a negotiating process that rejects Palestine's
aspiration to exercise its right to self-determination and
denies Israel the necessary safeguards for its people.
If peace is to be achieved, reopening the dialogue is
a challenge that must be tackled. The Council must
contribute to that, and it has a responsibility to help
to create conditions that can foster trust between the
parties.

We believe it is crucial to ensure that the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, sends a signal in support of initiatives that
can pave the way for a peace process based on specific
parameters and a definite timetable. In that regard, we
will support proposals aimed at arriving at a basis for a
consensus that can advance the peace process.

