Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this regular meeting of the Security Council
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999).
10-47134
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier. The United Nations continues to be
an indispensable actor in the province. We believe it
critical for the Security Council to keep supporting
UNMIK as a strong pillar of peace and stability.

The United Nations status neutrality, and that of
all organizations that operate under its overall
authority, such as the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, remains the
framework within which all of us can work together to
improve the lives of ordinary people in Kosovo,
irrespective of their ethnicity. Disagreements on
broader issues notwithstanding, responsible
stakeholders should rededicate themselves to acting in
concert and in a status-neutral manner on practical
issues, including those that fall under the Secretary-
General's six-point plan welcomed by this Council.

Serbia highly appreciates the United Nations firm
commitment to maintaining the external representation
function of UNMIK. As the report under consideration
today makes clear, "as long as resolution 1244 (1999)
is in force, UNMIK will continue its facilitation"
(5/2010/40], para. 48) in multilateral forums. We
value UNMIK's role in enabling Pristina's dealings
with INTERPOL and the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission, for example. We also
support UNMIK's continued engagement with the
Council of Europe regarding various human rights
monitoring mechanisms and conventions as they apply
to Kosovo under resolution 1244 (1999), as well as its
work in the important area of missing persons.

The report highlights the fact that the "overall
numbers of returns [of internally displaced persons]
remain disappointingly low" (para. 51): 268 Kosovo
Serbs in four months, to be exact, out of a total of
205,835 expelled from the province since June 1999,
according to the official figures of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). The report also expresses the Secretary-
General's deep concern about the continuing
harassment of Kosovo Serbs who chose to return to
their south Kosovo homes in enclaves such as Zac. We
are troubled that, to quote the report, "Kosovo
Albanians in the receiving community refused to
accept Kosovo Serb returnees" (para. 34), and that this
has resulted in "physical attacks and protests" (Ibia') as
well as the "firing of automatic weapons" (para. 35),
5
despite the deterring presence of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR).

The precarious state of holy sites belonging to the
Serbian Orthodox Church continues to be a part of the
reality on the ground in south Kosovo. In addition to
long-standing, unresolved issues, such as the
restoration of the Decani monastery's cadastral record
and the paving over with concrete of the remains of the
twice-destroyed Serbian church in the centre of
Djakovica, new ones have unfortunately arisen. As the
report points out, "During the reporting period, several
Serbian cultural and religious sites were vandalized"
(para. 40).

KFOR's unique ability to maintain peace and
stability in the province remains acknowledged by all.
The report mentions the North Atlantic Council's
18 March decision to confer responsibility for static
security at the Gazimestan memorial to local police
units, despite strong opposition from my Government
and the Kosovo Serb community. Its more recent
decision to unfix its presence around four additional
Serbian holy sites-including the early fourteenth-
century Graeanica monastery, a UNESCO World
Heritage in Danger site, against the will of the
Government of Serbia and the Serbian Orthodox
Church, is deeply troubling. We hope that the
implementation timetable of these potentially
destabilizing developments will be revised in the light
of the increasingly tenuous conditions on the ground.

The report draws attention to the fact that the
situation in north Kosovo remains politically delicate.
Tensions rapidly increased as a result of a unilateral
attempt by Pristina to "establish their institutions"
(para. 16), as the report puts it, in the Serbian town of
north Mitrovica, by opening a so-called Kosovo
government office without the consent of the local
community, UNMIK or EULEX.

An emergency meeting of the Security Council
was convened on 6 July to address the tragedy that
took place there (see S/PV.6353). Our position on this
issue was clearly stated by our President during that
meeting and remains unaltered. Serbia welcomes
paragraph 50 of the Secretary-General's latest report,
which underlines the necessity of peaceful engagement
and "continuing consultation and coordination between
all relevant actors in order to avoid further
escalations in northern Kosovo". Serbia concurs with
the report's conclusion in the same paragraph that "any
other approach risks increasing instability and
furthering the divide between communities".

The Secretary-General has called on all sides to
commit to dialogue and transparency before any
strategies or policies are announced or implemented in
north Kosovo. The Republic of Serbia will continue to
strongly oppose any unilateralism. We will remain
committed to the inclusive approach suggested by the
report, in order to address the outstanding challenges
related to Kosovo. We expect all other stakeholders to
do the same.

On 17 February 2008, the ethnic Albanian
authorities of Serbia's breakaway province of Kosovo
and Metohija unilaterally declared independence,
against the will of the Security Council and in
contravention of my country's Constitution. More than
two years later, an agreement between the parties on
the effects of the unilateral declaration of independence
(UDI) has not been reached. From the very onset of
this grave crisis, the Republic of Serbia responded to
the UDI in a non-confrontational manner. We will
continue to use all diplomatic resources at the disposal
of a sovereign State to oppose this attempt to forcibly
change our borders in peacetime. No peaceful and
proud nation facing such a threat - be it African,
European, Asian or American; be it small or large, rich
or poor - would act differently.

Serbia will under no circumstances implicitly or
explicitly recognize Kosovo's UDI. That is our
constitutional imperative, as well as a political and
moral duty conferred on us by the overwhelming
democratic will of our citizens. A substantial majority
of United Nations Member States - and of States
seated on this Council - have continued to respect
Serbia's sovereignty and territorial integrity. On behalf
of my nation, I would like to reiterate our deep
gratitude for their support and solidarity and urge them
to maintain their principled position not to recognize
Kosovo.

In October 2008, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 63/3, seeking the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the lawfulness of
Pristina's UDI. The Court has now delivered its
findings. The Court clearly reaffirmed that Kosovo
remains subject to the interim administration of the
United Nations, and that resolution 1244 (1999) and
UNMIK's Constitutional Framework for Provisional
Self-Government in Kosovo remain in force and
continue to apply. It is therefore evident that the
province is still a territory subject to an international
regime mandated by the Security Council. Moreover,
the Court endorsed neither the view that Kosovo's UDI
was a unique case nor Pristina's claim that Kosovo is a
State. Lastly, the Court failed to approve the province's
avowed right of secession from Serbia or any purported
right to self-determination for Kosovo's ethnic
Albanians. Nothing contained in the advisory opinion
changes the fundamental parameters set forth in
resolution 1244 (1999) by the Security Council, whose
centrality and leading role in a final settlement of the
Kosovo issue remains paramount in accordance with its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, as set forth in the United Nations Charter.

The Court opted to narrowly examine the
language of the unilateral declaration of independence.
Such a strictly technical approach enabled a conclusion
that the declaration itself did not violate international
law. This has unfortunately left room for a dangerous
misinterpretation of the Court's view as having
legalized the ethnic Albanians' attempt at unilateral
secession.

This could produce extensive and deeply
problematic consequences for the international
community. It could become the decisive step in
legitimizing unilateralism on the global stage, which
this Council, and the entire United Nations system for
that matter, were created to oppose. The safeguards
written into the 1945 Charter against the arbitrary use
of force would be downgraded in practice, producing a
heightened sense of insecurity throughout the world.
Nations would have fewer incentives to come together
in setting and implementing a common agenda.
Collective efforts to strengthen a rules-based,
multilateral approach to the maintenance of peace and
security would be significantly undermined, adversely
affecting developing countries most of all.

Additionally, a misinterpretation of the Court's
views could easily provide some ethnic minorities
around the globe with an opportunity to write their own
declarations of independence according to Kosovo's
textual template. That would put them in a position to
plausibly claim that such texts sufficiently legitimize
their respective acts of secession for their proclaimed
independence to be taken as not violating international
law.
10-47134
I believe we all share a duty to prevent the
inherent dangers of such scenarios from becoming a
reality. Otherwise, the borders of every multiethnic
country would be permanently threatened by
secessionism, producing lasting instability throughout
the world. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has
stated in his report, the General Assembly "will
determine how to proceed on this matter" (para. 55).

To that end, Serbia has submitted a draft
resolution. The forthcoming debate will inevitably
focus on the consequences and implications of
Kosovo's UDI in the light of the Court's findings.
Member States will have an opportunity to come
together and make a critical contribution to global
governance by uniting around a clear and resolute
message. Otherwise, the stage would be set for the
establishment of a universally applicable precedent that
provides a ready-made model for unilateral secession.

The Republic of Serbia is committed to working
with Pristina and the international community on
finding a mutually acceptable solution to all
outstanding issues through peaceful dialogue. I believe
that we should engage as soon as possible. The sooner
we do, the less there is a likelihood of producing an
outcome that is surely not in anyone's interest, least of
all Serbia's - the long-term freezing of Kosovo's
limbo.

We do not seek a confrontation with anybody, but
equally, there must be no doubt that we shall not give
in and simply walk away. This is not about
stubbornness, acrimony, revisionism or wanting to be a
nuisance. It is about the fact that we have no choice but
to persevere in a peaceful and dignified manner, for
Kosovo directly relates to the very essence of our
identity.

Moreover, it is also about the fact that zero-sum
outcomes - where one side gets everything, while the
other gets nothing - are intrinsically unstable.
Attempts to impose unilateral solutions have never
contributed to the stability of the Balkans or that of the
rest of Europe. The historical record is unambiguous. A
durable settlement has never been the product of
compulsion; it has always necessitated consent.

It is therefore inconceivable that a UDI could
become the basis for the normalization of relations
between Serbs and Albanians. Lasting prosperity will
be achieved only after everyone finally comes to
appreciate that the defeat of one is in truth a loss for
all.

There is no perfect solution, but there must be an
equitable one to which we can all agree - one that
will enable us to move forward and ensure the
consolidation of the gains the region has made in the
past decade. We shall keep working incessantly until a
compromise on Kosovo is found.

Time and again, this Government of Serbia has
demonstrated its capacity to engage with our partners
in overcoming lingering prejudices and points of
disagreement. Even on the most challenging issues, we
have found ways to work together. Our sustained
efforts have made the Western Balkans more stable and
secure, with key bilateral relationships in our part of
the world showing visible signs of improvement. These
achievements have taken place in the midst of a
renewed impetus to complete the process of full
reconciliation. Serbia's compelling track record of
good will has helped to advance common strategic
priorities and to building up the regional level of trust
to an all-time high.

We remain deeply committed to European Union
membership. This will continue to be our central
strategic priority. Serbia believes that its achievement
is the surest way to complete the democratic
transformation of the Balkans. Undoubtedly, this will
require leadership and imagination, as well as the
courage to reach beyond the present divisions. There
are those who still mistakenly insist that we be defined
by our differences. Serbia is adamant in maintaining
that we be defined by the shared destiny of all
European nations and by the values we should all
embrace.

Amongst the most basic of these is the
renunciation of unilateralism as a means of resolving
conflicts in Europe. The project to bind in peace and
consent the States of the old continent has brought to
an end centuries of war and destruction. On the way
towards achieving this, many creative solutions have
been found for bridging seemingly unbridgeable
divides. What all those had in common was the fact
that they were built on the basis of the consensus
principle. The challenge before us cannot be resolved
differently.

We should therefore brace ourselves to undertake
a bold course of action, and so bear ourselves that, by
working together in good faith, we make sure that
8
Kosovo is removed from the list of world's problems
once and for all. If we succeed, we will have made a
historic contribution to a stable Balkans, a united
continent and a safer world.

