Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank the President of the Security Council
for allowing us to take the floor in the Council for
the second time this month, and the delegation of the
United Kingdom, penholder on the Yemeni dossier,
for its efforts. We also thank the delegation of the
United States of America for its support to and interest
in Yemen. On my own behalf and that of the people
and Government of Yemen, I thank and commend the
delegation of the State of Kuwait, which is an authentic
Arab voice in the Council. I also thank the States of
the coalition for their firm and principled position for
Yemen, its territory and its people.

The Government of my country commends the
unified position that the members of the Security
Council have taken since the start of the Yemeni crisis.
We hope that this position will endure until we have
achieved lasting peace, put an end to the coup d'etat
and implemented all Security Council resolutions. This
will ensure that the Yemeni people can finally see the
resolutions implemented on the ground.

The Republic of Yemen welcomes the Security
Council's adoption today of resolution 2451 (2018),
which reaffirms the international community's
position with regard to Yemen's unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity and stresses the importance of
achieving a comprehensive political solution based on
the three agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism; the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference; and relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015).

The Republic of Yemen also welcomes the call
on the parties to implement the Stockholm agreement
pursuant to the timelines determined therein, including
the withdrawal of Houthi militias from the city of
Al-Hudaydah and the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa ports, while implementing the exchange
of prisoners and detainees and the declaration of
understanding on the city of Taiz.

In that regard, the Yemeni Government reaffirms
that, from the outset and based on the guidelines of the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, it presented numerous
proposals during the Stockholm consultations with a
view to alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Those proposals included the reopening of Sana'a
airport for domestic flights through Aden International
Airport, as well as proposals pertaining to the support
of its financial institutions and the Central Bank of
Yemen in Aden in order to enable it to pay the salaries
of all civil servants in accordance with the December
2014 payrolls. Nonetheless, the stubbornness of the
Houthi militias prevented that from happening. The
international community should have condemned the
Houthis who carried out the coup d'e'tat supported
by Iran.

The Government of Yemen reaffirms its full
commitment to implementing the Stockholm agreement.
It calls on the international community to monitor the
violations by the coup party, seeking to impede the
agreement. The Government of Yemen is also ready to
work constructively, alongside the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, to implement all points
of the Stockholm agreement.

The Government of Yemen sees no point in holding
new rounds of consultations until the Houthi militias
withdraw from the city and port of Al-Hudaydah, the
legitimate authority of the Government is restored
and its hierarchy is respected, in accordance with
Yemeni law, as stipulated in Stockholm agreement on
Al-Hudaydah.

