Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour and a privilege to have the President
of the Republic of Togo guiding this debate. Your
participation, Sir, and that of the Vice-Prime Minister
of Luxembourg, several Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, the representatives of Council members, and
Mr. Abdullahi Shehu of the Integovernmental Action
Group against Money Laundering in West Africa attest
to the importance and timeliness of the proposed topic.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
participation and informative briefing.

As we recognize in the presidential statement
that we have just adopted (S/PRST/2013/5), terrorism
continues to pose a serious threat to peace and security,
the enjoyment of human rights, and the social and
economic development of States. In the case of Africa
in particular, terrorism undermines its stability and
prosperity. This threat has become more diffuse
and developed increasingly complex operational
mechanisms in response to the growing vigilance of the
international community. Acts of terrorism, including
those motivated by intolerance and extremism of all
stripes, are on the rise. Argentina condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. At the same time, we
are convinced that the general framework in which we
seek any response to that situation must always include
absolute respect for international law, international
humanitarian law, international human rights law
and be within the purposes and aims enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

The tragic Argentinian experience with State
terrorism, which gave rise to massive and systematic
human rights violations, has led us to develop State
policies with regard to various aspects of human rights,
in particular those related to memory, truth, justice and
reparations, as well as to the gradual development of
the right to truth.
Furthermore, Argentina has suffered directly from
international terrorism, having been the victim of two
very serious terrorists attacks in the city of Buenos
Aires, one in 1992 against the Israeli Embassy and the
other in 1994 against the headquarters ofthe Argentinian
Israelite Mutual Association. That experience has
reaffirmed our conviction that terrorism must be fought
within the framework of the rule of law and with total
respect for fundamental freedoms. We have no doubts
in that regard, and that is why we firmly reject the idea
that human rights violations are acceptable in certain
circumstances.

Our country, in its fight against illicit trafficking
and human trafficking and in the field of migration,
has legislation and policies that do not criminalize or
discriminate for any reason against immigrants. We
recognize that migration is a human right. That still
means that we must have an effective policy at the
border so as to control illicit trafficking in drugs and
weapons. We have made progress in establishing solid
normative frameworks and public policies, which have
led to certain achievements. We have also developed
regional strategies at the level of the Common Market
of the South (MERCOSUR) and the Union of South
American Nations, because we understand that the
efforts ofnational States are essential. The commitment
of the region and of the international community is also
crucial.

Terrorism cannot be dissociated from the growing
complexity of the international reality, and that is why
it is crucial that its complexity be approached within
the framework of a comprehensive multilateral effort
based on coordination and cooperation between States
in order to effectively prevent and combat the scourge.
The fight against terrorism requires, first of all, a firm
commitment on the part of every State to combat terrorist
acts at the national level, to not provide assistance to
the perpetrators of or participants in activities related
to terrorism, and to strengthen national legislation that
promotes the prosecution or extradition of terrorists.

In addition, at the global level within the
framework of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, a comprehensive approach to the
matter would strengthen joint efforts, with regard to the
conditions that lead to the spread of terrorism and its
financing. Terrorist acts cannot be justified by religious
or ethnic differences, nor by economic circumstances.
Nonetheless, tolerance and the operation of the rule
of law with full social inclusion and dignified work
provide an environment that would help prevent the
spread of terrorism and help us to combat it. Behind
every terrorist act there is usually a problem of cultural,
political, social, ethnic or religious marginalization,
often with a fundamentalist component, the growth
of which over time offers fertile ground for the
development of terrorism.

Furthermore, in the case of Africa, as we see in the
presidential statement adopted today(S/PRST/2013/5),
terrorism endangers the efforts of African States
to promote economic and social development. The
countries of the region need to dedicate resources to
development without being forced to divert them to
the fight against terrorism. In that regard, the situation
in the Sahel region is very telling. On the one hand,
in order to have development, we need to have basic
security and stability without the threat of terrorism. At
the same time, however, in order to achieve minimum
stability, we need a comprehensive and integrated
approach. In that regard, I welcome the comments
made by the Secretary-General, who referred to the
need to have a comprehensive United Nations strategy
for the Sahel region that would encompass security,
governance, development and respect for human rights,
as well as humanitarian issues.

We need coordinated action between States in
the region, which would make it possible to tackle the
activities of terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad
in West Africa, and Ansar Dine, and to fight illicit
drug trafficking as well as trafficking in small arms
and light weapons. The extensive land and sea borders
are a particular challenge for us in fighting against the
activities of such groups, which highlights the need for
support from the international community for national
capacity-building.

There is also great concern over the repeated
attacks that have taken place in some African countries,
including those that have targeted United Nations
offices, such as the August 2011 against the United
Nations Office in Abuja. In particular, when it comes
to the trafficking in small arms and light weapons, we
understand that the Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by the
General Assembly on 2 April, could make an important
contribution to preventing the diversion of weapons
towards such terrorist groups.

In Africa, as in many other regions of the world,
the fight against terrorism requires structural changes
that would bring an end to poverty, exclusion and
marginalization, factors that are conducive to the
development of terrorism. We need cooperation and
coordination from the international community in
order to tackle the problem. We also need a global
economic system that is based on equity, which would
provide responses to many of the deep-rooted causes of
the scourge. Likewise, as we also see in the presidential
statement, the efforts of the international community
to combat terrorism must be complemented by efforts
at the regional and subregional levels, as well as those
of specialized agencies, to promote cooperation in
matters of global interest. Every region and subregion
has its particularities, and, as in many other issues,
when it comes to terrorism, subregional and regional
cooperation is a crucial element in providing a
comprehensive and broad response to that scourge.

In the case ofour region, through the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism, we have developed
several programmes to exchange information and best
practices in the area. Likewise, in MERCOSUR, through
a specialized counter-terrorism forum, information
is exchanged on legislation, control measures and
the harmonization of standards so as to enable better
coordination in the countries of the subregion.

In the African continent, Argentina supports the
steps taken by African countries at the national and
regional levels to combat terrorism. In that regard,
we reaffirm the need to work jointly with the African
Union to implement cooperation.

Within a broader framework, but still closely related
to the situation in the African continent, we believe that
peacekeeping operations are not an effective tool in the
fight against terrorism. The use of force in an offensive
fashion would go against the three essential principles
of peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the use of force only in self-defence
or for the purposes of the mandate. Furthermore, we
understand that allowing peacekeeping operations
to use force offensively with a view to combatting
the actions of terrorist elements could transform the
United Nations into a participant in an asymmetrical
internal conflict, undermining the Organization's
legitimacy and endangering its personnel working on
humanitarian issues, in development and in human
rights protection. In any case, the inclusion of the
peacemaking dimension in peacekeeping operations
requires thorough discussion and responsibility.

For Argentina, it is clear that the issue requires a
comprehensive debate, where all of the Members of the
United Nations would participate and where we could
assess the elements that the Organization would need in
order to tackle such situations.

Within the framework of the Council, African
issues are the ones that take up most of our analysis
and discussion. Generally speaking, we tend to focus
on conflict situations and other aspects that are not
so positive. Nevertheless, Argentina is convinced
that much progress has been achieved by African
States, the African Union and other subregional
organizations in conflict-prevention, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. Africa has also made progress when
it comes to promoting and protecting human rights,
in strengthening democracy, the rule of law and the
constitutional order. Argentina strongly supports this
process, and we offer all of our experience of recent
years and our cooperation in combating this scourge.

In the same sense, we believe it important to
identify the prevailing challenges facing Africa in the
fight against terrorism. At the same time, we recognize
the broad progress that has been made, including the
large number of ratifications of international counter-
terrorism instruments, the adoption of legislation on
terrorist financing, the progress made on border control,
the increased cooperation and coordination among the
States in the region, and progress in upholding human
rights in the fight against terrorism.

Important progress has been made, but there are
still a number of challenges in the fight ahead, both
in Africa and at the international level. Solidarity
and cooperation in the context of full respect for the
sovereignty of States remain our best tools.

