Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks the delegation of the Russian Federation for
organizing this topical debate. We are especially
appreciative of the concept note (S/2014/384, annex)
provided to guide our discussions today, and we
welcome the opportunity to share our perspectives
on this very timely subject. We also want to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General, not
only for his statement, but especially for his abiding
commitment to peacekeeping.

The concept note that you have provided,
Mr. President, identifies at least six distinct new
trends in peacekeeping, and 1 would like to mention
them in their order: the nature of conflicts, which
is changing from inter-State to intra-State; robust
mandates characterized by the use of pre-emptive force
and targeted offensive operations; the deployment of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in parallel
with foreign military forces, both national and
regional; the technical strengthening of United Nations
peacekeeping operations through the use of high-
technology equipment; the operational strengthening
of United Nations peacekeeping operations through
inter-mission cooperation; and the greater complexity
of contemporary multidimensional mandates.

Since the end of the cold war in the 1990s, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have undergone
substantial changes from the classical concept
of peacekeeping, which entailed impartiality, a
non-combative posture, intervening with the consent of
the warring parties and the prior existence of a peace
agreement or ceasefire. That is principally because, in
the post-cold-war era, conflicts have moved from being
largely inter-State to being intra-State. The nature of
those intra-State conflicts is such that there is often
no ceasefire or peace agreement in place before a
peacekeeping operation is deployed. The dynamics of
the conflict make it difficult or indeed impossible to
achieve a ceasefire.

As those conflicts often present a threat to
international peace and security, the international
community cannot be bystanders without taking
action. That has led to a situation where, as indicated
in the concept note, peacekeeping operations have been
deployed in theatres with elevated risks, where there is
little or no peace to keep and where peacekeepers face
unconventional threats and greater risks to their safety.
In such situations, the classical model of peacekeeping
would prove inadequate and almost ineffective.
A major concern arising from the new trends
in United Nations peacekeeping operations relates
to the well-being of peacekeepers, who have been
increasingly subjected to harsh and risky conditions
while they are required to serve as a protective force. In
several instances, troops and their civilian counterparts
have been fired upon, abducted or ambushed. Some
have, in the course of carrying out their mandates, had
their weapons seized and yet others have been killed
by armed groups. Peacekeepers have also been attacked
through the use of improvised explosive devices.

The changing dynamics in the peacekeeping
environment and the concerns of troop- and
police-contributing countries for the safety of their
personnel have led to the approval of more robust
mandates for peacekeeping operations. That is
illustrated in the adoption of resolutions 1933 (2010),
2098 (2013) and 2100 (2013), which respectively
empowered the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to undertake pre-emptive measures to fulfil their
mandates, including the use of force. The robust
mandates given to peacekeeping missions exemplify
the Council's determination to meet the new challenges
in peacekeeping operations.

One significant new trend in peacekeeping is the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in parallel with foreign military forces already on the
ground. The military forces may be from one country or
may be deployed by a regional organization involving
personnel from its member States. Examples of that
can be seen in Mali, where French forces have been
deployed since January 2013 under Operation Serval.
The United Nations peacekeeping force MINUSMA
was later deployed in July 2013 to replace the African-
led International Support Mission in Mali and operates
side by side with the French forces under separate
commands. Resolution 2100 (2013), which established
MINUSMA, authorized the French forces under
Operation Serval to intervene, upon the request of the
Secretary-General, in support of MINUSMA when the
Mission is under serious and imminent threat. Thus
far, MINUSMA and the French forces have worked
together to restore peace to areas previously seized
by rebel groups, and in the process, they have made
very significant progress in the protection of civilians,
which is a primary concern for the Council.

Another example of where a United Nations
peacekeeping operation will be working in parallel
with regional forces is in the Central African Republic.
In that case, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), which was established by
resolution 2149 (2014) of April 2014 to replace the
African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA) on 15 September
2014, will work side by side with Operation Sangaris,
made up of French forces. Operation Sangaris has
been deployed in the Central African Republic since
December 2013 with the aim of working with MISCA
to restore security, protect civilians and stabilize the
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic.
When MINUSCA is eventually deployed, in September
2015, Operation Sangaris will have been on the ground
for nine months. The particular situation in Central
African Republic is that MINUSCA will also have
to work in parallel with another international force,
namely the European Union force, which is made up of
personnel from France and Estonia.

One of the new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping operations is the use of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), or drones. While some members
have concerns about the use of UAVs in peacekeeping
missions, we believe that modern technology should
rightly be considered as we seek solutions to the
evolving challenges of peacekeeping. We share the
View of Under-Secretary-General Ladsous that the
United Nations cannot continue to work with twentieth-
century tools in the twenty-first century.

As has been noted, drones could be use to reduce
the risk on the ground for United Nations peacekeepers.
That is significant when we consider the fact that 106
United Nations peacekeepers died in 2013, and another
22 civilians lost their lives, while serving in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. According to the

United Nations, an average of one United Nations
peacekeeper is killed every 30 days. UAVs could make
it possible to reduce the number of peacekeepers on
the ground. The implication of that is that it could also
potentially help to reduce the number of peacekeepers
and civilians killed in peacekeeping missions.

Another critical way in which drones could
contribute to making peacekeeping operations more
effective is in the area of surveillance. A drone
operating silently at several thousand metres above the
ground can observe and transmit images in real time
to its controllers on the ground. That translates into
real-time information, which in certain circumstances
could allow for the kind of rapid response that makes
the difference between life and death or allow for
monitoring the movements of combatants in conflict
situations. Drones could also help in the protection of
civilians, especially those displaced by conflict. The
benefits derived from the use of drones, in our view,
make the case for their sustained application in the
context of peacekeeping operations.

Inter-mission cooperation has been aptly described
as a tool that enables the United Nations to fill critical
gaps in personnel and/or equipment in situations, such as
humanitarian crisis or other emergencies. That has been
the practice since June 2005 when the Security Council
adopted resolution 1609 (2005), which authorized the
temporary redeployment of personnel between the
peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, Cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia. Subsequently, the Council approved
inter-mission cooperation in resolution 1951 (2010) of
November 2010 between the United Nations Mission in
Liberia and UNOCI and resolution 1650 (2005) between
the United Nations Operation in Burundi and MONUC
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In recent
times, we have seen units redeployed to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan from United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Haiti, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Darfur within
the framework of inter-mission cooperation.

While acknowledging the progress that has been
made by the United Nations, we believe that a coherent
standardized training programme for current and
prospective peacekeeping contingents on inter-mission
cooperation is very essential to overcoming the
challenges in inter-mission cooperation and to ensure
that all forces have a common understanding of their
critical role in the process.

United Nations peacekeeping mandates have
transformed from simple ceasefire monitoring and
have become multidimensional. That in effect requires
peacekeeping operations to carry out multiple tasks
usually under very challenging circumstances.
Those tasks, as we know, range from disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration to peacebuilding,
nation-building, the setting up of institutions of rule of
law, the strengthening of human rights protection, the
protection of civilians, the promotion of democracy and
good governance, as well as promoting security sector
reforms. Peacekeeping operations are now staffed with
child protection advisers, gender advisers, experts in
planning elections and a broad range of other personnel
with expertise in various fields. In light of the resource
constraints faced by peacekeeping operations, it would
seem logical for the United Nations to prioritize the
various mandates in a multidimensional operation
and accord the greatest priority to the most urgent and
attainable tasks.

Experience shows that multidimensional
peacekeeping operations face challenges in terms of
the technical expertise required to comprehensively
implement effective peacebuilding programmes.
Achieving that will require that efforts are undertaken
by troop-contributing countries to conduct specific
training and scenario-based exercises aimed
at enhancing the capacity of multidimensional
peacekeeping missions to deliver on peacebuilding
programmes. We endorse the View that there should
be a sequencing of tasks in multidimensional missions
with the utmost priority accorded to the most important
mandate of peacekeepers, which is the protection of
civilians.

We believe that the time is ripe for a deepening
synergy between the Security Council and United
Nations Member States, particularly the troop- and
police-contributing countries, for a more cohesive
mandate design. We take this opportunity to pay tribute
to peacekeeping personnel who have lost their lives in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We are in
their great debt, and the greatest tribute we believe
we can pay them is to attempt to beat our swords into
plowshares.

