Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the convening of this open meeting
on Afghanistan. China also welcomes the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, at the meeting. We also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing.

Peace and stability in Afghanistan have a direct
bearing on the fundamental interests of the Afghan
people, as well as on regional security, stability,
development and prosperity. China applauds the
efforts of the Afghan Government in safeguarding
national stability, facilitating national reconciliation
and promoting economic development. China
underscores the important role that neighbouring and
regional countries playon the question of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan continues to face a number of political,
economic and security challenges. In order to
help Afghanistan overcome such challenges, the
international community should continue to provide
firm support in the following areas.

First, maintaining peace and stability constitutes
the basis of Afghanistan's reconstruction and economic
development. The international community should
continue to support the capacity of the Afghan national
security forces and contribute to the country's ability
to defend itself so that Afghanistan can effectively
respond to threats, such as terrorism, transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking. We support an
active role by the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) and other actors in helping Afghanistan fight
terrorism. The international community should step up
its coordination and cooperation in combating terrorist
elements in Afghanistan.

Secondly, political dialogue is the only viable
solution for the question of Afghanistan. Actors in
Afghanistan should put the country's long-term interests
and their people's welfare first and actively participate
in the reconciliation process. The international
community should continue to promote the realization
of a broad, inclusive political settlement that is Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned. Furthermore, the international
community should engage all Afghan parties concerned
for the early launch of peace talks. We welcome the
assistance provided by relevant regional countries and
mechanisms.

Thirdly, strengthening governance is an important
guarantee for Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction
process. Ultimately, Afghan affairs should be handled
by the Afghan people themselves. All political actors
in Afghanistan must achieve unity and resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultations. The
international community must fully respect the right
of the Afghan people to independently choose their
political system and development path. Moreover, on the
basis of Afghanistan's national development strategy
and actual needs, the international community should
provide targeted assistance to the Afghan Government
to improve its capacity to govern.

Fourthly, integration into regional development
constitutes an important path towards the achievement
of peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan. The
international community must make good on its
pledges to provide assistance and support Afghanistan
in promoting economic and social development. With
its unique resources and geographical advantages,
Afghanistan enjoys great prospects for regional
cooperation efforts. Resolution 2344 (2017) and the
relevant General Assembly resolutions stipulate that
all parties must create a community of a common
future in the spirit of cooperation and principle of
win-win, and promote the economic development of
Afghanistan and regional cooperation through the Belt
and Road Initiative.

China has taken note of the Secretary-General's
special report (S/2017/696) on the strategic review of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), officially submitted in August pursuant to
resolution 2344 (2017). We hope that, through the review,
the United Nations will be able to further optimize and
re-prioritize the tasks of the Mission in accordance
with the current situation, maximize the allocation
of resources, improve the management processes and
enhance the Mission's ability to deal with complex
situations. China commends the work carried out by
UNAMA and hopes that the Mission will respect the
sovereignty, leading role and ownership of Afghanistan,
continue to facilitate the political reconciliation process
and promote the economic development of the country.
Furthermore, China hopes that UNAMA will play a
positive role in helping Afghanistan to restore stability,
promote national reconciliation, improve governance
and promote economic development.

China will continue to support the work of
UNAMA. China has always played a constructive
role in promoting the reconciliation process in
Afghanistan. During a recent visit to Afghanistan
and Pakistan by Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang
Yi, the three countries agreed to establish a trilateral
foreign ministers' dialogue mechanism, support
the relaunch of the Afghanistan-Pakistan-China-
United States Quadrilateral Coordination Group
and the reactivatation of the International Shanghai
Cooperation Organization Afghanistan Contact Group.
Afghanistan and Pakistan also agreed to establish a
bilateral crisis-management mechanism. China will
continue to support Afghanistan's security capacity-
building as well as the country's efforts to promote
economic and social development. China stands ready
to work together with the international community for
the early realization of peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan.
