Mr. Ajawin (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
congratulate you, Madam, and the United Republic of
Tanzania on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. As this is the first
time that I have addressed the Council, I wish to
express our gratitude for the interest that the Council
has consistently devoted to my country, the Sudan,
since the negotiations began in Kenya and since the
Council visited Nairobi last November to provide
impetus to the peace process, and for the role played by
the United Nations in implementing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. On behalf of the
Government of National Unity, I assure the Council of
our serious commitment to implementing the Peace
Agreement and making it a reality not only in the
south, but throughout the Sudan. That will promote
stability and peace in the Great Lakes region and on
the continent as a whole.

There can be no doubt that the issue we are
discussing at today's meeting - peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region - has been of
great importance to international peace and security for
decades. This region, in the heart of Africa, has
endured a number of conflicts and civil wars. The
Sudan is an integral part of the region and is inevitably
influenced by any positive or negative developments in
its other States. Therefore, we have participated in all
meetings concerning the region since the Security
Council, in 1994, supported the holding, under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity of an international conference on the
Great Lakes region, through the holding of the Dar es-
Salaam Summit in November 2004 and the adoption of
the Dar es-Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.

The Declaration, adopted by the heads of State or
Government, is a programme of action covering all
priority areas, including the establishment of lasting
peace through regional efforts aimed at ending
conflicts and establishing conflict prevention and
monitoring mechanisms. Led by the United Nations
and the African Union, the rest of the international
community and other partners and friends of the Great
Lakes region must also become involved.

We welcome the consensus on collective regional
cooperation and are optimistic that, through such joint
regional and international efforts, we will be able to
consolidate lasting peace and dispel the mistrust and
suspicion among the region's countries, mentioned in
the second paragraph of the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration. Now we will be able to focus on other
tasks. We urge the international community to
strengthen national and regional capacity, in particular
that of African forces, through the provision of
financing and equipment so that they can shoulder their
responsibility to put an end to conflicts and disputes.
In addition, there are other pressing concerns.
First, strengthening the principles of democracy and
good governance in the region will lay the foundation
for balanced and sustainable development and
institution-building. That will help to ensure peaceful
coexistence among the States of the region, which in
turn will pave the way for bilateral and regional
cooperation regarding the refugee situation and the
ongoing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) efforts in a number of countries.

We must combat trafficking in small arms and
light weapons and prevent the circulation of such
weapons among non-State actors. We must also combat
transnational organized crime. That will further
strengthen trust among States of the region, thereby
helping us turn the page and put an end to conflicts. It
will allow us also to exploit our natural resources for
development, undertake joint projects for economic
cooperation and pursue other joint efforts.

Peace and security go hand in hand, in particular
in a region such as the Great Lakes region, which
historically has gone through periods of instability. The
Dar es-Salaam summit, held last year, outlined four
major areas for action: peace and security; democratic
governance and economic development; regional
integration; and humanitarian and social issues. It
paved the way for a second summit, which was to have
been held in 2005, to devise implementation measures
with respect to those areas of concern - hence the
importance of support on the part of the international
community and of international agencies in those
areas. The goal is to build on the advances towards
peace made in some regions and to resolve some
persistent causes of tension.

The goal is to bring about a culture of peace and
cooperation, in keeping with the preamble of the
UNESCO Constitution, which states that: "Since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men
that the defences of peace must be constructed."

The draft resolution before the Council today
reflects the strong support of the Security Council for
the achievement of peace, security and development in
the region. A time frame must be set for monitoring
and follow-up with respect to the measures undertaken
on the basis of the priorities mentioned earlier, so that
we can work together. Indeed, there have been some
positive developments in some areas of the region,
primarily in Burundi and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We hope that the draft resolution that is
before the members of the Security Council will lead to
a more committed and effective involvement by the
United Nations to ensure peace, security and
sustainable development in the Great Lakes region.

