Mr. Roux: On behalf of INTERPOL, I would like
to commend Spain for convening this timely high-level
open debate. I would also like to thank and congratulate
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), with Spain as its Chair, as well as its
Group of Experts, for their relentless efforts during
the comprehensive review process, crowned by the
production ofthe final report on the 2016 comprehensive
review and the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016).

During the most recent open consultations of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), last June, INTERPOL emphasized that the
threat of the use of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear (CBRN) materials by terrorist groups,
criminals and other non-State actors was real and had
today become one of the most significant challenges
to public safety and security on a global scale. This
alarming reality was affirmed in the final report on the
2016 comprehensive review, which refers to the

"increasing risks of proliferation in relation
to non-State actors arising from developments
in terrorism".

More disturbingly, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons recently confirmed
that Da'esh had used chemical weapons in Iraq
and developed a programme to make improvised
chemical weapons.

In 2010, in response to the growing concern about
the illicit trafficking in CBRN materials, INTERPOL
launched a comprehensive CBRN terrorism-prevention
and response effort to support its 190 member countries.
Since then, INTERPOL has been supporting its
member countries in countering non-State-actor-based
CBRN threats, in accordance with its mandate and
Constitution. Our activities range from data analysis,
multi-agency capacity-building and countermeasure
programmes, to regional cross-border operations,
resulting in the arrest of traffickers and the seizure of
illegally trafficked CBRN materials.

In a clear sign of committing to sustainably
assisting its 190 member countries in the prevention
of and response to CBRN terrorism, INTERPOL has
identified the following four actionable objectives in
its recently adopted global counter-terrorism strategy:
first, to facilitate intelligence-sharing and threat
analysis among member countries on subjects and
modus operandi linked to CBRN incidents; secondly, to
enhance the capacity of our member countries to prevent
and respond to CBRN by assisting them in establishing
countermeasure programmes; thirdly, to design and
coordinate cross-border intelligence-led inter-agency
operations to intercept the illicit trafficking in CBRN
materials; and, finally, to maintain and develop strategic
CBRN partnerships on a global scale. INTERPOL
will continue to adopt a dual-track global engagement
policy to maintain and establish sustainable bilateral
partnership frameworks with relevant international
partner agencies and further consolidate its integration
within major relevant multinational frameworks.

Against that backdrop, we were particularly
pleased by the reference made in the final report to
the enhanced cooperation between INTERPOL and
the 1540 Committee. Indeed, INTERPOL has been
regularly exchanging official letters with the 1540
Committee, outlining the terms of their collaboration
and establishing respective points of contact. We
believe that further strengthening of the points-of-
contact network would only benefit the enhancement
of interaction and coordination between the Committee
and international organizations. Since the launch of
INTERPOL's CBRN capacity, most of the activities
conducted have been supporting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), making INTERPOL an active
1540 assistance provider agency.

In the light of the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), INTERPOL is looking forward to consolidating
and continuing to play its role within the framework of a
strengthened assistance mechanism, a mechanism that
makes resolution 1540 (2004) the main global umbrella
under which relevant activities are given priority, new
initiatives are systematically launched and successful
matchmaking opportunities between donors and
assistance providers ultimately result in concrete and
effective support to member countries.

