Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on the situation
in the Middle East and to welcome him to the Security
Council.

Since the Security Council's previous discussions
on the Middle East, the situation in the region has
remained at the centre of the international community's
attention. With the 11 May ministerial-level meeting of
the Council (see S/PV.6123), the Trieste meeting of the
Quartet of Middle East mediators and the Group of
Eight (G-8) summit in L'Aquila, the international legal
basis for the peace process has been reaffirmed,
primarily the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Road Map. The significance
of the Arab Peace Initiative has been noted. The
importance of the two-State principle has been voiced.

All those key provisions were also reflected in a
statement made by the President of the Russian
Federation, Dmitry Medvedev, at the headquarters of
the League of Arab States. A positive development that
should be noted is the readiness expressed by the Prime
Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, for an
immediate resumption of negotiations with the
Palestinian side and his de facto recognition of the
two-State concept.

I emphasize that the main objective now is to
create conditions for an immediate resumption of
negotiations and strict compliance by the parties with
their obligations under the Road Map, including to
combat terrorist activity and to ensure freedom of
movement for the population in the West Bank.

One of the main factors hampering the
resumption of dialogue is settlement activity, including
natural growth. We consider unacceptable actions that
bring about new realities on the ground and could
prejudge the outcome of final-status negotiations. The
ongoing blockade of Gaza, which is causing the
suffering of civilians in the Gaza Strip, is also
unacceptable. Moving the peace process forward
requires restoring unity in the Palestinian ranks, based
on well-known principles.

Once again, we would like to commend most
highly the mediation efforts of Egypt. We look forward
to results in moving intra-Palestinian consultations
forward. Unfortunately, the most recent round has once
again been postponed - this time to 25 August.

With regard to achieving a comprehensive
settlement in the region, another relevant factor is the
return to active diplomacy on the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks of the peace process. It is now important,
through collective efforts, actively to help eliminate
obstacles to restoring a full-fledged regional peace
process. Russia's initiative to hold an international
conference on the Middle East in Moscow this year,
which has wide support, aims to promote that goal. We
continue to prepare for the forum, which is enshrined
in the Security Council resolutions, the decisions of the
Middle East Quartet and the recent G-8 summit.

That topic was discussed during the latest trip to
the region by the Special Representative to the Middle
East of the President of Russia, Alexander Saltanov,
who held extensive talks in the region. We firmly
intend to continue our work at various levels with all
interested parties and partners. The Moscow meeting
should be effective and productive.

I would now like to say a few words on Lebanon.
Russia continues to hold the position of unwavering
support for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Lebanese State. We welcome
the successful holding of parliamentary elections. We
are closely following talks under way in Beirut among
the leading political parties of the country, and hope
they will soon conclude and that an effective
Government will be formed to represent the interests of
all communities living in Lebanon.

We are concerned by outbreaks of tension in
southern Lebanon and welcome efforts now being
made by Lebanese authorities in cooperation with the
United Nations, to defuse the tension. We reaffirm the
need for strict compliance with the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006) by all sides without exception.
That is the only way to guarantee the maintenance of
stability in southern Lebanon.

