Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) Lamberto Zannier for his briefing. I
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
to this debate and thank him for his statement. I also
thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement.

At the outset, Uganda would like to commend
UNMIK for its continued efforts in promoting security
and stability in Kosovo and in the region. We are
encouraged that the overall security situation in
Kosovo during the reporting period remained relatively
calm. We are concerned, however, by the recent
incidents of violence in northern Mitrovica, which
increase instability and division between the
communities. We urge all sides to exercise restraint in
order to avoid a further escalation of tensions.

We commend UNMIK for its proactive
engagement with all communities, as well as the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade and international
actors for furthering peace and stability in Kosovo. We
are convinced that UNMIK's work in supporting
minority communities, encouraging reconciliation and
facilitating dialogue and regional cooperation is
critical.

My delegation welcomes the cooperation and
coordination among UNMIK, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force on
issues of mutual concern. That cooperation is vital and
should be strengthened within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). We commend UNMIK for
facilitating the activities of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as
well as for facilitating intercommunal meetings to
resolve issues regarding power, the water supply, the
construction of roads and other social services. Those
activities are important because they build confidence
and create better understanding among communities.
We therefore urge UNMIK to continue its efforts to
address critical social service needs in coordination
and cooperation with local and relevant international
actors.

We commend UNMIK's efforts in facilitating the
work of the Reconstruction Implementation
Commission regarding construction of Serbian
patrimonial, cultural and religious heritage sites
damaged during the 2004 violence. It is important for
the Commission to be provided with the financial and
logistical support necessary to complete its work and
ensure the protection of Serbian cultural heritage.

We welcome the progress made so far regarding
the returns process and the complementary role played
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In the spirit of
peaceful reconciliation, we call on recent communities
to desist from hate rhetoric and attacks against
returnees so as to facilitate intercommunity
reintegration. It is also important for both sides to
devote more resources to the location of missing
persons so as to promote the process of reconciliation.

Regional cooperation plays an important role in
enhancing development. We therefore encourage the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to work together in
pursuit of this goal. We are convinced that UNMIK
continues to play an important role in facilitating
Kosovo's engagement in international and regional
forums. We call on the international community to
continue to support UNMIK's important work,
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999).

With regard to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report, my delegation would like
to say that long before the opinion was delivered, as far
back as October 2008, Uganda was convinced that it
was necessary for the people of Kosovo and Serbia,
who have lived side by side for a long, long time, to
resolve any outstanding issues through dialogue.
Uganda's position remains the same. We encourage and
support the parties to remain engaged in a dialogue
aimed at finding a solution which will promote
common understanding and better relations. We are
convinced that this approach will enhance durable
peace and stability in the region.

Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Lamberto Zannier, and the
staff of UNMIK for their important work in promoting
peace and security in the region.

