The Republic of Croatia is fully aligned with the statement submitted by the representative of the European Union (EU) (annex XVIII). I would like to take this opportunity to address several points in my national capacity. It is my pleasure to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko and thank him for comprehensive report (S/2020/1052, annex) and briefing today. A stable, functional, prosperous and secure Bosnia and Herzegovina has a key role to play in the stability not only of South-Eastern Europe, but of Europe in a wider sense. Croatia has been and will remain a strong supporter of Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts in making decisive strides towards its EU integration. Integration within the EU offers not only the best reform framework for the country, but also a comprehensive transformation of the whole of its society. We will spare no effort in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in continuing to be anchored in European values and standards, with constitutional equality among its three constituent peoples and with the rights of all its citizens guaranteed. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to invest significant efforts and undertake political, institutional and economic reforms in order to progress on its desired path. Over the last year, and, more importantly, in this year's enlargement package, the European Commission expressed its views with regard to these reforms. We firmly believe that reform processes must come from within and can be accomplished only through an inclusive, internal, consensus-based process that will take place in an environment of dialogue and compromise. Today's Bosnia and Herzegovina is based on the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement, as well as the country's Constitution, which is an integral part of that Agreement, which is 25 years old this year. Through its entire history and under its current constitutional framework, a fundamental feature of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains its multinational setup as a State composed of three constituent peoples equal in their rights and in the rights of others. In that respect, it is important to stress that, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while Serbs can rely on their own entity and Bosniaks on their numbers as the largest of the constituent peoples, Croats can rely only on constitutional guaranties and the legal and institutional system for their equality to be ensured. The existing electoral system in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where a constituent people smaller in numbers - the Croats - is being given greater weight than a larger constituent people - the Bosniaks- is not in line with its Constitution. This fact is contributing to political tensions and slowing down reforms. It is therefore of key importance to embark on election-law reform with urgency. This is becoming an even more pressing issue with the next general elections approaching in 2022. In that regard, we deem it necessary to underline the importance of the political agreement on amendments to the electoral law signed by the two political leaders, Mr. Izetbegovie and Mr. Covie, in June of this year. It is worth noting that in the agreement, political leaders expressed their full commitment to EU principles and values and to the implementation of all judgments of the European Court of Human Rights, all decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and all relevant recommendations of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and its Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, and of the Venice Commission. The agreement clearly shows signs of a political will to reach a compromise. It also enables Bosnia and Herzegovina to take ownership of this crucial process and to show that it is capable of tailoring its own destiny. The taking of ownership in this manner has been requested by the international community many times, and now that it has occurred it should be welcomed and acknowledged. We should all now follow up on that and encourage further efforts aimed at reaching a consensus on this important issue and call for an inclusive reform process and its implementation, which would eliminate all forms of inequality and discrimination in the electoral process, well in advance the 2022 general elections. We also deem it necessary to draw attention to the problem of migration, and not just the burning problem of illegal migration, particularly in Una-Sana canton, the severity of which is also stressed in the report of the High Representative, and which throughout the past two years has been burdening the country and needs our urgent attention. Combating smuggling networks, improving return and readmission procedures, enhancing border control and migration management system are of key importance, not only as a security, but also as a humanitarian issue. We therefore need to focus our efforts towards enhancing border protection capacities of the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, through education and direct technical assistance as well as expert participation on the ground, strengthening the security and stability of the country and the whole region. This is particularly important in the present context, owing to the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on vulnerable groups, refugees and migrants. The recently adopted Economic and Investment Plan for the Western Balkans demonstrates once again the EU's strong commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina and all Western Balkans partners. It is the most concrete example how the European Union is supporting the region. In order to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's European path, Croatia has been implementing technical assistance projects that transfer the experience we gained from our EU pre-accession process through the framework of the European Partnership Agreement. Croatia is also a leading trade partner with the country. We are deeply engaged in the exchange of goods and in providing investment capital. Many regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina are included in the plans and strategies that underlie our interregional and cross-border cooperation programmes and instruments. Let me conclude by stressing once more that Bosnia and Herzegovina is Croatia's friend and important neighbour. We are going to continue to work diligently to further develop close relations of partnership and cooperation, for the benefit of our peoples and for the wider region.
