Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me start by welcoming
the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018), which we believe
will enable the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to deliver essential life-saving assistance to all
Syrians, based on their needs. We have always believed
that the Council should be united in supporting the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners, which
have been working under difficult circumstances to
deliver aid to millions of Syrians. Syrians" humanitarian
needs should be our priority, and addressing them
should be central to the Council's deliberations and
decisions. We hope that the resolution we adopted today
will contribute to ending the suffering of all Syrians.
We would like to express our appreciation to the
penholders, Kuwait and Sweden, for effectively leading
the negotiation process, and we thank all delegations
for their constructive engagement.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his briefing. Since this is our last statement on the
Syrian humanitarian issue as a member of the Security
Council, I want to take this opportunity to reiterate
our profound appreciation for his effective leadership.
His briefings have always been very useful in bringing
the humanitarian tragedy in Syria to the attention of
the Council and the entire world. I thank him for his
outstanding and impeccable service. We also thank
all humanitarian workers for their selfless service in
delivering aid to all in need.

Despite a relative drop in the overall intensity of
violence, civilians in some parts ofSyria are still affected
by the direct and indirect consequences of hostilities,
including deaths, injuries and the destruction of civilian
facilities. In that regard, we concur with the Secretary-
General, whose most recent report (S/2018/1104)
appealed for enhancing the efforts to maintain the
de-escalation and the agreed demilitarization zone
in Idlib and to protect civilians. We reiterate our
appreciation to Turkey and Russia for their continued
efforts to implement the Idlib agreement. Avoiding a
military escalation there remains critical to averting any
possible humanitarian catastrophe. In that connection,
we encourage all States with influence on the parties
to work together and strengthen global coordination in
combating terrorist groups on the United Nations list.

The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
have continued to reach millions of people through all
the available access routes, including through cross-
border assistance, which the report of the Secretary-
General cites as a vital part of the humanitarian
response. We welcome the continued endeavours to
scale up humanitarian aid delivered from inside Syria.
In that regard, we strongly encourage the United
Nations and the Syrian Government to continue their
consultations on improving humanitarian access to all
areas, including those that are hard to reach. The safe,
sustained and unhindered delivery of humanitarian
access remains critical for all Syrians. In that regard,
the implementation of the resolution we adopted today
is crucial to improving humanitarian access.

In conclusion, as we have repeatedly stated, only
a comprehensive political solution can address the
humanitarian tragedy in Syria. There is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. It will be resolved only with
a political solution, facilitated by the United Nations,
based on resolution 2254 (2015), which commits to
meeting the legitimate aspirations of the people of
Syria. As the Secretary-General reminded us in his
report, the sole goal ofUnited Nations efforts - ending
the suffering of Syrians - should be supported by us
all. In that regard, we look forward to Special Envoy de
Mistura's briefing next week.

