The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nkingiye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

(spoke in French)

"The Security Council acknowledged the
election of Pierre Nkurunziza as President of the
Republic of Burundi, on 19 August 2005. This
vote marks the welcome final step of the
transitional process in Burundi. The conclusion of
this transitional process represents an important
milestone for the future of Burundi as well as the
Great Lakes region as a whole.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
spirit of peace and dialogue demonstrated by the
Burundian people throughout the transitional
period and commends them for their encouraging
participation in the electoral process. The Council
calls on all parties to respect the will of the
Burundian people, the elected Government and
the commitments agreed during the transitional
process. It encourages the new authorities to
continue on the course of stability and national
reconciliation and to promote social concord. It
reaffirms in this regard that it is essential to bring
an end to the climate of impunity.

"The Security Council commends the
critical contribution the Regional Initiative for
Peace in Burundi, the African Union and the
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB)
made to the peace process. It calls upon all
international partners of Burundi, including the
States of the Regional Initiative and the main
donors, to remain committed and encourages
them to agree with the Burundian authorities on
the most appropriate framework to coordinate
their support to reforms currently under way and
to the consolidation of peace."

(spoke in English)

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/41.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

