Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome this opportunity to exchange opinions on
the situation of the occupied territories, which is a
matter of great concern to my delegation and, as we
have seen from today's debate, to the entire
international community.

Yesterday we had the opportunity to listen to Mr.
Shimon Peres, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Israel. We would like to thank him
for having been the one to ask to come to convey to the
members of the Security Council the views of the new
Government of Israel on the current situation. At
yesterday's meeting we had an opportunity to convey
to Mr. Peres and to the Permanent Observer of the
Palestine the views of the members of the Council on
the situation of the occupied territories. We hope that
both parties also listen to what the other Members of
the Organization think about the situation in Palestine.

The current wave of violence is lamentable, given
the fact that a few months ago the parties were very
close to reaching an agreement. The history lesson is
clear: we should take advantage of opportunities for
peace, and we should bear in mind that it is easier to
erode a peace process than it is to build one. The
current wave of violence is unacceptable because it
takes the region back to the situation that prevailed
nearly 10 years ago.

A great deal has been said about the
disproportionate Israeli response to what was initially a
street protest by young people throwing stones.
Violence breeds further violence. That violence takes
on a momentum of its own that later is more difficult to
stop. In this regard, we would like to call on all the
parties to take all necessary steps to end the violence
and bring the situation back to normal so as to be able
to resume negotiations on a basis acceptable to all.

It is crucial that financial remittances be resumed,
as there is a risk of strangling the Palestinian
economy - something that would have unforeseeable
humanitarian consequences and could eventually lead
to an escalation of violence.

The parties should determine the basis for
discussions while taking into account the progress
previously achieved. In addition, the leadership of the
Palestinian Authority should be maintained. In
summary, it is necessary to return to the path of
cooperation in order to improve security and make
possible the restoration of a minimum level of trust to
end the current wave of violence and re-establish the
conditions that will enable progress towards a
definitive agreement.
The volatility of the situation in the Middle East
is well known. Current events clearly pose a threat to
international peace and security. In that regard, it is
necessary that the Security Council continue its
permanent review of the situation in order to comply
with its responsibilities.

My delegation believes that an international
presence under the auspices of the United Nations
would be a catalyst for the restoration of peace in the
occupied territories. We hope that today's deliberations
will send clear signals about the unanimous
expectations and wishes of the community of nations
for peace in the Middle East.

