Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I should like to begin by thanking Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for her seventh semi-annual report and the
Secretary-General for his report on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/492). Let me also
congratulate our colleague Ambassador Marc Pecsteen
de Buytswerve, Permanent Representative of Belgium,
in his capacity as Facilitator, for his outstanding work
thus far to promote the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). It is also my pleasure to welcome Ambassador
Joao Vale de Almeida, Head of the European Union
delegation and Coordinator of the Joint Commission.

Four years after its conclusion and its endorsement
by the Security Council through resolution 2231 (2015),
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
the aim of which was to address the concerns of the
international community regarding the Iranian nuclear
programme, is more than ever at a critical juncture.
Indeed, the concerns regarding the Viability of the
agreement are being stoked by a series of adverse events
as we prepare to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.

The unilateral withdrawal of one of the key actors
and the mounting tensions in the Persian Gulf are
undermining the foundations of the agreement, which
was secured after many long years of multilateral
negotiations. Despite the oft-reaffirmed commitment of
the other parties, the combination of the aforementioned
negative factors is undermining the Iranian nuclear
agreement. Like any other human endeavour, it is
imperfect; however, it remains an inclusive framework
designed to temper the military nuclear ambitions of
the Iranian side.

For that reason, cote d'Ivoire is of the View that we
must pool our efforts to prevent the undermining of the
consensus around the J CPOA and therefore, despite the
stumbling blocks, maintain the level of international
mobilization and support for the agreement, which, in
our view, is fully in keeping with multinational efforts
to tackle nuclear proliferation.

Cote d'Ivoire fervently hopes that responses to the
potential shortcomings of the JCPOA will be crafted
within the framework of the Joint Commission, as
provided for in annex IV, so as to devise dynamic,
consensus-based solutions, taking account of the
observations and concerns expressed by all parties. My
country holds the deep conviction that a multilateral
approach is the only way to dispel, through frank and
proactive dialogue, mutual distrust and come up with
mutually acceptable solutions.

My country holds the view that keeping the Iranian
nuclear agreement alive is contingent on the commitment
of the signatory parties and a de-escalation of current
tensions, which have the potential to spark an armed
conflict with potentially disastrous consequences
for the Middle East in particular and for the world
in general.

Given our strong commitment to the peaceful
resolution of disputes through dialogue, my delegation
would like to urge the parties concerned to exercise
restraint and to refrain from any hostile action that
would undermine international peace and security. Cote
d'Ivoire therefore condemns the recent attacks on oil
tankers in the Strait of Hormuz and the threats that they
pose to the security of international trade. We call for
an impartial investigation to identify the perpetrators
and bring them before the relevant judicial bodies.

My country encourages the Iranian authorities to
uphold their commitments under the JCPOA and to
continue to cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). In that regard, we note that
the fifteenth report of the IAEA on the verification
of Iran's nuclear-related commitments (S/2019/496, annex), circulated on 14 June, concludes that Iran is in
compliance with its commitments under the JCPOA,
in particular with regard to its enriched uranium
quota. That is why Cote d'Ivoire sincerely hopes that
the Iranian authorities will renounce any decision to
withdraw from the agreement.

The history of international relations teaches us
that the greatest tragedies experienced by humanity
often stem from the inability of nations to engage
in constructive dialogue, which is essential to the
reconciliation of partisan interests so that peace
prevails in the world.

At a time when belligerent rhetoric is increasing
and becoming more radical, with the prospect of an
armed conflict looming in the Gulfregion, Cote d'Ivoire
would like to join the urgent calls for the establishment
of a robust dialogue between the parties in order to
protect humanity from the ravages of a major conflict,
which we can do without.

