Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is a threat
that looms over the international community as a
whole. The commitment and cooperation of all States
are needed in the fight against terrorism, given its
global nature. Resolution 2396 (2017), which we have
just adopted, has 51 operative paragraphs containing
calls, in some cases urgent, for States to take action
in different areas, and in other cases requiring them
to act accordingly. These measures seek to achieve
an effective worldwide response in order to stop the
movements and activities of foreign terrorist fighters.
For that reason, we believe that anything undertaken to
that end must be done with full respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and of international law.

We also believe that it is important to highlight that,
although the resolution is directed to all States equally,
not all States have the same capacities to implement its
provisions. There are undoubtedly countries that have
adopted many of these measures already. Others will
have no major difficulty in doing so. Others will need
technical assistance, training and financing for that
purpose, and will probably receive them. But there are
others that may also need to cooperate to strengthen
their capacity and to implement the provisions of the
resolution, but may not receive assistance as they are
not considered priority countries.

We thank the penholder and the delegations that
supported the resolution. While we note the difficulties
involved in implementation, we encourage States that
are able to do so and the competent bodies of the United
Nations to provide assistance to States that need and
request it in order to implement the provisions of the
resolution. Uruguay reiterates that it will continue to do
its utmost to adapt to the new requirements imposed by
the international context by joining in the shared effort
to fight the foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon and
its protagonists while respecting international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.

