Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Three and a half years ago, in accordance with
the desire of the Macedonian Government, the Security
Council decided to send a United Nations military
contingent to that country. Thus was the first United
Nations preventive peace-keeping operation set in motion.
Originally, as a separate mission of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR), the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) played an
important part in preventing the spread of the Yugoslav
crisis and in stabilizing the internal situation in that former
Yugoslav Republic, proving by its deeds the vitality of
the concept of preventive diplomacy. The United Nations
can be justly proud of the success of this operation, and
we would like to pay due tribute to the personnel of
UNPREDEP, whose members include representatives of
the Russian Federation.

At the same time, the current situation in the region
of the former Yugoslavia is radically different from the
one that prevailed in 1992, or even a year ago. An end
has been put to the bloody conflict in Bosnia, where the
process of implementing the Peace Agreement is
proceeding, and a decisive stage has been reached in the
United Nations operation in Eastern Slavonia, An
important stabilizing factor was the conclusion on 8 April
of this year of the Agreement on the Regulation of
Relations and the Promotion of Cooperation between the
Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Progress has also been achieved in improving
relations between Skopje and Athens.

Arising from these positive changes is the question
of bringing the parameters of the Macedonian operation
into line with the new state of affairs. It would be strange,
to say the least, if UN PREDEP were now to be
maintained in the form in which it existed at the height of
the hostilities in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. In
this connection, we think it is perfectly fitting and proper
to raise at this time the question of reconfiguring the
whole structure of the operation. We believe this is
important both from the point of View of improving the
instruments of preventive diplomacy, which should be
readily adaptable to changing situations, and from that of
the financial crisis in which the United Nations now finds
itself, while also taking into account the needs of peace-
keeping operations in other areas, including the hottest
spots around the world.

We have noted that the report the Secretary-General
submitted to the Security Council analyses the possibility
of replacing the military contingents of UNPREDEP with
military observers. Despite certain reservations, the
conclusion was reached that this option would be feasible
in principle, from both technical and operational
viewpoints. The Secretary-General also gave us a very
timely reminder that in 1992 - that is, at the peak of the
crisis in the former Yugoslavia - the Security Council
had established the personnel strength of the operation's
military component at approximately 700. Given that the
armed struggle in Bosnia has been brought to a close, we
believe that it would be logical to revert at least to this
original personnel strength.

 

In addition, it is clear that several of the functions
currently being performed by the civilian component of
UNPREDEP could be entrusted to the United Nations
Development Programme and the specialized agencies of
the Organization.

At the same time, we realize that the positive changes
in the region have not yet become irreversible. The Russian
Federation is as eager as others to maintain stability in the
Balkans. We have not raised the question of winding up the
operation or of withdrawing UNPREDEP, and we take
particular account of the ongoing concerns of the
Macedonian leadership.

In view of all these factors, we believe it would be
possible at this stage to extend the mandate of UNPREDEP
in its present form for four months, so that the Security
Council could subsequently come back to this issue and
take a decision that would be consonant with the real state
of affairs in the region. Unfortunately, our proposals were
not supported by the other members of the Security Council
and are not reflected in the draft resolution before us today,
which provides for the extension of the mandate for six
months in an unaltered form.

We have not heard any convincing arguments in
support of the view that this is the only correct decision in
the current situation, and we will therefore be obliged to
abstain in the voting. We hope that when the mandate of
UNPREDEP is taken up again account will be taken of our
concerns, which are both financial and politically
fundamental, since they relate to the development of United
Nations peace-keeping as a whole. On the basis of whether
this is done or not, we will determine how this operation
should be dealt with in the future.

