Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting today. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ghassan Salame', Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his
briefing. We commend him and the UNSMIL team for
their tireless efforts to help enable peace, stability and
humanitarian assistance in Libya. I also would like to
thank Mr. Juergen Schulz for the periodic reporting on
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970, (2011) concerning Libya. We wish
him well in the conduct of his duties.

Libya - a beautiful mosaic with rich traditions
from Berber, African, Turkish, Arab and many other
cultures - with its proud people, has unfortunately

suffered much. Indonesia is deeply concerned by
the condition of our Libyan brothers and sisters.
Insecurity, fractured politics, violence and terrorism
have taken too heavy a toll. Much has to be done but,
learning from the past and fully embracing the Libyan
Political Agreement, with a collective vision for peace
and democracy, we believe success is very much
possible. All national State and non-State actors, as
well as regional and international actors, should direct
their energies to that end. As the United Nations and
others engage, Indonesia additionally underlines the
following points.

First, national reconciliation must be prioritized.
Difficulties for the whole country will only increase if
the centres of power based in Tripoli and the east work
at cross purposes. Having one national authoritative
Government with a united army, security agencies
and financial and economic institutions is crucial to
stabilizing the country and preparing it for a democratic
electoral process. All parties should intensify efforts
and discard their narrow interests for the sake of the
whole people of Libya. The key phrase here, once again,
is national reconciliation. In that regard, we welcome
the unity of the international community in support of
the Palermo meeting, in particular in supporting the
United Nations action plan.

The holding of the national conference under
auspices of the United Nations early this year will
hopefully provide a good opportunity for the various
Libyan political groups to set out their ideas and
reinvigorate efforts on how the Libyan Political
Agreement can best advance the political process
towards free and fair national elections. Indonesia
once again calls on all national and relevant external
partners to fully play their part to help ensure that the
United Nations action plan advances smoothly.

Secondly, security needs to improve. The duality
of power centres, coupled with fight over oil and other
resources, has exacerbated the situation. Non-State
armed groups have particularly thrived. While no
effort should be spared by the Government of National
Accord, all political groups and militias should also
play a positive role to enable the Government to provide
security for common Libyans, who have already gone
through so much.

The adverse security situation, with the presence
of militias and terrorists, including the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, will remain a serious challenge. We
condemn any and all acts of terrorism. Clashes between
armed groups based in Tripoli and adjoining areas in
August 2018 also added to the concern. We concur with
the few on the need for a holistic and comprehensive
security strategy in support of restoring security in the
whole country. We applaud the hard work by UNSMIL
with regard to security and protection and to broker a
ceasefire. We must also fully support UNSMIL efforts
and take concerted action.

Thirdly, Indonesia emphasizes development along
with human rights, transitional justice and the rule
of law. Those are important elements to bring Libya
to normalcy. While acknowledging the vital role of
various United Nations agencies and other regional and
international entities, we call for providing Libya with
greater assistance in capacity-building in those and
other priority fields.

We must also prioritize our actions to help young
people and women. Listening to their voices and
involving them in national decision-making would
further engage them in building and abiding by a
collective national vision for peace and progress. An
improvement of their economic and social condition is
essential to ensuring a better quality of life for them,
including access to basic needs. Economic reform must
be linked to political and security reform.

In conclusion, the Council must bring its full weight
to bear on the various national and external actors to
ensure that the conflict in Libya is resolved and that
peace and security return to the country. Libya, too, can
and must prosper within a democracy, without negative
external interference and in full accordance with the
wishes of its people. At the end of the day, Libya shall
be the master of its own destiny.

