Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the opportunity to address the Security Council on
the situation in the Middle East.

Japan fully understands the earnest aspiration of
Palestinians to build their own State and strongly
supports a two-State solution, under which Israel and a
future independent Palestinian State would live side by
side in peace, security and mutual recognition. Japan
supports the vision that the borders under a two-State
solution should be defined through negotiations, based
on the 1967 lines and with mutually agreed swaps, in a
way that would achieve the peaceful coexistence of a
viable Palestinian State and Israel, with secure and
recognized borders. Such a two-State solution can be
achieved only through sincere negotiations between the
parties concerned. Japan firmly believes that both sides
should do their utmost to conduct direct negotiations in
line with the time frame set out by the Quartet. In that
connection, Japan welcomes the meetings between
Israel and the Palestinians held in Amman this month,
and expresses its deepest respect for the efforts of
Jordan and the Quartet in preparing for the meetings.
Japan strongly expects that those meetings will lead to
the early resumption of direct negotiations.
Japan does not recognize any measures that
prejudge the outcome of final status negotiations, and
calls upon both sides to refrain from any provocative
actions in order to build mutual trust. Both parties must
abide by their obligations under previous agreements.

Japan reiterates its strong call to Israel to
immediately freeze its settlement activities in the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem, which violate
international law. At the same time, we call upon the
Palestinian Authority to continue its efforts to improve
security and fulfil its commitments to cease violence
and work against incitement.

Japan has been supporting the efforts of the
Palestinian Authority to establish statehood and is
committed to continuously providing assistance in that
regard. Japan is also keenly following Palestinian
efforts to establish a unified Government.

Japan shares the serious concerns of the
international community over the situation in Syria.
Japan supports the initiative of the League of Arab
States to bring about stability in Syria, and also hopes
that the Security Council will act effectively. We
deplore the continuing wide-scale use of force by the
Syrian authorities in spite of the League's deployment
of the monitoring mission. We deem it important that
the United Nations provide technical assistance to
observers participating in the mission. Japan condemns
the use of force by the Syrian authorities against
civilians and reiterates its call to them to immediately
halt such acts of violence, promptly carry out reforms
and engage in dialogue with the Syrian people.

Tomorrow, Egypt will celebrate the first
anniversary of its historic change. Japan welcomes the
fact that the elections for the People's Assembly were
conducted without any major disorder. We are also
pleased that Japan assisted in the conduct of elections
by providing funding and sharing expertise. As the
stability of Egypt is a linchpin for maintaining that of
the entire region, Japan hopes that the political process
will evolve in a peaceful manner and that economic
and social reforms will lead to tangible results at an
early stage.

