Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to commend
the laudable initiative of Costa Rica to highlight the
importance of disarmament and development at this
Security Council debate under the leadership of Nobel

laureate President Oscar Arias Senchez. Costa Rica is
well known as a country with no standing army and is,
therefore, best positioned to take up such an initiative.

Strengthening multilateralism and collective
security is very close to the heart of our people in
Japan. Under its Constitution, Japan has renounced the
use of force as a means of settling international
conflicts and has followed faithfully the path of peace
and development through international cooperation.
Japan has spared no effort to mobilize resources for the
peace and prosperity of its population domestically and
of the world in the international arena. Japan is a
determined advocate for the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and disarmament.

Disarmament is one of the top priorities of
Japan's foreign policy. We are leading international
efforts for nuclear disarmament and the control of
conventional arms. We have adopted three non-nuclear
principles and a strict policy of non-export of weapons.
On the basis of its strong conviction that it is necessary
to create a world without nuclear weapons, Japan has
initiated the resolution on nuclear disarmament at the
General Assembly every year since 1994 and has
actively promoted the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty. In the area of small arms and light
weapons, Japan has played a leading role in
implementing the Programme of Action since its
adoption in 2001. Furthermore, Japan, together with
Colombia and South Africa, has initiated General
Assembly resolutions on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons.

It is our strong belief that peace dividends
realized from disarmament efforts will enhance the
economic and social development of populations at
large and, by easing tensions, have a beneficial effect
on a society as well as on its neighbouring countries.
Needless to say, peace and security are not
automatically given to us; we have to work for them.
Constant efforts and a significant amount of resources
must be brought together to achieve and sustain them.
That is why we need to unite our strength and wisdom
to maintain international peace and security and to
work to practice tolerance in order to live with one
another in peace as good neighbours.

The importance of the control and disarmament
of conventional weapons is most acutely felt in post-
conflict situations. After a ceasefire agreement is
reached, military expenditures often increase rather
than go down. Over the course of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, our endeavours need to focus on
regulating arms and disarmament in order to achieve a
safer and more stable society. The Peacebuilding
Commission is uniquely placed to fill gaps and work as
a catalyst to marshal resources to bring about peace
and development, thereby charting a new horizon for
collective security.

For a conflict-torn society to be restored to a
normal life and the vicious cycle of conflict and
poverty to come to an end, that society needs to
produce tangible changes in the everyday livelihood of
the people. For instance, electricity supply should be
brought to every household, and farmland should be
cleared of landmines and employment generated for
ex-combatants. The aspiration to social stability and
durable peace will then become dominant, and people
will eventually beat their swords into ploughshares.

Peacebuilding efforts are multifaceted; security
sector reform, economic development and the
strengthening of governance have to be tackled
concurrently. National ownership and self-help are not
only a norm, but an irreplaceable key to success. After
peace is restored, State-building and reconciliation
need to replace intolerance and hatred. The deepening
of trust, mutual respect and interdependence among
neighbours will prevent a relapse into violent conflict.
All disputes should be settled by peaceful and
democratic means.

Regional cooperation in this respect is
indispensable. As many conflicts today are
characterized as revolving cross-border conflicts,
conflict resolution will be partial and incomplete
unless it addresses the regional dimension of a conflict
and the control of illicit weapons. The control of small
arms and light weapons is particularly important, since
the proliferation of such weapons prolongs deadly
conflicts and has an adverse impact on social stability
and long-term development.

The Security Council can cooperate closely with
regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union and others, and work for peace and
security, through which a decline in military spending
can result. For instance, we supported, through
ECOWAS, the establishment of national commissions
to tackle the illicit proliferation of small arms and light

weapons in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.
We also welcome the contributions of the United
Nations regional disarmament centres to promoting the
regional approach. Japan will continue to support
regional and subregional efforts to implement the
Programme of Action on small arms, in cooperation
with the United Nations.

The world is faced with a myriad of challenges
that need to be addressed in order to maintain peace
and promote prosperity. We are determined to
contribute to collective security through Security
Council membership starting next year and to continue
to devote ourselves fully to maintaining international
peace and security.

